T OWARDS U NDERSTANDING H OW M ACHINES C AN
L EARN C AUSAL OVERHYPOTHESES
    Anonymous authors
    Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
          Recent work in machine learning and cognitive science has suggested that under-
          standing causal information is essential to the development of intelligence. One
          of the key challenges for current machine learning algorithms is modeling and
          understanding causal overhypotheses: transferable abstract hypotheses about sets
          of causal relationships. In contrast, even young children spontaneously learn causal
          overhypotheses, and use these to guide their exploration or to generalize to new
          situations. This has been demonstrated in a variety of cognitive science experiments
          using the “blicket detector” environment. We present a causal learning benchmark
          adapting the “blicket" environment for machine learning agents and evaluate a
          range of state-of-the-art methods in this environment. We find that although most
          agents have no problem learning causal structures seen during training, they are
          unable to learn causal overhypotheses from these experiences, and thus cannot
          generalize to new settings.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Over the past few years, deep learning has made impressive progress in many areas, including
reinforcement learning, natural language processing, and computer vision. However, most state-
of-the-art algorithms still pale in comparison to humans, even children, for out-of-distribution
generalization and fast adaptation to new tasks. In contrast, causal modeling has long concerned itself
not merely with accurate modeling of in-distribution data, but also the accurate recovery of underlying
causal mechanisms (and their true graphical relations) capable of explaining out-of-distribution data.
Hence causal modeling holds promise for achieving systematic generalization (Bengio et al., 2019;
Schölkopf et al., 2021; Ke et al., 2021).
One of the key components of causal learning for humans are causal overhypotheses, which describe
priors over causal graphs. For example, a causal hypothesis may be that a system is stochastic, or that
it is conjuntive—i.e., more than one cause must be present in order for the effect to occur. Causal
overhypotheses are important because they enable humans to learn causal models from a sparse
amount of data (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2009), by reducing the set of possible causal relationships to
consider. Despite the recent surge of machine learning datasets and environment for causal inference
and learning (Ahmed et al., 2020; McDuff et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a; Ke et al., 2021), the causal
overhypotheses for these environments and datasets are unclear. Thus we cannot use these existing
benchmarks to evaluate how capable are agents are at learning and using causal overhypotheses.
In this work, we seek to fill this gap, by focusing on introducing a benchmark environment that
draws inspiration from recent cognitive science work using blicket detectors. This environment
contains a virtual blicket detector, and has been used previously for understanding causal learning
and exploration in children (Kosoy et al., 2022) and basic RL models, but not yet for state-of-the-art
machine learning agents.
A “blicket detector” is a machine that lights up and plays music when some combinations of objects
but not others are placed on it (Gopnik & Sobel, 2000; Lucas et al., 2014). The central question is
whether an agent can learn that a particular set of causal events will lead to the lighting-up effect,
and use that knowledge to design novel interventions on the machine. The causal relationship is
entirely determined by the pattern of conditional dependencies and interventions, rather than requiring
intuitive physics knowledge or visual understanding. Although these tasks may seem simple, and are
easily mastered by children, we find that they are challenging for current learning algorithms.


                                                   1
Several features of this environment and the tasks it allows make it particularly useful as a benchmark
for machine learning algorithms. First, causal representations are more powerful and structured
than mere statistical generalizations, though both can be systematically inferred from statistical
information. Many researchers (e.g. Pearl, Spirtes et al., Bengio) have argued that such causal
representations are crucial for both human and general AI intelligence. The goals of causal inference,
namely learning which actions will alter the environment in particular ways, are similar to those
of standard reinforcement learning, but adding causal representations and inferences makes such
learning far more effective.
Second, and unlike some existing causal environments (Ke et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a), the
blicket environment enables the inference of both specific causal structure and more general features
of causal structure, such as whether causal systems are conjunctive or disjunctive, stochastic or
deterministic. Learning these overhypotheses about causal structure (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2009)
is especially important because such inferences can constrain the search for causal structure in the
future, a search that can rapidly become unwieldy. Third, this environment allows for active learning
and exploration in a way that is both sufficiently constrained to be practical and that also allows for
informative interventions.
Most significantly, and again unlike existing environments, research has already shown that even
preschool children can easily manipulate and explore this environment, generate appropriate data,
and rapidly learn both particular causal structure and overhypotheses about causal structure (Kosoy
et al., 2022). We can then directly compare both the overall performance and the behavior of various
agents in these tasks to the performance and behavior of children. Young children are a particularly
informative baseline group. They do not have the extensive education and experience of typical
adults, which might make comparisons to artificial agents challenging, but they are nevertheless
effective causal learners and able to make broad yet accurate generalizations from small sample sizes,
in contrast to many current machine learning systems (Gopnik, 2012; Gopnik et al., 2017).
The work of Kosoy et al. (2022) first described a version of this environment and included data on
children and a few learning algorithms. But the environment and benchmarks have much wider
applications than in that preliminary study or the studies reported here. It allows multiple comparisons
of children and agents on multiple tasks and allows direct comparison with ML systems for multiple
kinds of causal inference tasks. In Kosoy et al. (2022) and in the experiments described here we
focus on one such inference – to conjunctive versus disjunctive structure, and a few algorithms. But
with very minor changes the environment would allow tests of inferences to many other kinds of
overhypotheses and inductive biases, such as inferring whether systems are stochastic or deterministic
or require sequential or unordered interventions, overhypotheses that are also important for causal
inference. It also allows multiple measures of causal inference including interventions and counter-
factuals as well as predictions. And, significantly, it would allow researchers to empirically record
the exploration behavior that children use in solving causal problems, not yet done this in this paper,
and compare it to a wide variety of increasingly influential exploration based ML procedures.
In what follows, we look at a spectrum of algorithms ranging from reinforcement learning, to imitation
learning, to the use of pre-trained language models, to better understand how these different methods
perform on the proposed environment and tasks. We find that such algorithms, in contrast to children,
only converge on a solution after an extensive number of trials or if they are given all the possible
settings and outcomes as training data. This suggests that these tasks are an interesting challenge for
machine learning algorithms. In order for machines to perform as well as children do, algorithms
must reason about the sequence of observations seen, extract causal overhypotheses from those
observations and use them for exploration—which current methods fall short of doing.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Exploration in Reinforcement Learning Recent exploration algorithms for deep reinforcement
learning typically add an exploration bonus to the task reward; please refer to Amin et al. (2021) for
a comprehensive survey. This bonus could be based on novelty (Bellemare et al., 2016; Ostrovski
et al., 2017; Martin et al., 2017; Tang et al., 2017; Machado et al., 2018a), dynamics prediction
error (Schmidhuber, 1991; Pathak et al., 2017), uncertainty (Osband et al., 2016; Burda et al., 2018),
or disagreement (Pathak et al., 2019). The vast majority of existing exploration methods do not
involve causal reasoning, whereas our proposed environment requires algorithms to learn and use
causal overhypotheses in order to explore effectively, to solve the task.


                                                   2
Multi-task and Causal RL Benchmarks There exist multi-task RL benchmarks featuring robotics
(Yu et al., 2019; James et al., 2020), physical reasoning (Bakhtin et al., 2019; Allen et al., 2020),
and video games (Cobbe et al., 2018; Machado et al., 2018b; Nichol et al., 2018; Chevalier-Boisvert
et al., 2018). Unfortunately, since it is not clear what the relevant causal overhypotheses for these
environments are, it is difficult to evaluate how causal information influences agents’ exploration.
RL benchmarks for causal discovery include Causal World (Ahmed et al., 2020), Causal City
(McDuff et al., 2021), Alchemy (Wang et al., 2021a), ACRE (Zhang et al., 2021), and the work of
Ke et al. (2021). However, many of these environments either lack clear causal hypotheses or do
not allow for controlling overhypotheses. In addition, these environments primarily focus on causal
induction or generalization, rather than exploration (though see Sontakke et al., 2021). In contrast,
the blicket environment in this work is designed to measure agents’ ability to explore using causal
overhypotheses. Moreover, children have not been tested on any of these existing environments,
whereas in the blicket environment, prior work has shown that children as young as age four are able
to learn causal overhypotheses and use these to explore effectively (Kosoy et al., 2022). It can be
informative to compare the exploration and performance of RL approaches to that of children.
Language Models for Reasoning Tasks Large language models such as GPT (Radford et al., 2019;
Brown et al., 2020) and PALM (Chowdhery et al., 2022) are trained on massive amounts of data, and
they have been shown to be able to express uncertainty and perform common sense reasoning up to
an extent (Lin et al., 2022). In this work, we probe the the causal reasoning capabilities of GPT-3 and
PALM using textual descriptions of the virtual blicket environment.

3    T HE “B LICKET D ETECTOR ” E NVIRONMENT
The blicket detector is commonly used in cognitive science to
study causal inference and reasoning in children (Gopnik & So-
bel, 2000; Lucas et al., 2014). Typically these studies are con-
ducted in person. Recently Kosoy et al. (2022) proposed an open-
sourced virtual blicket detector environment (Figure 1), focused
on studying how children learn and use causal overhypotheses in
exploration. This virtual environment has several advantages: it
enables not only tracking interactions with children, but also an
exact comparison between children and machine learning agents
via the OpenAI Gym interface (Brockman et al., 2016a). Please
refer to Appendix A for screenshots of the virtual blicket detector Figure 1: A screenshot of the embod-
in various states.                                                  ied version of the blicket detector.
Causal Overhypotheses Causal overhypotheses are hierarchical priors over the structure and/or
conditionals of a causal model, and have been widely studied in the cognitive science literature (Kemp
et al., 2007; 2010; Lucas & Griffiths, 2010; Perfors et al., 2011; Tenenbaum et al., 2011; Gopnik &
Wellman, 2012). An overhypothesis might state that the causal graph itself has a particular form (such
as a “common effect” or a chain structure), or that the conditionals within that graph have a particular
form (such as that p(X|Y, Z) follows a particular parametric distribution). Having a good causal
overhypothesis is a form of inductive bias that can make causal inferences much easier: for example,
while we might not know the specific causal graph, if we know that it takes the form of a common
effect, then we need only a few interventions (possibly only O(N )) to fully determine the specific
causal graph. Ideally, then, machine learning agents should be able to learn such overhypotheses and
leverage them to make more efficient and accurate causal inferences.
In our environment, we consider two causal overhypotheses: that the world is either conjunctive or
disjunctive, with the causal system defined as follows. In both cases, the causal graph takes the form
of a common effect, with N + 1 variables: N objects X = {X0 , X1 , ..., XN } (the causes) and one
blicket machine M (the effect). Each object Xi can either be on top of the blicket machine (Xi = 1)
or off the machine (Xi = 0). The blicket machine can be either on (M = 1) or off (M = 0). Because
the graph is a common effect, objects’ states do not influence each other (intervening on Xi = 1
does not impact Xj ). Objects’ states may, however, influence the state of the machine. Specifically,
some subset of the objects, B ⇢ X, are said to be “blickets” in that they have a causal influence on
whether the blicket machine turns on. Thus, the causal graph in this scenario always take the form of
a common effect, with edges {Xi ! M : Xi 2 B}.
The conjunctive and disjunctive overhypotheses specify the form of the blickets’ causal influence
on the machine. For example, let Xi , Xj 2 B be blickets. In the conjunctive case, both objects are


                                                   3
                      Disjunctive                                                Conjunctive


     Lights up       Doesn’t light up     Lights up          Doesn’t light up   Doesn’t light up    Lights up

Figure 2: A simplified rendering of the virtual blicket detector environment. In the disjunctive setting (left),
only one blicket is needed for the blicket to light up. Whereas in the conjuctive setting (left), two blickets are
needed. These examples are shown to children in Kosoy et al. (2022) for the given hypotheses condition.


needed at the same time to turn the machine on. Formally, P (M = 1|Xi = 1, Xj = 1) = 1, while
P (M = 0|Xi = 1) = 1 and P (M = 0|Xj = 1) = 1. In the disjunctive case, only one object (either
Xi or Xj ) is needed to turn the machine on, so P (M = 1|Xi = 1) = 1 and P (M = 1|Xj = 1) = 1.
An illustration of the disjunctive versus conjunctive overhypotheses can be found in Figure 2. We
note that while this setup is deterministic, it can easily be adapted to a stochastic environment with
minimal modifications.
Prior Experiments with Children Since we would like to compare the performance of machine
learning agents to that of children in this environment, we aim to make our evaluation of machine
learning algorithms comparable to how children are evaluated in Kosoy et al. (2022). Their evaluation
used a 2 ⇥ 2 experimental design, with a given hypotheses or not given hypotheses training phase,
combined with a disjunctive or conjunctive causal relationship in the test phase. In the training phase,
they showed the child two different blicket detectors, with three unique objects each, and for each
detector demonstrated three examples of placing objects on the detector and checking whether it
lights up. In the given hypotheses case, one could infer from the examples that one detector was
conjunctive and the other was disjunctive, as shown in Figure 2. Whereas in the not given hypotheses
case, one could not infer from the examples whether the detectors were conjuctive or disjunctive. In
the test phase, the children were given the opportunity to freely interact with a third blicket detector
with three new objects. When they were done exploring, they were asked to respond yes or no to
which objects were blickets. In their experiments with children from ages four to six, Kosoy et al.
(2022) found that children exhibit a diverse range of exploration strategies, which suggests that they
are exploring based on a rich set of causal overhypotheses, formed from their prior knowledge of
how objects and mechanisms behave.
Experiments with SOTA RL Models To adapt the virtual blicket environment for agent learning in
this work, we made the following design choices regarding the observations, actions, reward, and
termination conditions.
Observations: We could allow the algorithms to observe the same embodied visual space as the
children, but this places RL algorithms at a significant disadvantage, since they would need to not
only understand causal structures, but also learn visual inputs and object detection. Thus, we choose
to evaluate the algorithms in a purely symbolic environment where the objects are represented by
one-hot indices. Formally, the state space is a vector in o 2 {0, 1}N +1 where N is the number of
blickets. The index oi , 0  i < N is 1 if oi is on the detector, and 0 otherwise. The index oN is 1 if
the detector is illuminated, and 0 otherwise.
Actions: In the experiments with children, actions consist of placing a blicket onto the detector,
removing a blicket from the detector, and pressing the “check” button to evaluate the detector’s
state. For RL algorithms, we simplify this process by allowing the agent to place multiple objects
simultaneously, automatically “checking” the state of the detector with every action, and automatically
resetting the detector after each check, leading to 2N actions for N blickets. This means that the
agent gets feedback with every action, which significantly improved training stability.
Reward: The reward function should capture whether the algorithm has learned the causal over-
hypothesis of an environment. To do this, we evaluate the models using a quiz-based framework.
Models are allowed to make as many exploration steps as needed, and then trigger an action which
switches to the evaluation mode. In the evaluation mode, models receive as input a blicket and must
produce an action indicating if the object is a blicket or not. They receive a reward of 1 for identifying
a correct blicket, and a reward of 1 for incorrectly labeling an object (i.e., for both false positives
and false negatives). We also explored several reward modifications. In one modification, models
were asked to disambiguate between Disjunctive and Conjunctive environments, with +1 reward for
identifying the correct modality. The environment is implemented using the standard OpenAI Gym


                                                        4
(Brockman et al., 2016b) interface, allowing it to be used across many different pre-existing machine
learning architectures and algorithms.


4     E VALUATING C AUSAL L EARNING IN THE B LICKET E NVIRONMENT

Results from Kosoy et al. (2020) suggest that children can explore efficiently, especially given the
causal overhypotheses. In this work, we evaluate how a spectrum of different machine learning
models perform on the blicket detector tasks. Solving these tasks requires reasoning about the
sequence of observations seen, extracting causal overhypotheses from those observations, and using
these extracted overhypotheses for exploration.
We first evaluate several popular reinforcement learning algorithms—A2C (Mnih et al., 2016),
PPO2 (Schulman et al., 2017), and Q-learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992)—on this task. We also
evaluate imitation learning algorithms, including behaviour cloning with decision transformers (Chen
et al., 2021). Finally, we apply pre-trained language models (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al.,
2022) to this task, since they have been shown to be capable of performing common-sense reasoning
and expressing uncertainty to an extent (Lin et al., 2022).

4.1   D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING A LGORITHMS

We evaluate the performance of two popular deep reinforcement learning algorithms, Advantage Actor
Criric (A2C) (Mnih et al., 2016) and Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO2) (Schulman et al., 2017),
on the blicket environment. For each algorithm, we use several policy variants: a standard MLP policy
(no memory), an LSTM-based policy, and an LSTM-based policy with layer normalization with two
hidden dimension variants of 256 and 512. For all of these policies, we found that a network with a
hidden size of 512 obtained the optimal performance See Appendix B for learning hyperparameters.
We train all of these algorithms in the given hypothesis scenario, where the agent is exposed during
training to all possible overhypotheses, and asked to perform well given these scenarios.
Experimental Design We terminate training either after 3 million environment steps or when the
agent obtains maximum reward for 500 consecutive episodes, whichever comes first. Each episode
has 25 timesteps, so each agent is exposed to at most 120,000 episodes. Experiments are run using a
single Nvidia Titan-X Maxwell GPU, and take less than three hours to complete. To evaluate whether
the agent can generalize to additional causal situations, we also train agents on five held-out scenarios:
holding out all of the conjunctive overhypotheses, holding out all of the disjunctive overhypotheses,
and holding out either one conjunctive overhypothesis or one disjunctive overhypothesis. The
maximum achievable reward for these experiments is 3.
Results Figure 3a shows the performance of A2C and PPO2 when none of the hypotheses are held out.
PPO2 outperforms A2C in almost all scenarios, achieving higher rewards faster. Further, the LSTM
models clearly outperform the non memory-based models; this is expected, since causal learning
requires memory. Unfortunately, none of the algorithms perform well on held-out causal examples,
as shown in Figure 3c. This suggests that they are primarily learning to memorize the causal patterns,
and thus are incapable of generalization. This conclusion comes with a caveat: because there are only
a handful of possible hypotheses, it may be possible that we do not have enough data to perform
well on held-out samples. Agents are, however, able to easily distinguish between conjunctive and
disjunctive environments—Figure 3b shows that after very few steps, in the held-out situation (with
both overhypotheses), agents can distinguish conjunctive from disjunctive environments, even though
they are unable to determine which objects exactly are blickets.

4.2   Q-L EARNING

We also train tabular Q-Learning on the symbolic version of the blicket environment. We append the
full history of previous observations to the current observation in order to give the agent memory. The
Q-values are initialized to zero. We used ✏-greedy exploration with an exploration probability of 0.1,
and we found the best learning rate was 0.95. Q-learning is able to learn the task very quickly due to
a small search space—it took an average of 70 episodes and 292 steps for the agent to converge to
maximum reward. However, tabular Q-learning is incapable of generalizing to new scenarios, so we
do not test Q-Learning agents in the held-out scenarios.


                                                    5
(a) Performance of PPO2 and A2C algorithms with               (b) Accuracy of models over time when determining
MLP, LSTM, and Layer-Norm LSTM policies on the                if the environment is conjunctive or disjunctive.
blicket environment.


(c) Performance on several over-hypothesis variants.          (d) Performance of a standard A2C-LSTM model
Conjunctive Only: Train on conjunctive hypotheses,            when forced to explore for K steps before entering
test on conjunctive and disjunctive. Disjunctive Only:        the quiz phase. While this exploration helps the de-
Train on only disjunctive hypotheses, test on conjunc-        cision transformer, additional forced explanation is
tive and disjunctive. Leave one out modifier: Train           harmful to all standard RL models.
on 2/3 (or 4/6 for both) of the hypothesis within the
overhypothesis, and test on the remaining.
                 Figure 3: Experiments with standard deep reinforcement learning algorithms


   Model                        Pre-Training Dataset                                      Reward             FCA
   Decision Transformer         Random                                                  0.16 ± 1.747         0.67
   Decision Transformer         Random (5-step forced exploration)                      2.06 ± 0.998         0.71
   Decision Transformer         Random (10-step forced exploration)                     2.16 ± 0.872         0.73
   Decision Transformer         Random (15-step forced exploration)                     2.37 ± 0.633         0.77
   Decision Transformer         A2C-LSTM                                                0.14 ± 1.847         0.63
   Decision Transformer         PPO2-LSTM                                               0.26 ± 0.990         0.66
   Decision Transformer         A2C-LayerNorm-LSTM                                      0.18 ± 0.983         0.62
   Decision Transformer         PPO2-LayerNorm-LSTM                                     0.74 ± 1.460         0.64
   Behavior Cloning             Random                                                  0.22 ± 0.975         0.61
   Behavior Cloning             Random (5-step forced exploration)                       0.16 ± 0.987        0.58
   Behavior Cloning             Random (10-step forced exploration)                     0.14 ± 0.990         0.60
   Behavior Cloning             Random (15-step forced exploration)                     0.04 ± 0.999         0.61
   Behavior Cloning             A2C-LSTM                                                0.10 ± 0.995         0.55
   Behavior Cloning             PPO2-LSTM                                               0.06 ± 0.998         0.63
   Behavior Cloning             A2C-LayerNorm-LSTM                                      0.04 ± 2.087         0.59
   Behavior Cloning             PPO2-LayerNorm-LSTM                                     0.12 ± 0.995         0.68
Table 1: Performance of the imitation learning models with different pre-training datasets. Reward is on the
blicket-quiz task: +1 for correctly identifying a blicket, and -1 for incorrectly identifying a blicket. FCA refers to
Forced Choice Accuracy, accuracy of the model in determining if the environment is conjunctive or disjunctive.


                                                          6
4.3   B EHAVIOR C LONING
Recently Chen et al. (2021) introduced the Decision Transformer, a simple transformer-based
approach to imitation learning, shown to outperform most existing behavior cloning methods. The
decision transformer works by applying a causally-masked transformer to predict the reward-to-go of
a flattened sequence of (state, action, reward, next state) tuples, with an `2 -norm loss. The model
then chooses actions during test time that maximize the predicted reward-to-go.
Experimental Design We collect trajectories for behavior cloning by exploring randomly in the
space (an approach followed by Chen et al. (2021)). In this work, we adapt the model to predict
discrete actions in our space by adding a sigmoid activation to the action predictions and altering
the action prediction loss accordingly. We evaluate the model using a target reward of 3, which
corresponds to identifying all of the blickets correctly. The decision transformer was trained using a
batch size of 128, a K-value of 30, embedding dimension of 128, 3 layers, one head, and dropout
of 0.1. The weights are optimized using ADAM, with a learning rate of 1e 4 and weight decay of
1e 4 . We also compare against standard behavior cloning, using an MLP with a hidden-dimension
of 128, and trained using the same optimizer as the decision transformer. Both models are trained
for 10 epochs using one Nvidia Titan-X Maxwell GPU, which takes less than one hour, and the best
validation set checkpoint is used for each during test time. Models are evaluated on 100 rollouts in
the environment, and the mean reward is reported.
When training the decision transformer model, we found that in some cases, random (and even the
PPO2/A2C trained) models were unable to explore efficiently, as they entered the quiz environment
too soon. Note that random exploration will enter the quiz environment after t steps with with
probability p = 1 21t . Thus, we found it helpful to force the policy to explore for several steps
before allowing it to enter the quiz environment. While this process helps the decision transformer, it
negatively affects the performance of the standard RL models, as shown in Figure 3d.
Results Table 1 shows the performance of the decision transformer and behavior cloning models
when applied to datasets generated by several policies. As we can see, while expert policies allow for
higher rewards using the decision transformer, allowing the model additional forced exploration time
is the most important factor. This suggests that on their own, the A2C and PPO2 trained policies do
not lead to sufficient exploration for learning a strong model of the reward, whereas forcing additional
exploration (even if it is random) is much more useful. Notably, standard behavior cloning performs
very poorly, as copying actions with the same local observations under different overhypotheses will
likely lead to incorrect or uninformative actions.

4.4   C AUSAL D ISCOVERY BASELINES
Most deep learning models do not explicitly model the causal structure of the data, for example, it
would be quite challenging to extract the causal structure learned by a transformer network. However,
one workaround is to evaluate the model on causal structure learning by asking it to answer questions
about the existence of an edge in a causal graph. For example, we could ask a language model, does
variable A cause variable B? Then one can take the average accuracy of these answers as the ratio
of the structured hamming distance (SHD). However, note that in our case, since objects do not
influence each other, we only ask the question of which objects influence the machine.
To explore the performance of existing causal discovery models on the benchmark, we leveraged the
recent Differentiable Causal Discovery from Interventional Data (DCDI) approach (Brouillard et al.,
2020). We evaluated the model on causal structure learning for the disjunctive and the conjunctive
settings. For the disjunctive settings, the model achieved a structured hamming distance (SHD) of
2.3. Noting that the graph has 4 variables and hence 16 possible edges in the graph structure, the
model achieved a SHD ratio of 85%. For the conjunctive setting, the model achieved a SHD of 2.6,
which is a SHD ratio of 83%.

4.5   L ARGE L ANGUAGE M ODELS
Recently large language models have shown promising performance on a wide variety of tasks, includ-
ing logical inference and common-sense reasoning. Such language models include GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020), PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), MT-NLG (Smith et al., 2022), and Chinchilla (Hoff-
mann et al., 2022), which all use transformer-based architectures and are trained autoregressively on
a large corpus of text, to predict the next token when given a sequence of tokens. These language


                                                   7
models have also shown promising performance on tasks that involve causal reasoning, such as
identifying causal effects from observational data (Veitch et al., 2020) and inferring causality for
when drugs lead to adverse effects (Wang et al., 2021b). However, these models have not yet been
applied to a task that involves reasoning across a set of overhypotheses, as is required in the blicket
environment.
Motivated by this, here we investigate the performance of two such language models, GPT-3 and
PaLM, on the blicket environment. One can apply a language model to a target task via purely
text-based interaction with the model, by providing a prompt to the model and evaluating its output.
This prompt could be freeform, in which it has no set structure, or it could be few-shot, where it
contains a small number of examples of correct prompt-output pairs, followed by the test prompt.
Instead of text-based interaction, another option is to fine-tune the model on the target task. This
involves training the model on data from the target task, and can require a sizeable amount of data.
To make the evaluation more similar to how children are introduced to the task, we focus on only
text-based interaction with the model, including both freeform and few-shot prompts.
As in the experiments with children, there are four conditions: given versus not given hypotheses,
and disjunctive versus conjunctive. In the disjunctive case, one of the three objects is a blicket. In
the conjunctive case, two of the three objects are blickets. We evaluate how well the models can:
1) identify the blickets and 2) identify whether the causal structure is disjunctive or conjuctive. For
GPT-3, we use the OpenAI API1 , and for PaLM we use an internally available interface. We have
also run GPT-3 on different temperature settings and we found that this did not significantly change
the result, refer to Section C.1 in the appendix for details.
Freeform Prompt In the freeform prompt, we provide the model with text that is as similar as
possible to what children receive in the blicket experiment. The only difference is that we replace
the visual components with text descriptions. We include the exact prompts in Appendix C. The
prompt starts with a description of interacting with a striped blicket machine and then a dotted blicket
machine, each of which has three unique objects. There are three interaction examples given per
machine, for example “If we put the blue pyramid on the machine, then it does not light up”. In
the given hypotheses condition, the striped blicket machine is conjunctive and the dotted blicket
machine is disjunctive. In the not given hypotheses condition, there is not enough information to
determine whether the striped and dotted blicket machines are disjunctive or conjuctive. Thus the
given hypotheses condition defines the space of overhypotheses, whereas the not given hypotheses
condition does not. The prompt then introduces a new blicket machine, along with examples of
interactions with the machine and whether it lights up or not. Finally we ask the model which objects
are blickets and whether the new machine is more similar to the striped or dotted machine.
Few-shot Prompt In the few-shot prompt, we structure the input into two prompt-output demon-
strations, one per machine, containing the same information as in the freeform prompt. Unlike
the information given to children, in the outputs we explicitly state which objects are blickets. In
addition, for the given hypotheses condition, in the preamble we define the disjunctive and conjunctive
hypotheses: “A striped machine needs two blickets to make it light up, and a dotted machine needs
one blicket to make it light up”, and in the outputs we state whether this is more similar to a striped
or dotted machine.
The results are reported in Table 2.2 We find that when given hypotheses, GPT-3 and PaLM are
almost always able to select the correct causal structure, but they are not always able to select the
correct blickets. In particular, GPT-3 frequently names too many objects as blickets, including those
associated with other machines. In contrast, PaLM never identified objects as blickets that were not
one of the three objects in the test task. In the two-shot setting, PaLM performs best when the space
of overhypotheses is covered perfectly by the two examples given, as one would expect. However,
when this space is not covered, i.e. in the not given hypothesis setting, PaLM struggles in the two-shot
setting because the test example’s causal structure does not match either of the two given examples.
Adding chain-of-thought reasoning in the PaLM prompt did not improve results in either setting.


   1
    Available at https://beta.openai.com/overview
   2
    For GPT-3, we use the text-davinci-002 model, with temperature 0.7, maximum length 256, and frequency
and presence penalties 0. For PaLM, we use a temperature of 0 to obtain the greedy, or one-best decoding.
When given the freeform input, the PaLM model output continues indefinitely, so we simply took the first two
sentences of the output and ignored the rest.


                                                     8
 Condition                             Model & Input                  Blickets Chosen       Causal Structure
 Given hypotheses, disjunctive         GPT-3, freeform              1/1 correct, 6 wrong        correct
                                       PaLM, freeform               1/1 correct, 1 wrong         wrong
                                       PaLM, two-shot                    1/1 correct            correct
 Given hypotheses, conjunctive         GPT-3, freeform              2/2 correct, 1 wrong        correct
                                       PaLM, freeform                    2/2 correct            correct
                                       PaLM, two-shot                    2/2 correct            correct
 Not given hypotheses, disjunctive     GPT-3, freeform              1/1 correct, 7 wrong           —
                                       PaLM, freeform                    0/1 correct               —
                                       PaLM, two-shot               1/2 correct, 1 wrong           —
 Not given hypotheses, conjunctive     GPT-3, freeform              2/2 correct, 7 wrong           —
                                       PaLM, freeform                    2/2 correct               —
                                       PaLM, two-shot               1/2 correct, 1 wrong           —
Table 2: Results for GPT-3 and PaLM for the four conditions. Bold font indicates a fully correct answer. For the
not given hypotheses setting, answering correctly is impossible, as there is not enough information to determine
whether the blicket detectors in the training phase are disjunctive or conjunctive.



5    D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION

In this work, we looked into evaluating and understanding how machine learning models learn
causal overhypotheses, by evaluating these models in the blicket environment. In contrast to existing
benchmark tasks, in which there is a fixed causal structure, this environment focuses on the need for
causal overhypotheses in order to explore effectively to determine the underlying causal structure.
We focused on three categories of state-of-the-art methods—deep RL, behavior cloning, and large
language models—for tasks in this environment. In blicket detector experiments, children are able to
learn causal overhypotheses from only a handful of observations and can apply these overhypotheses
to explore effectively for a new situation (Kosoy et al., 2022). In contrast, our experiments indicate that
state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms have difficulty learning and using causal overhypotheses
for exploration and inference—we saw this in the weak performance of deep RL algorithms on
held-out environments and in the tendency of decision transformer models to under-explore. In our
experiments with language models, we provide the same observations that the children were given in
Kosoy et al. (2022), along with a full set of examples for the new situation (thus removing the need
for exploration). Despite this, language models struggle when the hypotheses are not given, and are
not able to express uncertainty about the causal structure in that case.
Given that understanding and leveraging causal structure is essential to developing general intelligence,
this work highlights an opportunity for improvement in this direction, and provides a set of concrete
benchmark tasks to measure improvement. One direction of future work is to build machine learning
models that can better learning causal overhypotheses. Modular architectures have shown to be
helpful in understanding causal hypotheses of the environment (Goyal et al., 2019; 2021; Ke et al.,
2021); it would be promising to explore such models for causal overhypotheses understanding.
Another direction of future work is to improve on exploration in RL agents by explicitly learning
and incorporating causal overhypotheses, in order to narrow down the search over possibilities.
Furthermore, an interesting direction is to train machine learning models on children’s exploration
behavior used in solving causal problems, for instance the trajectories provided by Kosoy et al. (2020).
This may lead to new insights for improving causal overhypotheses learning for machine learning
models.
A main limitation of this work is that we evaluated only two types of causal overhypotheses–
conjunctive and disjunctive. These are particular types of overhypotheses on the causal graph
structure. In the real world, there exist many other types of overhpotheses, as well as conditional
probability distributions. It would be interesting to see if one can extend either the blicket or other
RL environments (such as Ahmed et al. (2020); Ke et al. (2021)) to include other types of causal
overhypotheses. With minor changes, one could extend the blicket environment to test other kinds of
causal overhypotheses, such as inferring whether systems are stochastic or deterministic, or require
sequential or unordered interventions. This environment also allows for multiple measures of causal
inference, including interventions and counterfactuals, as well as predictions.


                                                       9
R EFERENCES
Ossama Ahmed, Frederik Träuble, Anirudh Goyal, Alexander Neitz, Yoshua Bengio, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, Manuel Wüthrich, and Stefan Bauer. Causalworld: A robotic manipulation benchmark
  for causal structure and transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04296, 2020.
Kelsey R. Allen, Kevin A. Smith, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum. Rapid trial-and-error learning with
  simulation supports flexible tool use and physical reasoning. Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences, 117(47):29302–29310, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1912341117. URL
  https://www.pnas.org/content/117/47/29302.
Susan Amin, Maziar Gomrokchi, Harsh Satija, Herke van Hoof, and Doina Precup. A survey of
  exploration methods in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00157, 2021.
Anton Bakhtin, Laurens van der Maaten, Justin Johnson, Laura Gustafson, and Ross Girshick. Phyre:
  A new benchmark for physical reasoning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  pp. 5082–5093, 2019.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In Advances in neural information
 processing systems, pp. 1471–1479, 2016.
Yoshua Bengio, Tristan Deleu, Nasim Rahaman, Rosemary Ke, Sébastien Lachapelle, Olexa Bilaniuk,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Christopher Pal. A meta-transfer objective for learning to disentangle causal
  mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10912, 2019.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016a.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016b.
Philippe Brouillard, Sébastien Lachapelle, Alexandre Lacoste, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Alexandre
  Drouin. Differentiable causal discovery from interventional data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:21865–21877, 2020.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01345, 2021.
Maxime Chevalier-Boisvert, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Salem Lahlou, Lucas Willems, Chitwan Saharia,
 Thien Huu Nguyen, and Yoshua Bengio. Babyai: A platform to study the sample efficiency of
 grounded language learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Oleg Klimov, Chris Hesse, Taehoon Kim, and John Schulman. Quantifying generalization
  in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02341, 2018.
Alison Gopnik. Scientific thinking in young children: Theoretical advances, empirical research, and
  policy implications. Science, 337(6102):1623–1627, 2012.
Alison Gopnik and David M. Sobel. Detecting blickets: how young children use information about
  novel causal powers in categorization and induction. Child Development, 71(5):1205–1222, 2000.


                                                10
Alison Gopnik and Henry M Wellman. Reconstructing constructivism: causal models, bayesian
  learning mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological bulletin, 138(6):1085, 2012.
Alison Gopnik, Shaun O’Grady, Christopher G Lucas, Thomas L Griffiths, Adrienne Wente, Sophie
  Bridgers, Rosie Aboody, Hoki Fung, and Ronald E Dahl. Changes in cognitive flexibility and hy-
  pothesis search across human life history from childhood to adolescence to adulthood. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 114(30):7892–7899, 2017.
Anirudh Goyal, Alex Lamb, Jordan Hoffmann, Shagun Sodhani, Sergey Levine, Yoshua Bengio, and
  Bernhard Schölkopf. Recurrent independent mechanisms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.10893, 2019.
Anirudh Goyal, Aniket Didolkar, Nan Rosemary Ke, Charles Blundell, Philippe Beaudoin, Nicolas
  Heess, Michael C Mozer, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural production systems. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Thomas L Griffiths and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Theory-based causal induction. Psychological review,
  116(4):661, 2009.
Ashley Hill, Antonin Raffin, Maximilian Ernestus, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Rene Traore,
  Prafulla Dhariwal, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, Alex Nichol, Matthias Plappert, Alec Radford,
  John Schulman, Szymon Sidor, and Yuhuai Wu. Stable baselines. https://github.com/
  hill-a/stable-baselines, 2018.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom
  Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy,
  Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.
Stephen James, Zicong Ma, David Rovick Arrojo, and Andrew J Davison. Rlbench: The robot
  learning benchmark & learning environment. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(2):3019–
  3026, 2020.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Aniket Rajiv Didolkar, Sarthak Mittal, Anirudh Goyal, Guillaume Lajoie, Stefan
  Bauer, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Michael Curtis Mozer, Yoshua Bengio, and Christopher Pal.
  Systematic evaluation of causal discovery in visual model based reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2107.00848, 2021.
Charles Kemp, Andrew Perfors, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Learning overhypotheses with hierarchical
  bayesian models. Developmental science, 10(3):307–321, 2007.
Charles Kemp, Noah D Goodman, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Learning to learn causal models.
  Cognitive Science, 34(7):1185–1243, 2010.
Eliza Kosoy, Jasmine Collins, David M Chan, Sandy Huang, Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, John
  Canny, Alison Gopnik, and Jessica B Hamrick. Exploring exploration: Comparing children with rl
  agents in unified environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.02880, 2020.
Eliza Kosoy, Adrian Liu, Jasmine Collins, David M Chan, Jessica B Hamrick, Nan Rosemary
  Ke, Sandy H Huang, Bryanna Kaufmann, John Canny, and Alison Gopnik. Learning causal
  overhypotheses through exploration in children and computational models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.10430, 2022.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Teaching models to express their uncertainty in
  words. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14334, 2022.
Christopher G Lucas and Thomas L Griffiths. Learning the form of causal relationships using
  hierarchical bayesian models. Cognitive Science, 34(1):113–147, 2010.
Christopher G Lucas, Sophie Bridgers, Thomas L Griffiths, and Alison Gopnik. When children are
  better (or at least more open-minded) learners than adults: Developmental differences in learning
  the forms of causal relationships. Cognition, 131(2):284–299, 2014.


                                                11
Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. Count-based exploration with the
 successor representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.11622, 2018a.

Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael
 Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open problems for
 general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 61:523–562, 2018b.

Jarryd Martin, Suraj Narayanan Sasikumar, Tom Everitt, and Marcus Hutter. Count-based exploration
   in feature space for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08090, 2017.

Daniel McDuff, Yale Song, Jiyoung Lee, Vibhav Vineet, Sai Vemprala, Nicholas Gyde, Hadi Salman,
  Shuang Ma, Kwanghoon Sohn, and Ashish Kapoor. Causalcity: Complex simulations with agency
  for causal discovery and reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13364, 2021.

Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.

Alex Nichol, Vicki Pfau, Christopher Hesse, Oleg Klimov, and John Schulman. Gotta learn fast: A
  new benchmark for generalization in rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03720, 2018.

Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped dqn. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29:4026–4034, 2016.

Georg Ostrovski, Marc G Bellemare, Aäron van den Oord, and Rémi Munos. Count-based exploration
  with neural density models. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine
  Learning-Volume 70, pp. 2721–2730. JMLR. org, 2017.

Deepak Pathak, Pulkit Agrawal, Alexei A Efros, and Trevor Darrell. Curiosity-driven exploration
  by self-supervised prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 16–17, 2017.

Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04161, 2019.

Amy Perfors, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Thomas L Griffiths, and Fei Xu. A tutorial introduction to
 bayesian models of cognitive development. Cognition, 120(3):302–321, 2011.

Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.

Jürgen Schmidhuber. Curious model-building control systems. In Proc. international joint conference
  on neural networks, pp. 1458–1463, 1991.

Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Towards causal representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2102.11107, 2021.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Shaden Smith, Mostofa Patwary, Brandon Norick, Patrick LeGresley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Jared
  Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, Elton Zhang, Re-
  won Child, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Julie Bernauer, Xia Song, Mohammad Shoeybi, Yuxiong
  He, Michael Houston, Saurabh Tiwary, and Bryan Catanzaro. Using deepspeed and megatron
  to train megatron-turing nlg 530b, a large-scale generative language model. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11990, 2022.

Sumedh A Sontakke, Arash Mehrjou, Laurent Itti, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal curiosity: Rl
  agents discovering self-supervised experiments for causal representation learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9848–9858. PMLR, 2021.


                                                 12
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, OpenAI Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John
  Schulman, Filip DeTurck, and Pieter Abbeel. # exploration: A study of count-based exploration
  for deep reinforcement learning. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp.
  2753–2762, 2017.
Joshua B Tenenbaum, Charles Kemp, Thomas L Griffiths, and Noah D Goodman. How to grow a
  mind: Statistics, structure, and abstraction. science, 331(6022):1279–1285, 2011.
Victor Veitch, Dhanya Sridhar, and David Blei. Adapting text embeddings for causal inference.
  In Jonas Peters and David Sontag (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Uncertainty
  in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), volume 124 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  919–928, August 2020.
Jane X. Wang, Michael King, Nicolas Porcel, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Tina Zhu, Charlie Deck, Peter Choy,
  Mary Cassin, Malcolm Reynolds, Francis Song, Gavin Buttimore, David P. Reichert, Neil Rabi-
  nowitz, Loic Matthey, Demis Hassabis, Alexander Lerchner, and Matthew Botvinick. Alchemy: A
  structured task distribution for meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.02926,
  2021a.
Xingqiao Wang, Xiaowei Xu, Weida Tong, Ruth Roberts, and Zhichao Liu. Inferbert: A transformer-
  based causal inference framework for enhancing pharmacovigilance. Frontiers in Artificial Intelli-
  gence, 4, 2021b.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 8(3):279–292, 1992.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.10897, 2019.
Chi Zhang, Baoxiong Jia, Mark Edmonds, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yixin Zhu. Acre: Abstract causal
  reasoning beyond covariation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10643–10653, 2021.


                                                13
