Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O N THE I MPACT OF A DVERSARIALLY ROBUST M ODELS
ON A LGORITHMIC R ECOURSE

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

          The widespread deployment of machine learning models in various high-stakes
          settings has underscored the need for ensuring that individuals who are adversely
          impacted by model predictions are provided with a means for recourse. To this end,
          several algorithms have been proposed in recent literature to generate recourses.
          Recent research has also demonstrated that the recourses generated by these al-
          gorithms often correspond to adversarial examples. This key finding emphasizes
          the need for a deeper understanding of the impact of adversarially robust models
          (which are designed to guard against adversarial examples) on algorithmic recourse.
          In this work, we make one of the first attempts at studying the impact of adver-
          sarially robust models on algorithmic recourse. We theoretically and empirically
          analyze the cost (ease of implementation) and validity (probability of obtaining a
          positive model prediction) of the recourses output by state-of-the-art algorithms
          when the underlying models are adversarially robust. More specifically, we con-
          struct theoretical bounds on the differences between the cost and the validity of
          the recourses generated by various state-of-the-art algorithms when the underlying
          models are adversarially robust vs. non-robust. We also carry out extensive empiri-
          cal analysis with multiple real-world datasets to not only validate our theoretical
          results, but also analyze the impact of varying degrees of model robustness on
          the cost and validity of the resulting recourses. Our theoretical and empirical
          analyses demonstrate that adversarially robust models significantly increase the
          cost and reduce the validity of the resulting recourses, thereby shedding light on the
          inherent trade-offs between achieving adversarial robustness in predictive models
          and providing easy-to-implement and reliable algorithmic recourse.


1    I NTRODUCTION
As machine learning (ML) models are increasingly being deployed in high-stakes domains such as
banking, healthcare, and criminal justice, it becomes critical to ensure that individuals who have
been adversely impacted (e.g., loan denied) by the predictions of these models are provided with
a means for recourse. To this end, several techniques have been proposed in recent literature to
provide recourses to affected individuals by generating counterfactual explanations which highlight
what features need to be changed and by how much in order to flip a model’s prediction (Wachter
et al., 2017; Dhurandhar et al., 2018; Ustun et al., 2019a; Pawelczyk et al., 2020a; Karimi et al.,
2021b;a; Verma et al., 2020)1 . For instance, Wachter et al. (2017) proposed a gradient-based approach
which returns the nearest counterfactual resulting in the desired prediction. Ustun et al. (2019a)
proposed an integer programming-based approach to obtain actionable recourses for linear classifiers.
More recently, Karimi et al. (2021b; 2020c) leveraged the causal structure of the underlying data for
generating recourses (Barocas et al., 2020; Mahajan et al., 2019; Pawelczyk et al., 2020a).
Prior research has also theoretically and empirically analyzed the properties of the recourses generated
by state-of-the-art algorithms. For instance, several recent works (Rawal et al., 2021; Pawelczyk
et al., 2020a; Dominguez-Olmedo et al., 2022; Upadhyay et al., 2021b) demonstrated that the
recourses output by state-of-the-art algorithms are not robust to small perturbations to input instances,
underlying model parameters, and to the recourses themselves. More recently, Pawelczyk et al.
   1
     The terms counterfactual explanations (Wachter et al., 2017), contrastive explanations (Karimi et al., 2020b),
and recourse (Ustun et al., 2019a) have often been used interchangeably in prior literature.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2022a) demonstrated that the recourses output by state-of-the-art algorithms are very similar to
adversarial examples. This finding is critical because there have been several efforts in the literature on
adversarial ML (Huang et al., 2011; Kurakin et al., 2016; Biggio & Roli, 2018) to build adversarially
robust models that are not susceptible to adversarial examples. However, the impact of such models
on the quality and the correctness of the recourses output by state-of-the-art algorithms remains
unexplored. The aforementioned connections between adversarial examples and recourses underscore
the need for a deeper investigation of the impact of adversarially robust models (which are designed
to guard against adversarial examples) on algorithmic recourse. Such an investigation becomes
particularly critical as the need for adversarial robustness of predictive models as well as the ability
to obtain easy-to-implement and reliable recourses have often been touted as the cornerstones of
trustworthy and safe ML both by prior research as well as recent regulations Voigt & Von dem Bussche
(2017); Hamon et al. (2020). However, there is no prior work that investigates the relationship and/or
the trade-offs between these two critical pillars of trustworthy and safe ML.
In this work, we address the aforementioned gaps by making the first ever attempt at studying the
impact of adversarially robust models on algorithmic recourse. We theoretically and empirically
analyze the cost (ease of implementation) and validity (probability of obtaining a positive model
prediction) of the recourses output by state-of-the-art algorithms when the underlying models are
adversarially robust. More specifically, we construct theoretical bounds on the differences between
the cost and the validity of the recourses generated by various state-of-the-art algorithms (e.g.,
gradient-based (Wachter et al., 2017; Laugel et al., 2017) and manifold-based (Pawelczyk et al.,
2020b) methods) when the underlying models are adversarially robust vs. non-robust (See Section 4).
To this end, we first derive theoretical bounds on the differences between the weights (parameters) of
adversarially robust vs. non-robust models and then leverage these to bound the differences in the
costs and validity of the recourses corresponding to these two sets of models.
We also carried out extensive empirical analysis with multiple real-world datasets from diverse
domains. This analysis not only validated our theoretical bounds, but also unearthed several inter-
esting insights pertaining to the relationship between adversarial robustness of predictive models and
algorithmic recourse. More specifically, we found that the cost differences between the recourses cor-
responding to adversarially robust vs. non-robust models increase as the degree of robustness of the
adversarially robust models increases. We also observed that the validity of recourses worsens as the
degree of robustness of the underlying models increases. We further probed these insights by visualiz-
ing the resulting recourses in low dimensions using t-SNE plots, and found that the number of valid re-
courses around a given instance reduces as the degree of robustness of the underlying model increases.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Algorithmic Recourse. Several approaches have been proposed in recent literature to provide
recourses to affected individuals (Dhurandhar et al., 2018; Wachter et al., 2017; Ustun et al., 2019a;
Van Looveren & Klaise, 2019; Pawelczyk et al., 2020a; Mahajan et al., 2019; Karimi et al., 2020a;c;
Dandl et al., 2020). These approaches can be broadly categorized along the following dimensions
Verma et al. (2020): type of the underlying predictive model (e.g., tree based vs. differentiable
classifier), type of access they require to the underlying predictive model (e.g., black box vs. gradient
access), whether they encourage sparsity in counterfactuals (i.e., only a small number of features
should be changed), whether counterfactuals should lie on the data manifold, whether the underlying
causal relationships should be accounted for when generating counterfactuals, and whether the output
produced by the method should be multiple diverse counterfactuals or a single counterfactual. In
addition, Rawal & Lakkaraju (2020) also studied how to generate global, interpretable summaries of
counterfactual explanations. Some recent works also demonstrated that the recourses output by state-
of-the-art techniques might not be robust, i.e., small perturbations to the original instance (Dominguez-
Olmedo et al., 2021; Slack et al., 2021), the underlying model (Upadhyay et al., 2021a; Rawal et al.,
2021), or the recourse (Pawelczyk et al., 2022c) itself may render the previously prescribed recourse(s)
invalid. These works also formulated and solved minimax optimization problems to find robust
recourses to address the aforementioned challenges.
Adversarial Examples and Robustness. Prior works have shown that complex machine learning
models, such as deep neural networks, are vulnerable to small changes in input (Szegedy et al.,
2013). This behavior of predictive models allows for generating adversarial examples (AEs) by


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


adding infinitesimal changes to input targeted to achieve adversary-selected outcomes (Szegedy et al.,
2013; Goodfellow et al., 2014). Prior works have proposed several techniques to generate AEs using
varying degrees of access to the model, training data, and the training procedure (Chakraborty et al.,
2018). While gradient-based methods (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016) return the
smallest input perturbations which flip the label as adversarial examples, generative methods (Zhao
et al., 2017) constrain the search for adversarial examples to the training data-manifold. Finally,
some methods (Cisse et al., 2017) generate adversarial examples for non-differentiable and non-
decomposable measures in complex domains such as speech recognition and image segmentation.
Prior works have shown that Empirical Risk Minimization (ERM) does not yield models that are
robust to adversarial examples (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Kurakin et al., 2016). Hence, to reliably train
adversarially robust models, Madry et al. (2017) proposed the adversarial training objective which
minimizes the worst-case loss within some ϵ-ball perturbation region around the input instances.
Intersections between Adversarial ML and Model Explanations. There has been a growing
interest in studying the intersection of adversarial ML and model explainability (Hamon et al.,
2020). Among all the existing works focusing on this intersection, two explorations are relevant
to our work (Shah et al., 2021; Pawelczyk et al., 2022b). Shah et al. (2021) studied the interplay
between adversarial robustness and post hoc explanations (Shah et al., 2021) and demonstrated that
gradient-based feature attribution methods (e.g., vanilla gradients, gradient times input, integrated
gradients, smoothgrad) may severely violate the primary assumption of attribution – features with
higher attribution are more important for model prediction – in case of non-robust models. However,
their results also demonstrate that such a violation does not occur when the underlying models are
robust to ℓ2 and ℓinf input perturbations. More recently, Pawelczyk et al. (2022a) demonstrated that
recourses generated by certain state-of-the-art methods are very similar to adversarial examples, and
also argued that the methods proposed to output recourses and adversarial examples are designed
with similar goals of changing the input minimally in order to achieve the desired outcome. While
the aforementioned works explored the connections between adversarial ML and model explanations,
none of these works focus on analyzing the impact of adversarially robust models on the recourses
output by state-of-the-art algorithms.

3    P RELIMINARIES
Notation. In this work, we denote a classifier f : X → Y mapping features x ∈ X to labels y ∈ Y,
where x is a d-dimensional feature vector. We define a non-linear activation function ϕ(·) such
that f (x) = ϕ(h(x)), where h(x) is the logits of the linear model of the form h(x)=wT x, for
parameter weights w. In addition, we represent the non-robust and adversarially robust models using
fNR (x) and fR (x). Below we describe the methodological frameworks used for comparing recourses
generated from non-robust and adversarially robust models.
Adversarially Robust models. Despite the superior performance of machine learning (ML) models,
they are susceptible to adversarial examples (AEs), i.e., inputs generated by adding infinitesimal
perturbations to the original samples targeted to change prediction label (Agarwal et al., 2019). One
standard approach to ameliorate this problem is training a model using adversarial training which
minimizes the worst-case loss within some perturbation region (the perturbation model) (Kolter &
Madry). In particular, for a classifier, f parameterized by weights θ, loss function ℓ(·), and training
data {xi , yi }i={1,2,...,n} ∈ Dtrain , the optimization problem of minimizing the worst-case loss within
ℓp −norm perturbation with radius ϵ is:
                                         1       X
                               min                       max ℓ(fθ (x + δ)), y),                       (1)
                                θ |Dtrain |             δ∈∆p,ϵ
                                         (x,y)∈Dtrain

where Dtrain denotes the training dataset and ∆p,ϵ = {δ : ∥δ∥p ≤ ϵ} is the ℓp ball with radius ϵ
centered around sample x. We use p = ∞ for our theoretical analysis resulting in a closed-form
solution of the model parameters θ.
Algorithmic Recourse. One of the ways in which recourse can be realized is by explaining to affected
individuals what features in their profile need to change and by how much in order to obtain a positive
outcome. Counterfactual explanations which essentially capture the aforementioned information
can therefore be used to provide recourse. The terms "counterfactual explanations" and "algorithmic
recourse" have, in fact, become synonymous in recent literature (Karimi et al., 2020b; Ustun et al.,


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2019b; Venkatasubramanian & Alfano, 2020). More specifically, algorithms that try to find algorith-
mic recourses do so by finding a counterfactual x′ = x + ζ that is closest to the original instance
x and change the model’s prediction f (x + ζ) to the target label. Next, we describe three methods
we use to understand the implications of adversarially robust models on algorithmic recourses.
Score CounterFactual Explanations (SCFE). Given the classifier f (x) = ϕ(h(x)) and a distance
function d : Rd × Rd → R+ , Wachter et al. (2017) define the problem of generating a recourse
x′ = x + ζ for sample x by minimizing the following objective:
                               arg min(h(x′ ) − s)2 + λd(x′ , x),                         (2)
                                      x′
where s is the target score for x′ , λ is the regularization coefficient, and d(·) is the distance between
sample x and its counterfactual counterpart x′ .
C-CHVAE. Given a Variational AutoEncoder (VAE) model with encoder Eγ and decoder Gθ trained
on the original data distribution Dtrain , C-CHVAE (Pawelczyk et al., 2020b) aims to generate recourses
in the latent space Z, where Eγ : X → Z. The encoder Eγ transforms a given sample x into a latent
representation z ∈ Z and the decoder Gθ takes z as input and produces x̂ as similar as possible to x. To
this end, given a sample x, C-CHVAE generates the recourse ζ using the following objective function:
                      ζ ∗ = arg min∥ζ∥ such that f (Gθ (Eγ (x) + ζ)) ̸= f (x),                       (3)
                              ζ∈Z
where Eγ allows to search for counterfactuals in the data manifold and Gθ projects the latent
counterfactuals to the feature space.
Growing Spheres Method (GSM). While the above techniques directly optimize specific objective
functions for generating counterfactuals, GSM (Laugel et al., 2017) uses a search-based algorithm
to generate recourses by randomly sampling points around the original instance x until a sample
with the target label is found. In particular, GSM first draws an ℓ2 -sphere around a given instance x,
randomly samples point within that sphere, and checks whether any sampled points result in target
prediction. Finally, they contract or expand the sphere until a (sparse) counterfactual is found and
finally returned. GSM defines a minimization problem using a function c : X × X → R+ , where
c(x, x′ ) is the cost of moving from instance x to counterfactual x′ .
                                ∗
                              x′ = arg min{c(x, x′ ) | f (x′ ) ̸= f (x)},                             (4)
                                      x′ ∈X
where x′ is sampled from the ℓ2 -ball around x such that f (x′ ) ̸= f (x), c(x, x′ ) = ∥x′ −x∥2 +γ∥x′ −
x∥0 , and γ ∈ R+ is the weight associated to the sparsity objective.

4     T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS
Next, we carry out a detailed theoretical analysis to bound the cost and validity differences of recourses
generated by state-of-the-art recourse methods when the underlying models are adversarially robust
vs. non-robust, for the case of linear classifiers. More specifically, we compare the cost differences
w.r.t. the recourses obtained using 1) gradient-based methods such as SCFE (Wachter et al.,
2017)(Sec. 4.1.1) and 2) manifold-based methods such as C-CHVAE (Pawelczyk et al., 2020b)
(Sec. 4.1.2). Finally, we show that the validity of algorithmic recourse generated using existing
methods for robust models is lower compared to that of non-robust models (Sec. 4.2).

4.1     C OST A NALYSIS

The cost of a generated algorithmic recourse is defined as the distance (e.g., ℓ1 or ℓ2 distance)
between the input instance x and the counterfactual x′ obtained using a state-of-the-art recourse
finding method (Verma et al., 2020). Algorithmic recourses with lower costs are considered better
since they enable minimal changes to input to achieve the desired outcome. Here, we theoretically
analyze the cost difference of generating recourses using algorithmic recourse methods when the
underlying models are non-robust and adversarially robust.

4.1.1    G RADIENT- BASED METHOD : SCFE
Next, we carry out a detailed theoretical analysis to bound the cost and validity difference of recourses
generated by state-of-the-art recourse methods when the underlying models are adversarially robust


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


vs. non-robust. We derive the lower and upper bound for the cost difference of recourses generated by
the SCFE (Wachter et al., 2017) method when the underlying models are adversarially robust vs. non-
robust. Following previous works (Garreau & Luxburg, 2020; Hardt & Ma, 2017; Pawelczyk et al.,
2022b; Rosenfeld et al., 2020; Ustun et al., 2019b), we focus on locally linear model approximations
as this lays the foundation for understanding non-linear model behavior. For the cost difference, we
first define the closed-form solution for the optimal cost ζ ∗ required to generate a recourse.
Definition 1. (Optimal Cost from Pawelczyk et al. (2022b)) For a given scoring function f with
weights w the SCFE method generates a recourse x′ for an input x using cost ζ such that:
                                                    λ
                                        ζ∗ = m              · w,                                  (5)
                                                λ + ∥w∥22
where m = s − h(x′ ) is the target residual, s is the target score for x, h(x) is a local linear score
approximation, and λ is a given hyperparameter.


Theorem 1. (Cost difference for SCFE) For a given instance x, let x′NR and x′R be the recourse
generated using Wachter’s algorithm for non-robust and adversarially robust models. Then, for a
normalized Lipschitz activation function σ(·), the cost difference for the recourse generated for both
models can be bounded as:
         mNR         mR           ∗                   λ                       λ
     λ|         −          | ≤ ∥ζNR  − ζR∗ ∥2 ≤              2 ∥wNR ∥ +             2 ∥wR ∥,       (6)
        ∥wNR ∥2    ∥wR ∥2                       λ + ∥wNR ∥               λ + ∥wR ∥
where wNR and wR are the weights of the non-robust and adversarially robust models, λ is the
regularization coefficient in Wachter’s algorithm, mN R =s−hNR (x′ ), mR =s−hR (x′ ) are the target
residuals for robust (fR (x) = ϕ(hR (x))) and non-robust models (fNR (x)=ϕ(hNR (x))), respectively.


Proof Sketch. We derive the cost difference of recourses generated for non-robust and adversarially
robust models by comparing their optimal solutions. Similar to Pawelczyk et al. (2022b), the upper
bound results follow from Cauchy-Schwartz and triangle inequality. In addition, we also leverage
reverse triangle inequality to derive a lower bound for the recourse difference. The equality of
Equation 6 entails that the upper bound of the recourse difference will have a tighter bound if the
ℓ2 -norms of the weights wR and wB are bounded, and the lower bound of the recourse difference
will be tighter if the output score of the non-robust and adversarially robust models is similar for the
given sample x. See Appendix A.1 for the complete proof.

4.1.2   M ANIFOLD - BASED METHOD : C-CHVAE
We extend our analysis of bounding the cost difference of generated recourses using manifold-based
methods for non-robust and adversarially robust models. In particular, we leverage C-CHVAE (Pawel-
czyk et al., 2020b) that leverages variational autoencoders to generate counterfactuals. For a fair
comparison, we assume that both models use the same encoder Iγ and decoder Gθ networks for
learning the latent space of the given input space X .
Definition 2. (Bora et al. (2017)) An encoder model E is L-Lipschitz if ∀z1 , z2 ∈ Z, we have:
                                 ∥E(z1 ) − E(z2 )∥p ≤ L∥z1 − z2 ∥p .                                (7)

Using Definition 7, we now derive the lower and upper bounds of the cost difference of recourses
generated for non-robust and adversarially robust models.
Theorem 2. (Cost difference for C-CHVAE) Let zNR and zR be the generated recourse from C-
CHVAE (Pawelczyk et al., 2020b) method in the latent space using an L-Lipschitz generative
model G(·) for a non-robust and adversarially robust model. Then, by definition of C-CHVAE,
xNR =G(zNR )=x + ζNR and xR =G(zR )=x + ζR are the corresponding recourses in the input space.
The cost difference between the recourses can then be bounded as:
                            L(rR∗ − rNR
                                     ∗
                                        ) ≤ ∥ζR − ζNR ∥p ≤ L(rR∗ + rNR
                                                                    ∗
                                                                       ),                           (8)
                                                                  ∗
where L is the Lipschitz constant of the generative model, and rNR    and rR∗ be the corresponding
radii chosen by the algorithm such that they successfully return a recourse for the non-robust and
adversarially robust model.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof Sketch. The proof follows from Definition 7 and the triangle inequality. It shows that the cost
difference for generating recourses using C-CHVAE is bounded by the product of the Lipschitz
constant of the generative model and the radii chosen by the C-CHVAE to generate counterfactuals for
the underlying non-robust and adversarially robust models. See Appendix A.2 for detailed proof.

4.2      VALIDITY A NALYSIS

The validity of a given recourse x′ is defined as the probability that it results in the desired out-
come (Verma et al., 2020), denoted by P r(f (x′ ) = 1). Below, we analyze the validity of the
recourses by first deriving the upper bound of the difference in non-robust and adversarially robust
model weights, and then use this lemma to show that the validity of non-robust model is higher than
for the adversarially robust model.
Lemma 1. (Difference between non-robust and adversarially robust model weights) For a given
instance x, let wNR and wR be weights of the non-robust and adversarially robust model. Then, for a
normalized Lipschitz activation function σ(·), the difference in the weights ∆w can be bounded as:
                                                             √
                                    ∥∆w ∥2 ≤ nη(y∥xT ∥2 +ϵ d)                                     (9)
where η is the learning rate, ϵ is the ℓ2 -norm perturbation ball, y is the label for x, n is the total
number of training epochs, and d is the dimension of the input features.

Proof Sketch. We derive the upper bound of the difference in non-robust and adversarially robust
model weights, denoted by ∆w , and show that it is proportional to the dimension of the input features
times the ℓ2 perturbation ball around the sample x. See Appendix A.3 for the detailed proof.

Next, we show that the probability of a recourse action resulting in the desired outcome is greater for
a non-robust model compared to that of the adversarially robust model.
Theorem 3. (Validity Comparison) For a given instance x ∈ Rd and desired target label denoted by
unity, let xR and xNR be the counterfactuals for adversarially robust fR (x) and non-robust fNR (x)
models respectively.
                √       Then, P r(fNR (xNR ) = 1) ≥ P r(fR (xR ) = 1) if |fNR (xR ) − fNR (xNR )|≤
nη(y∥xT ∥2 +ϵ d)∥xR ∥, where η is the learning rate, ϵ is the ℓ2 -norm perturbation ball, y is the
label for x, and n is the total number of training epochs.

Proof Sketch. We derive the difference between the probability that a valid recourse exists for a
non-robust and adversarially robust model. Using data inequalities and Cauchy-Schwartz, we show
that the condition for the validity is dependent on the weight difference of the models (Lemma 1).
See Appendix A.4 for the detailed proof.

5       E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
In this section, we empirically analyze the impact of adversarially robust models on the cost and
validity of recourses. First, we empirically validate our theoretical bounds on differences between
the cost and validity of recourses output by state-of-the-art recourse generation algorithms when the
underlying models are adversarially robust vs. non-robust. Second, we carry out further empirical
analysis to assess the differences in cost and validity of the resulting recourses as the degree of the
adversarial robustness of the underlying model changes on three real-world datasets.

5.1      E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Here, we describe the datasets used for our empirical analysis along with the predictive models,
algorithmic recourse generation methods, and the evaluation metrics.
Datasets. We use three real-world datasets for our experiments: 1) The German Credit dataset 2
comprises demographic (age, gender), personal (marital status), and financial (income, credit duration)
features from 1000 credit applicants, with each sample labeled as "good" or "bad" depending on their
credit risk. The task is to successfully predict if a given individual is a "good" or "bad" customer
    2
        https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/statlog+(german+credit+data)


                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in terms of associated credit risk. 2) The Adult dataset 3 contains demographic (e.g., age, race, and
gender), education (degree), employment (occupation, hours-per week), personal (marital status,
relationship), and financial (capital gain/loss) features for 48,842 individuals. The task is to predict if
an individual’s income exceeds $50K per year. 3) The COMPAS dataset4 has criminal records and
demographics features for 18,876 defendants who got released on bail at the U.S state courts during
1990-2009. The dataset is designed to train a binary classifier to classify defendants into bail (i.e.,
unlikely to commit a violent crime if released) vs. no bail (i.e., likely to commit a violent crime).
Predictive models. We generate recourses for the non-robust and adversarially robust version of
Logistic Regression (linear) and Neural Networks (non-linear) models. We use two linear layers with
sigmoid activation functions as our predictor and set the number of nodes in the intermediate layers to
twice the number of nodes in the input layer, which is the size of the input dimension in each dataset.
Algorithmic Recourse Methods. We analyze the cost and validity for non-robust and adversarially
robust models w.r.t. three popular classes of recourse generation methods, namely, gradient-based
(SCFE), manifold-based (C-CHVAE), and random search-based (GSM) methods (described in Sec. 3).
Evaluation metrics. To concretely measure the impact of adversarial robustness on algorithmic
recourse, we analyze the difference between cost and validity metrics for recourses generated using
non-robust and adversarially robust model. To quantify the cost, we measure the average cost incurred
to act upon the prescribed recourses across all test-set instances, i.e., Cost(x, x′ ) = |Dtest    1
                                                                                                      | ∥x −
  ′                                     ′
x ∥2 , where x is the input and x is its corresponding recourse. To measure validity, we compute
the probability of the generated recourse resulting in the desired outcome, i.e., Validity(x, x′ ) =
|{x′ :f (x′ )=1 ∩ x′ =g(x,f )}|
              |Dtest |          , where g(x, f ) returns recourses for input x and predictive model f .
Implementation details. We train non-robust and adversarially robust predictive models from two
popular model classes (logistic regression and neural networks) for all three datasets. In the case of
adversarially robust models, we adopt the commonly used min-max optimization objective for adver-
sarial training using varying degree of robustness, i.e., ϵ ∈ {0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20, 0.25, 0.3}.
Note that the model trained with ϵ=0 is the non-robust model. Following Ballet et al. (2019) and
Erdemir et al. (2021), we pre-processed the input data by removing categorical features for efficient
training of our models. We follow Pawelczyk et al. (2022b) to set the hyperparameters for the
algorithmic recourse methods.

5.2     E MPIRICAL A NALYSIS

Next, we describe the experiments that we carried out to understand the impact of adversarial robust-
ness of predictive models on algorithmic recourse. More specifically, we will discuss (1) empirical
verification of our theoretical bounds, (2) empirical analysis of the differences between the costs
of recourses corresponding to non-robust vs. adversarially robust models, and (3) empirical analysis
to compare the validity of the recourses corresponding to non-robust vs. adversarially robust models.
Empirical Verification of Theoretical Bounds. We empirically validate our theoretical findings
from Section 4 on real-world datasets. In particular, we first estimate the empirical bounds (RHS of
Theorems 1-2) for each instance in the test set by plugging the corresponding values of the parameters
in the theorems and compare them with the empirical estimates of the cost differences between
recourses generated using gradient- and manifold-based recourse methods (LHS of Theorems 1-2).
Figure 9 show the results obtained from the aforementioned analysis of cost differences. We observe
that our bounds are tight, and the empirical estimates fall well within our theoretical bounds. Similarly,
we observe that the validity of the non-robust model, as denoted by P r(fNR (x) = 1) in Theorem
3, was higher than the validity of the adversarially robust model for all the test samples in Adult,
German Credit, COMPAS datasets, following the condition in Theorem 3 ( > 90% samples for the
three datasets ) for a large number of training iterations used for training adversarially robust models
with ϵ ∈ {0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3}.
Cost Analysis. To analyze the impact of adversarial robustness on the cost of recourses, we compute
the difference between the cost for obtaining a recourse using non-robust and adversarially robust
model and plotted this difference for varying degrees of robustness ϵ. Results in Figure 2 show a
   3
       https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Adult/
   4
       https://github.com/propublica/compas-analysis


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a)                                (b)                               (c)

Figure 1: Empirically calculated cost differences (in orange) and our theoretical lower (in blue) and up-
per (in green) bounds for (a) C-CHVAE and (b) SCFE recourses corresponding to adversarially robust
(trained using ϵ=0.3) vs. non-robust models trained on the Adult dataset. Figure (c) is the empirical
difference between the validity of recourses for non-robust and adversarially robust model. Results
show no violations of our theoretical bounds. See Appendix B for results using different ϵ values.


              (a) Adult                      (b) COMPAS                     (c) German Credit

Figure 2: Analyzing cost differences between recourse generated using non-robust and adversarially
robust neural networks for (a) Adult (b) COMPAS (c) German Credit datasets. We find that the cost
difference (i.e., ℓ2 −norm) between the recourses generated for non-robust and adversarially robust
models increases for increasing values of ϵ.


significant increase in incurred costs to find algorithmic recourse for adversarially robust models
compared to the non-robust model for all the datasets with increasing degrees of robustness. We
observe a similar trend for the case of logistic regression, as shown in Figure 6 in Appendix B.
Further, we observe a relatively smoother increasing trend for cost differences in the case of SCFE
compared to others, which can be attributed to the stochasticity present in C-CHVAE and GSM. We
also observe a higher cost difference in SCFE for most datasets, which could result from the larger
sample size used in C-CHVAE and GSM. We observe a similar trend in cost differences when the
sample size per iteration is reduced, which also resulted in more iterations to find recourse.
Validity Analysis. To analyze the impact of adversarial robustness on the validity of recourses,
we compute the fraction of recourses resulting in the desired outcome, generated using non-robust
and adversarially robust model under resource constraints, and plot it against varying degrees of
robustness ϵ. Results in Figure 3 show that there is an even stronger impact of adversarial training
on validity for neural networks trained on the three datasets. We observe a similar pattern for
the case of the logistic regression model trained on the three datasets, shown in Appendix B. On
average, we observe that the validity drops to zero for models adversarially trained with ϵ > 0.2. To
understand this further, we use t-SNE visualization (Van der Maaten & Hinton, 2008) – a non-linear
dimensionality reduction technique – to map points in the dataset to two-dimensional space and
demonstrate a gradual decline in valid recourses around a local neighborhood with increasing ϵ in
Figure 4, where x and y be the names of reduced dimensions. This decline suggests that a large


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              (a) Adult                      (b) COMPAS                    (c) German Credit

Figure 3: Analyzing validity of recourse generated using non-robust and adversarially robust neural
networks for (a) Adult (b) COMPAS (c) German Credit datasets. We find that the validity decreases
for increasing values of ϵ.


Figure 4: A t-SNE visualization of the change in availability of valid recourses (orange) for adversar-
ially robust models trained using ϵ = [0, 0.15, 0.25], where a non-robust model is a model trained
using ϵ = 0. Results are shown for a neural network model trained on the Adult dataset. We observe
fewer valid recourses for higher values of ϵ in this local neighborhood.


number of recourses in the neighborhood of the input sample are now being classified with the same
class as the input. Hence, this supports our hypothesis that adversarially robust models severely
impact the validity of recourses and make the recourse search computationally expensive.

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we theoretically and empirically analyzed the impact of adversarially robust models on
algorithmic recourse. We theoretically bounded the differences between the costs of the recourses
output by two state-of-the-art counterfactual explanation methods (SCFE and C-CHVAE) when
the underlying models are adversarially robust vs. non-robust. In addition, we also bounded the
differences between the validity of the recourses corresponding to adversarially robust and non-
robust models. We empirically validated our theoretical results using three real-world datasets
(Adult, COMPAS, and German Credit) and two popular model classes (neural networks and logistic
regression). Our theoretical and empirical analyses demonstrated that adversarially robust models
significantly increase the cost and reduce the validity of the resulting recourses, thereby highlighting
the inherent trade-offs between achieving adversarial robustness in predictive models and providing
easy-to-implement and reliable algorithmic recourses. Our work also paves the way for several
interesting future research directions at the intersection of algorithmic recourse and adversarial
robustness in predictive models. For instance, given the aforementioned trade-offs, it would be
interesting to develop novel techniques which enable end users to navigate these trade-offs based on
their personal preferences – e.g., an end user may choose to sacrifice the adversarial robustness of the
underlying model in order to secure lower cost recourses.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Chirag Agarwal, Anh Nguyen, and Dan Schonfeld. Improving robustness to adversarial examples by
  encouraging discriminative features. In ICIP. IEEE, 2019.
Vincent Ballet, Xavier Renard, Jonathan Aigrain, Thibault Laugel, Pascal Frossard, and Marcin
  Detyniecki. Imperceptible adversarial attacks on tabular data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.03274,
  2019.
Solon Barocas, Andrew D. Selbst, and Manish Raghavan. The hidden assumptions behind coun-
  terfactual explanations and principal reasons. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), New York, NY, USA, 2020. ACM.
Battista Biggio and Fabio Roli. Wild patterns: Ten years after the rise of adversarial machine learning.
  Pattern Recognition, 84:317–331, 2018.
Ashish Bora, Ajil Jalal, Eric Price, and Alexandros G Dimakis. Compressed sensing using generative
  models. In ICML. PMLR, 2017.
Anirban Chakraborty, Manaar Alam, Vishal Dey, Anupam Chattopadhyay, and Debdeep Mukhopad-
  hyay. Adversarial attacks and defences: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00069, 2018.
Moustapha Cisse, Yossi Adi, Natalia Neverova, and Joseph Keshet. Houdini: Fooling deep structured
 prediction models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.05373, 2017.
Susanne Dandl, Christoph Molnar, Martin Binder, and Bernd Bischl. Multi-objective counterfactual
  explanations. In International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, pp. 448–469.
  Springer, 2020.
Amit Dhurandhar, Pin-Yu Chen, Ronny Luss, Chun-Chen Tu, Paishun Ting, Karthikeyan Shanmugam,
 and Payel Das. Explanations based on the missing: Towards contrastive explanations with pertinent
 negatives. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo, Amir-Hossein Karimi, and Bernhard Schölkopf. On the adversarial
  robustness of causal algorithmic recourse. arXiv:2112.11313, 2021.
Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo, Amir H Karimi, and Bernhard Schölkopf. On the adversarial robustness
  of causal algorithmic recourse. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5324–5342.
  PMLR, 2022.
Ecenaz Erdemir, Jeffrey Bickford, Luca Melis, and Sergul Aydore. Adversarial robustness with
  non-uniform perturbations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:19147–19159,
  2021.
Damien Garreau and Ulrike Luxburg. Explaining the explainer: A first theoretical analysis of lime.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 1287–1296.
  PMLR, 2020.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Ronan Hamon, Henrik Junklewitz, and Ignacio Sanchez. Robustness and explainability of artificial
  intelligence. Publications Office of the European Union, 2020.
Moritz Hardt and Tengyu Ma. Identity matters in deep learning. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
Ling Huang, Anthony D Joseph, Blaine Nelson, Benjamin IP Rubinstein, and J Doug Tygar. Ad-
  versarial machine learning. In Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on Security and artificial
  intelligence, pp. 43–58, 2011.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Borja Balle, and Isabel Valera. Model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for consequential decisions. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics (AISTATS), 2020a.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. A survey of algorithmic
 recourse: definitions, formulations, solutions, and prospects. arXiv:2010.04050, 2020b.

Amir-Hossein Karimi, Julius von Kügelgen, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. Algorithmic
 recourse under imperfect causal knowledge: a probabilistic approach. In Conference on Neural
 Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020c.

Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. A survey of algorithmic
 recourse: contrastive explanations and consequential recommendations. ACM Computing Surveys
 (CSUR), 2021a.

Amir-Hossein Karimi, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. Algorithmic recourse: from counter-
 factual explanations to interventions. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
 Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 353–362, 2021b.

Zico Kolter and Aleksander Madry. Adversarial robustness - theory and practice. https://
  adversarial-ml-tutorial.org/linear_models/.

Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, Samy Bengio, et al. Adversarial examples in the physical world,
  2016.

Thibault Laugel, Marie-Jeanne Lesot, Christophe Marsala, Xavier Renard, and Marcin Detyniecki.
  Inverse classification for comparison-based interpretability in machine learning. arXiv, 2017.

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083,
  2017.

Divyat Mahajan, Chenhao Tan, and Amit Sharma. Preserving causal constraints in counterfactual
  explanations for machine learning classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03277, 2019.

Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji Kasneci. Learning model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for tabular data. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020 (WWW). ACM, 2020a.

Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji Kasneci. Learning model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for tabular data. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp. 3126–3132, 2020b.

Martin Pawelczyk, Chirag Agarwal, Shalmali Joshi, Sohini Upadhyay, and Himabindu Lakkaraju.
 Exploring counterfactual explanations through the lens of adversarial examples: A theoretical and
 empirical analysis. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
 2022a.

Martin Pawelczyk, Chirag Agarwal, Shalmali Joshi, Sohini Upadhyay, and Himabindu Lakkaraju.
 Exploring counterfactual explanations through the lens of adversarial examples: A theoretical and
 empirical analysis. In AISTATS. PMLR, 2022b.

Martin Pawelczyk, Teresa Datta, Johannes van-den Heuvel, Gjergji Kasneci, and Himabindu
 Lakkaraju. Algorithmic recourse in the face of noisy human responses. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2203.06768, 2022c.

Kaivalya Rawal and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Interpretable and interactive summaries ofactionable
  recourses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, 2020.

Kaivalya Rawal, Ece Kamar, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Algorithmic recourse in the wild: Under-
  standing the impact of data and model shifts. arXiv:2012.11788, 2021.

Elan Rosenfeld, Ezra Winston, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Zico Kolter. Certified robustness to label-
  flipping attacks via randomized smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8230–8241. PMLR, 2020.

Harshay Shah, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. Do input gradients highlight discriminative
  features? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:2046–2059, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aaron Sidford. sidford_mse213_cs269o_lec4_v5_share. https://web.stanford.edu/
  ~sidford/courses/20fa_opt_theory/sidford_2020fa_mse213_cs269o_lec4.pdf.
    (Accessed on 09/06/2022).
Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Himabindu Lakkaraju, and Sameer Singh. Counterfactual explanations
  can be manipulated. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34,
  2021.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv, 2013.
Sohini Upadhyay, Shalmali Joshi, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Towards robust and reliable algorithmic
  recourse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34, 2021a.
Sohini Upadhyay, Shalmali Joshi, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Towards robust and reliable algorithmic
  recourse. NeurIPS, 2021b.
Berk Ustun, Alexander Spangher, and Y. Liu. Actionable recourse in linear classification. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), 2019a.
Berk Ustun, Alexander Spangher, and Yang Liu. Actionable recourse in linear classification. In
  Proceedings of the conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency, pp. 10–19, 2019b.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Arnaud Van Looveren and Janis Klaise. Interpretable counterfactual explanations guided by proto-
  types. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02584, 2019.
Suresh Venkatasubramanian and Mark Alfano. The philosophical basis of algorithmic recourse. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), New York,
  NY, USA, 2020. ACM.
Sahil Verma, John Dickerson, and Keegan Hines. Counterfactual explanations for machine learning:
  A review. arXiv:2010.10596, 2020.
Paul Voigt and Axel Von dem Bussche. The eu general data protection regulation (gdpr). A Practical
  Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 10(3152676):10–5555, 2017.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without opening
  the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr. Harvard JL & Tech., 2017.
Zhengli Zhao, Dheeru Dua, and Sameer Singh. Generating natural adversarial examples. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1710.11342, 2017.


A     P ROOF FOR T HEOREMS IN S ECTION 4
Here, we provide detailed proofs of the Lemmas and Theorems defined in Section 4.

A.1    P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 1

Theorem 1. (Cost difference for SCFE) For a given instance x, let x′NR and x′R be the recourse
generated using Wachter’s algorithm for the non-robust and adversarially robust models. Then, for a
normalized Lipschitz activation function σ(·), the difference in the recourse for both models can be
bounded as:
     λ                         ∗                  λ                   λ
        φ(s, x, wNR , wR ) ≤ ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 ≤           2 ∥wNR ∥ +           2 ∥wR ∥,           (10)
    λ+1                                      λ + ∥wNR ∥           λ + ∥wR ∥
where wNR and wR are the weights of the non-robust and adversarially robust models, λ is the
regularization coefficient in Wachter’s algorithm, φ(·) is a function that measures the shift in the
model weights using the target and predicted scores.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Following the definition of SCFE in Equation 2, we can find a counterfactual sample x′ that
is "closest" to the original instance x by minimizing the following objective:
                                 arg min(h(x′ ) − y ′ )2 + λd(x′ , x),                                (11)
                                       x′

where s is the target score, λ is the regularization coefficient, and d(·) is the distance between the
original and counterfactual sample x′ .
Lower bound. Using Lemma 1, the optimal cost for generating a valid recourse for a non-robust
  ∗                                ∗
(ζN R ) and adversarially robust (ζR ) model can be written as:
                                   ∗
                                  ζNR       = mNR λ+∥wλ         2   · wNR                             (12)
                                                          NR ∥2
                                      ζR∗            λ
                                             = mR λ+∥w ∥2
                                                          · wR ,                                      (13)
                                                          R 2
                     T
where mNR = s − wNR    x and mR = s − wRT x. Subtracting and taking ℓ2 -norm on both sides of
Eqn. 12 and Eqn. 13, we get:
          ∗                       λ                    λ
        ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 = mNR               wNR − mR             wR
                             λ + ∥wNR ∥22          λ + ∥wR ∥22     2

          ∗                        λ                       λ
        ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 ≥ | mNR              wNR − mR                wR |
                              λ + ∥wNR ∥22     2       λ + ∥wR ∥22     2
                                                            (Using reverse triangle inequality)
          ∗                            1                         1
        ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 ≥ λ| mNR                wNR − mR                 2 wR   |
                                λ + ∥wNR ∥22       2        λ  + ∥w R ∥2    2

          ∗                          1                    1
        ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 ≥ λ| mNR           2 wNR − mR            wR |          (Since, λ << ∥w∥2 )
                                ∥wNR ∥2         2      ∥wR ∥22      2
          ∗                        1                    1
        ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 ≥ λ|mNR            ∥wNR ∥2 − mR         ∥wR ∥2 |
                              ∥wNR ∥22                ∥wR ∥22
          ∗                 mNR          mR
        ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 ≥ λ|          −         |
                           ∥wNR ∥2     ∥wR ∥2



Upper bound. Again, using the optimal recourse cost (Definition 1), we can derive the upper bound
of the cost difference for generating recourses using non-robust and adversarially robust models:
                            T
      ∗               (s − wNR x)λ                (s − wRT x)λ
    ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 =                2    · wNR −                 2    · wR
                      λ + ∥wNR ∥                   λ + ∥wR ∥
                            T
                      (s − wNR x)λ        (wRT x − s)λ
                 =              2 · wNR +            2 · wR
                      λ + ∥wNR ∥           λ + ∥wR ∥
                            T
                      (s − wNR x)λ                   (s − wRT x)λ
                 ≤                2     ∥wNR ∥ +                    2   ∥wR ∥   (Using Triangle Inequality)
                      λ + ∥wNR ∥                     λ + ∥wR ∥
Note that the difference between the target and the predicted score for both non-robust and adversari-
ally robust models is upper bounded by a term that is always positive. Hence, we get:

                     ∗                       λ                              λ
                   ∥ζNR − ζR∗ ∥2 ≤                  2   ∥wNR ∥ +                2   ∥wR ∥
                                        λ + ∥wNR ∥                      λ + ∥wR ∥



A.2   P ROOF FOR T HEOREM 2

Theorem 2. (Cost difference for C-CHVAE) Let zNR and zR be the solution returned by the C-
CHVAE (Pawelczyk et al., 2020b) algorithmic recourse method by sampling from ℓp -norm ball in


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the latent space using an L-Lipschitz generative model G(·) for a non-robust and adversarially
robust model. By definition of the recourse method, let xNR = G(zNR ) and xR = G(zR ) be the
corresponding recourses in the input space. The difference between them can then be bounded as:
                           L(rR∗ − rNR
                                    ∗
                                       ) ≤ ∥xR − xNR ∥p ≤ L(rR∗ + rNR
                                                                    ∗
                                                                       ),                     (14)
                                                                  ∗
where L is the Lipschitz constant of the generative model, and rNR    and rR∗ be the corresponding
radii chosen by the algorithm such that they successfully return a recourse for the non-robust and
adversarially robust model.

Proof. From the formulation of the counterfactual algorithm, we can write the difference between
xR and xNR as:
                            ∥xR − xNR ∥p = ∥Gθ (zR ) − Gθ (zNR )∥p                           (15)

Lower bound. Here, we present a lower bound on the ℓp norm of the cost difference between a
baseline and robust model. Using Equation 15, we get:
     ∥xR − xNR ∥p = ∥Gθ (zR ) − Gθ (z) − Gθ (zNR ) + Gθ (z)∥p                                     (16)
                   ≥ ∥Gθ (zR ) − Gθ (z)∥p −∥Gθ (zNR ) − Gθ (z)∥p       (since ∥a − b∥p ≥ ∥a∥p −∥b∥p )
                   ≥ L∥zR − z∥p −L∥zNR − z∥p                                                      (17)
                          ∗    ∗
     ∥xR − xNR ∥p ≥ L(rR − rNR ),                                                   (Using (Sidford))
where z is the latent space representation for the original point x, rR∗ and rNR
                                                                               ∗
                                                                                 are the radius of the
ℓp -norm for generating samples from the robust and baseline model. Note that using the radius of the
ℓp norm in the above equation provides a tighter lower bound.
Upper bound. Using Equation 15, we can derive the upper bound using Lemma 1 and the triangle
inequality.
            ∥xR − xNR ∥p ≤ ∥Gθ (zR ) − x∥p +∥x − Gθ (zNR )∥p            (Using triangle inequality)
                         = ∥Gθ (zR ) − Gθ (z)∥p +∥Gθ (z) − Gθ (zNR )∥p                        (18)
                         ≤ L∥zR − z∥p +L∥z − zNR ∥p                              (Using Lemma 1)
            ∥xR − xNR ∥p ≤ L(rR∗ + rNR
                                     ∗
                                        ),                                                    (19)
        ∗       ∗
where rR and rNR is the radius of the ℓp -norm for generating samples from the robust and baseline
model, respectively.

A.3   P ROOF FOR L EMMA 1

Lemma 1. (Difference between non-robust and adversarially robust model weights) For a given
instance x, let wNR and wR be weights of the non-robust and adversarially robust model. Then, for a
normalized Lipschitz activation function σ(·), the difference in the weights ∆w can be bounded as:
                                                             √
                                    ∥∆w ∥2 ≤ nη(y∥xT ∥2 +ϵ d)                                      (20)
where η is the learning rate, ϵ is the ℓ2 -norm perturbation ball, y is the label for x, n is the total
number of training epochs, and d is the dimension of the input features.

Proof. Without loss of generality, we consider the case of binary classification which uses the binary
                                                                                              T
cross entropy or logistic loss. Let us denote the baseline and robust models as fNR (x)=wNR     x and
          T
fR (x)=wR x, where we have removed the bias term for simplicity. We consider the class label as
y ∈ {+1, −1}, and loss function L(f (x)) = log(1 + exp(−y.f (x))). Note that an adversarially
robust model fR (x) is commonly trained using a min-max objective, where the inner maximization
problem is given by:
                                        max L(wRT (x + δ), y),                                    (21)
                                       ∥δ∥≤ϵ

where δ is the adversarial perturbation added to a given sample x and ϵ denotes the the perturbation
norm ball around x. Since our loss function is monotonic decreasing, the maximization of the loss
function applied to a scalar is equivalent to just minimizing the scalar quantity itself, i.e.,

                   T                                T                        T                  T

   max L y · (wR (x + δ)) = L min y · (wR (x + δ)) = L y · (wR x) + min y · wR δ
   ∥δ∥≤ϵ                              ∥δ∥≤ϵ                                         ∥δ∥≤ϵ
                                                                                                  (22)


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The optimal solution to min∥δ∥≤ϵ y · wRT δ is given by −ϵ∥wRT ∥1 (Kolter & Madry). Therefore, instead
of solving the min-max problem for an adversarially robust model, we can convert it to a pure
minimization problem, i.e.,

                                   min L y · (wRT x) − ϵ∥wR ∥1

                                                                                                 (23)
                                     wR



                                                                                             T

Correspondingly, the minimization objective for a baseline model is given by minwNR L y · (wNR   x) .
Looking into the training dynamics under gradient descent, we can define the weights at epoch ‘t’ for
a baseline and robust model as a function of the Jacobian of the loss function with respect to their
corresponding weights, i.e.,

                                 wNR − w0
                                          = ∇wNR L (y.fNR (x)) ,                                  (24)
                                    η


                             wR − w0
                                     = ∇wR L (y.fR (x) − ϵ∥wR ∥1 ) ,                              (25)
                                η

where η is the learning rate of the gradient descent optimizer, w0 is the weight initialization of both
models.

                                       exp(−y.fNR (x))
              ∇wNR L (y.fNR (x)) = −                     y.xT
                                     1 + exp(−y.fNR (x))
                                       exp(−y.fR (x) + ϵ∥wR ∥1 )
     ∇wR L (y.fR (x) − ϵ∥wR ∥1 ) = −                               (−y.xT + ϵ.sign(wR )),
                                     1 + exp(−y.fR (x) + ϵ∥wR ∥1 )

                                                                                      1
where sign(x) return +1, -1, 0 for x > 0, x < 0, x = 0 respectively and σ(x)= 1+exp(−x)      is the
sigmoid function. Let us denote the weights of the baseline and robust model at the n-th iteration
    n
as wNR and wRn , respectively. Hence, we can define the n-th step of the gradient-descent for both
models as:

                                 n     n−1
                                wNR − wNR        = η∇wn−1 LNR (·)                                 (26)
                                                         NR

                                 wRn − wRn−1     = η∇wn−1 LR (·),                                 (27)
                                                         R



where η is the learning rate of the gradient descent optimizer. Taking n = 1, we get:

                                  1     0
                                 wNR − wNR            0 LNR (·)
                                                 = η∇wNR                                          (28)
                                    wR1 − wR0     = η∇wR0 LR (·),                                 (29)

        0
where wNR   and wR0 are the same initial weights for the baseline and robust models. Subtracting both
equations, we get:
                               1
                              wNR − wR1
                                        = ∇wNR
                                            0 LNR (·) − ∇w0 LR (·)                                (30)
                                  η                       R


Similarly, for n = 2 and using Equation 30, we get the following relation:

       2
      wNR          1
          − wR2   wNR  − wR1
               −               = ∇wNR
                                   1 LNR (·) − ∇w1 LR (·)
          η            η                         R

                     2       2
                   wNR − wR
                               = ∇wNR
                                   0 LNR (·) + ∇w1 LNR (·) − ∇w0 LR (·) − ∇w1 LR (·)
                         η                       NR            R            R


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using the above equations, we can now write the difference between the weights of the baseline and
robust models at the n-th iteration as:
 n          n−1               n−1
wNR − wRn   X                 X
          =       i LNR (·) −
                ∇wNR              ∇wRi LR (·)
    η       i=0               i=0
                n−1
                X                                   n−1
                                                    X
                            i
            =         (σ(y.fNR (x)) − 1)y.xT −            (σ(y.fRi (x) − ϵ||wR
                                                                             i
                                                                               ||1 ) − 1)(y.xT − ϵ sign(wR
                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                           ))
                i=0                                 i=0
                n−1
                X                           n−1
                                            X
                           i
            =         σ(y.fNR (x))y.xT −            σ(y.fRi (x) − ϵ||wR
                                                                      i
                                                                        ||1 )(y.xT − ϵ sign(wR
                                                                                             i              i
                                                                                               )) + ϵ sign(wR )
                i=0                         i=0
                n−1
                X                           n−1
                                            X
                           i
            ≤         σ(y.fNR (x))y.xT −            σ(y.fRi (x))(y.xT − ϵ sign(wR
                                                                                i              i
                                                                                  )) + ϵ sign(wR )
                i=0                         i=0
                                                                         (Using σ(a − b) ≤ σ(a) for b > 0)
                n−1
                X                                                 n−1
                                                                  X
                            i
            ≤          σ(y.fNR (x) − σ(y.fRi (x)) y.xT +                σ(y.fRi (x)) − 1 ϵ sign(wR
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                                   )
                i=0                                               i=0


Using ℓ2 -norm on both sides, we get:
                   n−1                                    n−1
1 n                 X                                     X
  ∥wNR − wRn ∥2 ≤ ∥          i
                        σ(y.fNR (x) − σ(y.fRi (x)) y.xT +     σ(y.fRi (x)) − 1 ϵ sign(wR
                                                                                       i
                                                                                         )∥2
η                   i=0                                   i=0
                        n−1
                        X                                                    n−1
                                                                             X
                                    i
                 ≤∥            σ(y.fNR (x) − σ(y.fRi (x))          T
                                                                 y.x ∥2 +∥          σ(y.fRi (x)) − 1 ϵ sign(wR
                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                               )∥2
                        i=0                                                  i=0
                                                                                     (Using Triangle Inequality)
                        n−1
                        X                                           √              n−1
                                                                                   X
                                    i
                 ≤∥            σ(y.fNR (x) − σ(y.fRi (x)) y.xT ∥2 +ϵ d                   ∥σ(y.fRi (x)) − 1∥2
                        i=0                                                        i=0
                       n−1
                       X                                            √ n−1
                                                                       X
                                    i
                 ≤           ∥ σ(y.fNR (x) − σ(y.fRi (x)) y.xT ∥2 +ϵ d   ∥σ(y.fRi (x)) − 1∥2
                       i=0                                                     i=0
                       n−1
                       X                                               √ n−1
                                                                          X
                                    i              i             T
                 ≤           ∥ σ(y.fNR (x)) − σ(y.fR (x)) ∥2 ∥y.x ∥2 +ϵ d   ∥σ(y.fRi (x)) − 1∥2
                       i=0                                                               i=0

                               √ n−1
                                  X
                 ≤ n∥y.xT ∥2 +ϵ d    ∥σ(y.fRi (x)) − 1∥2
                                         i=0

                               √         n−1
                                         X
                 ≤ n∥y.xT ∥2 +ϵ d              (1 − σ(y.fRi (x)))       (since the term inside ∥·∥2 is a scalar)
                                         i=0
                              √
                ≤ n∥y.xT ∥2 +ϵ dn
                               √
         ∥∆w ∥2 ≤ nη(y∥xT ∥2 +ϵ d)



A.4   VALIDITY

Theorem 3. (Validity Comparison) For a given instance x ∈ Rd and desired target label denoted by
unity, let xR and xNR be the counterfactuals for adversarially robust fR (x) and non-robust fNR (x)
models respectively.
                √       Then, P r(fNR (xNR ) = 1) ≥ P r(fR (xR ) = 1) if |fNR (xR ) − fNR (xNR )|≤
nη(y∥xT ∥2 +ϵ d)∥xR ∥, where η is the learning rate, ϵ is the ℓ2 -norm perturbation ball, y is the
label for x, and n is the total number of training epochs.


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          wT x
                                                        e
Proof. In a logistic regression case, P r(f (x) = 1) = 1+e wT x
                                                                , which is the sigmoid of the model
output. Next, we derive the difference in probability of a valid recourse from non-robust and
adversarially robust model:
                                                                 T            T
                                                          ewNR xNR        ewR xR
              P r(fNR (xNR ) = 1) − P r(fR (xR ) = 1) =        T     −         T              (31)
                                                        1 + ewNR xNR    1 + ewR xR
                                                                T         T
                                                            ewNR xNR − ewR xR
                                                      =          T           T                (32)
                                                        (1 + ewR xR )(1 + ewNR xNR )
              T           T
Since (1 + ewR xR )(1 + ewNR xNR ) > 0, so P r(fNR (xNR ) = 1) ≥ P r(fR (xR ) = 1)) occurs when,
                          T          T
                       ewNR xNR ≥ ewR xR                                                      (33)
               T
              wNR (xNR − xR ) ≥ (wRT − wNR
                                        T
                                           )xR             (Taking natural logarithm on both sides)
               T                   T     T
              wNR (xR − xNR ) ≤ (wNR − wR )xR                                                 (34)
              T                      T
             wNR (xR − xNR )   ≤   (wNR − wRT )xR                     (Taking norm on both sides)
              T
             wNR (xR − xNR )     ≤ ∥wNR − wR ∥∥xR ∥                      (Using Cauchy-Schwartz)
              T
                                                √
             wNR (xR − xNR )     ≤ nη(y∥xT ∥2 +ϵ d)∥xR ∥                          (From Lemma 1)
                                                √
        |fNR (xR ) − fNR (xNR )| ≤ nη(y∥xT ∥2 +ϵ d)∥xR ∥                                      (35)


B    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
In this section, we have plots for cost differences, validity, and adversarial accuracy for the two
logistic regression and neural network models trained on three real-world datasets.


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a) NN – Adult                 (b) NN – German Credit               (c) NN – COMPAS


        (d) LR – Adult                 (e) LR – German Credit               (f) LR – COMPAS


Figure 5: Analyzing validity of recourse generated using non-robust and adversarially robust Logistic
Regression(LR) and Neural Networks (NN) for Adult, COMPAS, and German Credit datasets. We
find that the validity decreases for increasing values of ϵ.


                                                 18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a) NN – Adult                (b) NN – German Credit               (c) NN – COMPAS


        (d) LR – Adult                (e) LR – German Credit                (f) LR – COMPAS

Figure 6: Analyzing cost differences between recourse generated using non-robust and adversarially
robust Logistic Regression (LR) and Neural Networks(NN) for Adult, COMPAS, and German Credit
datasets. We find that the cost difference (i.e., ℓ2 −norm) between the recourses generated for non-
robust and adversarially robust models increases for increasing values of ϵ.


                                                19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a) NN – Adult                (b) NN – German Credit                (c) NN – COMPAS


        (d) LR – Adult                 (e) LR – German Credit               (f) LR – COMPAS

Figure 7: Here we plot the adversarial accuracy of the different models we trained on varying degree
of robustness (ϵ). As expected, we observe the adversarial accuracy for the non-robust model is
lowest out of all, and gradually gets better when the model is adversarially trained.


           (a) ϵ = 0.05                     (b) ϵ = 0.2                      (c) ϵ = 0.3
Figure 8: Comparison between the validity of recourses generated for non-robust and adversarially
robust model for varying degrees of robustness (ϵ)


                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        (a)                                               (b)

Figure 9: (Linear Approximation Bound Verification) (a) Empirically calculated cost differences
(in orange) for the original model and our theoretical lower (in blue) and upper (in green) bounds
for SCFE recourses corresponding to adversarially robust (trained using ϵ=0.3) vs. non-robust linear
approximation of neural networks corresponding to test samples of the Adult dataset. Figure (b)
is the empirical difference between the validity of recourses for non-robust and adversarially robust
linear approximated model. Results show no violations of our theoretical bounds. See Appendix B
for results using different ϵ values.


                                                 21
