Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ULTI - LINGUAL E VALUATION OF C ODE G ENERATION
M ODELS
     Ben Athiwaratkun† , Sanjay Krishna Gouda† , Zijian Wang† , Xiaopeng Li† , Yuchen Tian† ,
      Ming Tan, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Shiqi Wang, Qing Sun, Mingyue Shang, Sujan Kumar
    Gonugondla, Hantian Ding, Varun Kumar, Nathan Fulton, Arash Farahani, Siddhartha Jain,
         Robert Giaquinto, Haifeng Qian, Murali Krishna Ramanathan, Ramesh Nallapati,
          Baishakhi Ray, Parminder Bhatia, Sudipta Sengupta, Dan Roth, Bing Xiang†
                                              AWS AI Labs


                                             A BSTRACT

           We present two new benchmarks, MBXP and Multilingual HumanEval, designed
           to evaluate code generation models in over 10 programming languages. These
           datasets are generated using a conversion framework that transpiles prompts and
           test cases from the original MBPP and HumanEval datasets into the corresponding
           data in the target language. By using these benchmarks, we are able to assess the
           performance of code generation models in a multi-lingual fashion, and discovered
           generalization ability of language models on out-of-domain languages, advantages
           of multi-lingual models over mono-lingual, the ability of few-shot prompting to
           teach the model new languages, and zero-shot translation abilities. In addition, we
           use our code generation model to perform large-scale bootstrapping to obtain syn-
           thetic canonical solutions in several languages, which can be used for other code-
           related evaluations such as code insertion, robustness, or summarization tasks. *


1       I NTRODUCTION

Code completion by machine-learning models has great potential to improve developer productivity
(Barke et al., 2022). This line of research has seen tremendous progress with several models recently
proposed such as Codex (Chen et al., 2021), CodeGen (Nijkamp et al., 2022), PaLM (Chowdhery
et al., 2022), BLOOM (Mitchell et al., 2022), and InCoder (Fried et al., 2022).
One key component for code generation research is how to evaluate such program synthesis abil-
ities. In the literature, two primary evaluation approaches emerged, namely, the match-based and
the execution-based evaluations. For both approaches, each problem contains a prompt which a
model uses as input to generate a candidate body of code. The match-based evaluation compares
the candidate code against reference source code using n-gram metrics such as BLEU, whereas the
execution-based evaluation executes the candidate code against test cases and calculates success
rate. The execution-based evaluation has benefits over the n-gram evaluation in that it permits solu-
tions that are functionally correct but might not be equivalent to the reference solution in terms of
the exact implementation. Since the release of datasets such as HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) or
MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), the community has been widely adopting the execution-based approach
as a primary tool to evaluate program generation capabilities. However, creating execution-based
evaluation datasets is time-consuming since it requires careful construction of test cases to check
the correctness of the code’s functionality. Such difficulty leads to limited available of execution-
based evaluation data. For instance, to date, many execution-based datasets contain only problems
in Python.

    †
   Corresponding authors {benathi,skgouda,zijwan,xiaopel,tiayuche,bxiang}@amazon.com
    * We
       release the data and evaluation code at https://github.com/amazon-research/
mbxp-exec-eval.


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                 (B) MBXP in 10+ (C) Execution-    (D)                         (E) Other Evaluation Tasks
    Original Data                   Languages        based       Solution
                                                                                  (E-1)          (E-2)           (E-3)           (E-4)
                                                   Evaluation   Synthesis      translation   code insertion   summarization   robustness
                                                                                source                        prompt with     perturbed
        prompt                                                                                  prompt
                                     prompt                                     prompt                          extracted      prompt
                                                                                                                summary


                                                                 discard and
                        (A)


                                                                 regenerate
                                                                                source        left context
                     Language                         Model                     solution
        solution                    solution                                                                     solution
                    Conversion
                                                                                target       right context
                    Framework                                                   prompt
          test                        test
                                                                  keep                                   Model



                                         Figure 1: Benchmark Construction.

In this work, we propose a scalable framework for dataset convertion from Python to many different
languages. While translating code from one language to another is typically a non-trivial task, it
is possible to convert existing execution-based datasets to another language by transforming only
prompts and test statements (see Figure 1 part A and Figure 2). That is, the purpose of evaluat-
ing function completion ability, we do not need the canonical solution since it is not used during
evaluation. The function signature prompts and test cases of basic programming problems involve
sufficiently simple data structures that can be analyzed to synthesize dataset in new languages. With-
out having to translate the generic function body of code to another language, the conversion process
becomes possible via a rule-based transpiler.
The result of such conversion are two benchmarks, MBXP‡ and Multilingual HumanEval, which are
derived from the original Python dataset MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) and HumanEval (Chen et al.,
2021). We provide the evaluation data in many languages besides the original Python, namely, Java,
JavaScript, TypeScript, Go, Ruby, Kotlin, PHP, C#, Scala, C++, Swift, and Perl, with plans for more
language expansion in the future. Along with these datasets, we also release a code package to
perform execution in all supported languages. In addition, our conversion framework is easily ex-
tensible and allows us to obtain the multi-lingual version of other existing datasets such as MathQA
(Schubotz et al., 2019). In the main paper, we provide results and analyses mostly on MBXP where
the results on Multilingual HumanEval and MathQA can also be found in Appendix D.
Our benchmarks also support other code completion tasks such as code insertion or translation in
many languages. This extension is made possible by performing large-scale bootstrapping to syn-
thetize solutions (Section O.1.11). The result of our dataset conversion framework and the solution
synthesis process is, to date, the first multi-lingual execution-based evaluation benchmark equipped
with canonical solutions, which can be adapted for many code-related evaluations. In this paper, we
process MBXP for multiple use cases, namely, for zero-shot translation t-MBXP, prompt robustness
r-MBXP, code insertion i-MBXP, and the summarization s-MBXP.
Overall, the constructed datasets provides us new opportunities to explore many facets of code gen-
eration abilities. In this work, we conduct a large scale evaluation where we train models of various
sizes spanning three orders of magnitude (from ∼ 100M to ∼ 10B parameters) in both multi-lingual
and mono-lingual settings. We analyze results from hundreds of thousands of code generation sam-
ples to investigate the models’ code generation abilities with respect to in-domain versus out-of-
domain languages, the effectiveness of few-shot prompting, zero-shot translation abilities, robust-
ness to prompt perturbation, code summarization, and code insertion.

2       F INDING H IGHLIGHTS
We provide the highlights of out findings below.

         1. Given the same model size, a multi-lingual model often outperforms the best of mono-
            lingual models trained with equivalent training resources, especially when the models are
            sufficiently large. This observation indicates that it is beneficial to train a single model
            on all programming languages, and provided that the model size has enough capacity, the
            performance will be better than the best of monolingual models.
         2. Language models are able to generate code with correct syntax and pass unit tests in pro-
            gramming languages they are not intentionally trained on. We hypothesize that the data
            “spillover” effect, where code in one language is present in other languages through code
    ‡
        MBXP stands for Most Basic X(Python/Java/Go/Ruby, etc.) Programming Problems


                                                                  2
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Function signature
                                                          class BinomialCoeff {
                     def binomial_coeff(n,k):



  and docstring
                                                              /** Write a Java function to find binomial co-
                         """ Write a Python function to
                                                          efficient.
                     find binomial coefficient.
                                                               * > BinomialCoeff.binomialCoeff(5, 2)
                         >>> binomial_coeff(5,2)
                                                               * 10
                         10
                                                               */
                         """
                                                              public static int binomialCoeff(int n, int k){


                                                                                                                 Model
                                                                    if (n < k) return 0;
                         if k > n :
    Function body


                                                                    int res = 1;
                            return 0
                                                                    for (int i = 1; i <= k; i++) {
                         if k==0 or k ==n :
                                                                        res *= (n + 1 - i);
                             return 1
                                                                        res /= i;
                         return binomial_coeff(n-1,k-1)
                                                                    }
                     + binomial_coeff(n-1,k)
                                                                    return res;

                                                          class Main {
                                                              public static void main(String[] args) throws
    Test cases


                     assert binomial_coeff(5,2) == 10     Exception {
                     assert binomial_coeff(4,3) == 4              int x0 = BinomialCoeff.binomialCoeff(5, 2);
                     assert binomial_coeff(3,2) == 3              if (!x0.equals(10)) {
                                                                      throw new java.lang.Exception("Exception
                                                          -- test case 0 did not pass. x0 = " + x0);


                               Figure 2: Conversion of formatted MBPP (Python) to MBJP (Java).


                        comments or co-occurrences. Such amount of spillover data are enough for large language
                        models to learn different languages that are embedded within the main language.
                     3. The occurrences of multi-lingual data in natural data also explains the superior performance
                        of multi-lingual over mono-lingual models. That is, the multi-lingual model can perform
                        better on language A since it can pick up and combine all knowledge of language A from
                        the training data in languages A, B, C, etc. in the multi-lingual setting.
                     4. Few-shot prompting can effectively help teach provide knowledge on a new language
                        the model has not seen, significantly improving out-of-domain code generation abilities.
                        Through error analysis, few-shot prompting helps reduce compilation or parsing errors that
                        are the major sources of errors when it comes to a programming language the model is not
                        familiar with.
                     5. Language models have zero-shot code translation abilities; that is, even though they are
                        not specifically trained to perform translation, they are able to use reference code in one
                        language to improve code generation in another language. Problems that are difficult can
                        become much easier with access to another language’s solution. This observation holds for
                        mono-lingual as well as multi-lingual models.
                     6. Multi-lingual models are also more robust to prompt perturbation and better at summarizing
                        code.


 3                   C ONVERSION OF E XECUTION -BASED E VALUATION DATASETS

 In this section, we provide high-level details on the data conversion process. Figure 2 illustrates
 the mapping of the original Python prompt, consisting of a function signature and a docstring, to
 an equivalent prompt in Java (which we call a target prompt). The target prompt is a valid code
 including a function signature from which the model can use to complete the function body. In
 the case of Java or typed languages, constructing the target prompt requires inferring input and
 output types. We perform such type inference by parsing the original test cases, taking into account
 heterogeneous data types. For instance, if the first argument includes values of types int and
 float, we deduce it to have the most general type of all types encountered. The converted prompt
 also needs to work in harmony with the converted test cases. For instance, the Java test case in
 Figure 2 refers to the defined class BinomialCoeff and the defined method binomialCoeff
 in the converted prompt with appropriate function call based on the defined argument list. For more
 details including data validation and generated solutions via bootstrapping, see Appendix O.


                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     M ULTI - LINGUAL E VALUATION OF C ODE G ENERATION M ODELS

From the previous section, we have established a framework to perform dataset conversion, from
which we obtain a collection of execution-based evaluation datasets in 10+ programming languages.
These evaluation datasets contain rich information in the prompts including natural language de-
scription as well as appropriate function signatures that help steer a model to generate code in a
particular language. Most importantly, they also contain test cases in the respective language that
can be used to check code correctness, which is applicable for most types of evaluation in MBXP+.
This section describes the training, evaluation setup, and findings from each evaluation task.

4.1     DATA AND M ODELS

For the purpose of this work, we collected training data in three primary programming languages,
namely, Python, Java, and JavaScript, containing permissively licensed code data from GitHub. Fol-
lowing Chen et al. (2021); Nijkamp et al. (2022), we perform filtering, deduplication, and remove
data that contains a significant amount of non-English text or is not parsable with respect to that lan-
guage’s syntax parser. We also ensure the original MBPP and HumanEval datasets are not included
in data. After all the post processing steps, our dataset contains 101 GB Python, 177 GB Java, and
216 GB JavaScript data.
We use a decoder-only transformers as the model architecture and train the models via next-token
prediction loss (Vaswani et al., 2017; Brown et al., 2020). We design our training to compare multi-
lingual versus mono-lingual settings by using the same compute budget for each language in both
cases. In particular, we train mono-lingual models on 210 billion tokens with their respective lan-
guages (Python, Java, and JavaScript) and train multi-lingual models on 210 billion tokens from
each language, with 630 billion tokens in total. To study effects of model sizes, we train models
of various number of parameters, namely, 125M, 672M, 2.7B and 13B. For the synthetic canonical
solution process, we use a separate 13B multi-lingual model which we refer to as the 13B∗ model.

4.2     E XECUTION -BASED F UNCTION C OMPLETION

We use pass@k scores (Kulal et al., 2019) with the unbiased estimate presented in (Chen et al., 2021)
as the metrics for our evaluation, where each task is considered successful if any of the k samples
are correct. We generate up until the end of the function, such as end of indented function block
for Python or until the closing curly brace for PHP or Go, for example (see Appendix C.2 for end
of scope details). We refer to an evaluation language that the model is not specifically trained on
as out-of-domain with respect to that model. Otherwise, the language is considered in-domain. For
instance, Java is out-of-domain for a Python-only model and PHP is out-of-domain for our multi-
lingual model trained on Python, Java, and JavaScript.

4.2.1    ACCURACY VS . S AMPLING B UDGET
Overall, we observe sigmoid-like relationships between pass@k and sampling budget k across all
datasets in MBXP where the performance increases smoothly as k increases (Figure 3, and Appendix
F.2). This trend is consistent with the original MBPP and HumanEval which are manually-annotated.
This sigmoid-like performance with respect to sampling budget indicates that problems vary in terms
of difficulty, where certain problems require many more attempts to get them right. We do not
find a degenerate case in any evaluation language where all problems are either trivial to solve
(pass@k saturated near 100%), or impossible (pass@k all zeros). The consistency of the observed
performance trend across all programming languages in the MBXP benchmark provides reassurance
regarding the benchmark’s applicability as a multi-lingual evaluation tool for assessing a model’s
capabilities at different levels.

4.2.2    G ENERALIZATION TO OUT- OF - DOMAIN LANGUAGES
As demonstrated in Figure 3, our model can achieve non-zero pass@k scores for out-of-domain
languages. We emphasize that our models are not specifically trained on out-of-domain languages
since we filter languages based on file extensions and verify that the data have correct syntax with
respect to each language (refer to Section 4.1). However, we hypothesize that cross-language data


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            in-domain


           out-of-domain


     Figure 3: pass@k versus sampling budget k for various datasets across MBXP. We observe
     generalization behavior where the model can write valid code on languages not trained
     on, as indicated by the non-zero execution scores on out-of-domain evaluation. Model
     performance also tends to be sigmoid-like; that is, when the performance is on the lower
     end such as in the out-of-domain case, the curve breaks out upward, similar to the earlier
     part of the sigmoid function. The behavior also applies for models of other sizes as well
     as mono-lingual models (not shown in this figure).

spillover are quite typical, since there can be data related to other languages mentioned in code
comments, natural texts, or intentionally embedded in cross-lingual code projects. Examples of
such projects are Django or Flask, where JavaScript pieces of code can be embedded in Python files
for web development, or mixed use of Java and Python code in projects such as Jython. We provide
further discussion of types and examples of cross-lingual data occurrences in Appendix E.
In Figure 4a, we also observe that the out-of-domain scores are not symmetric for a given language
pair; i.e., Python models perform well on Java but Java models have negligible performance on
Python. The data spillover hypothesis supports this observation where it is likely that there are
many languages embedded in, e.g. Python files, whereas not as many languages are embedded in
Java files. We provide further analyses related to data spillover hypothesis in Section 4.2.3.

4.2.3   M ULTI - LINGUAL VERSUS MONO - LINGUAL MODELS
Figure 4a shows a plot of pass@k scores versus model sizes for multi- and mono-lingual mod-
els, where we observe approximate log-linear relationships similar to those found in the literature
(Chowdhery et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021; Nijkamp et al., 2022; Austin et al., 2021; Li et al.,
2022a). For small model sizes, we see that multi-lingual models can perform slightly sub-par or
on-par to mono-lingual models. For instance, at size 125M and 672M, mono-lingual models out-
perform multi-lingual models in some evaluation languages such as Python and Ruby. However,
once we reach a certain size such as 2.7B or 13B parameters, a large multi-lingual model begins
to outperform the best of mono-lingual models in all evaluation languages. The performance gains
of multi-lingual over mono-lingual models are particularly significant for out-of-domain languages
such as MBPHP and also noticeable for in-domain ones such as MBJSP and MBJP.
We observe that for MBPP, the mono-lingual Java and JavaScript models obtain close to zero
pass@k, suggesting that the amount of spillover Python code in Java or JavaScript training data is
likely low. This finding coincides with the Python and multi-lingual models achieving near identical
MBPP scores in Figure 4a, suggesting that both Python and multi-lingual models observed similar
amount of Python code during training. This evidence is consistent with the previous observation
that there is little Python code in Java or JavaScript training data.
In contrast, for the JavaScript evaluation (MBJSP) shown in Figure 4a, each of the mono-lingual
models obtain reasonable pass@k scores, suggesting that the spillover of JavaScript code is prevalent
(at least in Python and Java data). This finding also explains why the multi-lingual model performs
significantly better to the JS model on JS evaluation (MBJSP), as the multi-lingual model learn JS
knowledge from other sources, while the mono-lingual JS model’s source of knowledge is more
limited.


                                                       5
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                         temp 0.6 pass@10

                            MBPP (Python)                      MBJP (Java)                               MBJSP (JavaScript)
             60                                   60                                         60



pass@k (%)                                                                                                                                                             Code Pretraining
             40                                   40                                         40
                                                                                                                                                        0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                     13b multi-python
             20                                   20                                         20                                                                                      13b mono-python
                                                                                                                                                        0.8                          13b multi-java
                                                                                                                                                                                     13b mono-java
                                                                                                                                                                                     13b multi-javascript


                                                                                                                                      validation loss
              0                                    0                                          0                                                         0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                     13b mono-javascript
                                                                                                                                                        0.6
                            MBPHP (PHP)                       MBRBP (Ruby)                                  MBKP (Kotlin)
             40                                   40                                         40                                                         0.5
                                                                        in-domain                        Model
pass@k (%)


             30                                   30                    out-of-domain        30          Multi-lingual                                  0.4
                                                                                                         Python
             20                                   20                                         20                                                         0.3
                                                                                                         JavaScript                                           0   50         100       150          200
             10                                   10                                         10          Java                                                          # tokens (billion)
              0                                    0                                          0
                  125m        672m   2.7b   13b        125m    672m    2.7b        13b            125m        672m       2.7b   13b
                             Model Size                        Model Size                                    Model Size

                            (a) pass@10 vs. model size for multi- and mono-lingual models                                               (b) Validation losses per
                                                                                                                                        language

                         Figure 4: (a) We observe log-linear relationships between model sizes and scores, with
                         multi-lingual models outperforming mono-lingual ones. This trend persists across all
                         evaluation datasets in MBXP, including out-of-domain languages such as PHP, Ruby,
                         and Kotlin. Interestingly, the performance of MBRBP (Ruby) breaks out of this log-
                         linear trend, as the multi-lingual 13B model performs significantly better than the extrap-
                         olated performance would suggest. (b) Despite having higher validation losses for each
                         in-domain language compared to their mono-lingual counterparts, multi-lingual models
                         consistently outperform mono-lingual models in all evaluation datasets in MBXP.


             On languages such as PHP, Ruby, Kotlin which are outside of the core training data (Python, Java,
             JS), multi-lingual models are also more capable of learning such languages, as demonstrated in
             Figure 4a. Overall, the performance in the multi-lingual setting tends to improve more rapidly as
             they are able to draw knowledge from many sources at once, as observed by higher slopes in the
             plots (Figure 4a).
             Interestingly, we note that even though the multi-lingual models perform better during evaluation,
             the validation losses per language for multi-lingual models are higher than those of mono-lingual
             models (See Figure 4b). We provide further discussion on validation losses in Appendix N.2.

             4.3          Z ERO -S HOT C ODE T RANSLATION

             Our dataset conversion framework yields parallel data in many different languages. These parallel
             datasets provide a valuable resource for studying the translation abilities of code generation models,
             as we can evaluate how well the models generate code in any other supported language using the
             canonical solutions in our source language. For this study, we prepend the function in a source
             language to the beginning of the function-completion prompt of the target language (Figure 5). We
             can also think of this setup as a function completion with augmented information, where we provide
             a reference solution in another language. Therefore, we also refer to the usual function completion
             setup as the non-translation setting.

             Zero-shot translation abilities Figure 6a showcases the ability of language models to perform
             translation by using reference solutions in a different language to aid in function completion. Ex-
             amples in Figures 5 and 8 illustrate how the models are able to produce code that retains the same
             underlying logic as the reference solution in Python, while conforming to the syntax of the target
             language, such as PHP (e.g., using $ before variable names) Specifically, the generated code in the
             translation mode mimics the content of the reference solution, including the same loop and control
             flow structures, as shown in the upper part of Figure 8. Additionally, the generated code cab exhibit
             similar semantics, such as sorting by the summation, as illustrated in the lower part of Figure 8.
             Interestingly, our analysis in Figure 7c suggests that the translation setting can enable the models
             to solve problems that are otherwise difficult without the aid of reference solutions. For instance,
             on the MathQA dataset, which requires complex reasoning but has solutions with simple arithmetic
             syntax, our models are able to translate to a different language with near-perfect accuracy, achieving
             almost 100% pass@100 scores (see Appendix D.1).


                                                                                         6
              Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                             Solution in source language (Python)
                                                                       def count_Substrings(s,n):
                                                                           “"" Write a python function to count number of
                                                                       substrings with the sum of digits equal to their
                                                                       length.
                                                                           >>> count_Substrings('112112',6)
                                                                           6
                                                                           """
                                                                           from collections import defaultdict
                                                                           count,sum = 0,0
                                                                           mp = defaultdict(lambda : 0)
                                                                           mp[0] += 1
                                                                           for i in range(n):
                                                                               sum += ord(s[i]) - ord('0')
                                                                               count += mp[sum - (i + 1)]
                                                                               mp[sum - (i + 1)] += 1
                                                                           return count

                                                                                            Prompt in target language (PHP)
                                                                       /** Write a PHP function to count number of substrings
                                                                       with the sum of digits equal to their length.
                                                                        * php > countSubstrings("112112", 6)
                                                                        * 6
                                                                        */
                                    Function completion                function countSubstrings($s, $n) {                            Function completion
                                     in translation mode                                                                              without translation

                                              $count = 0;                                                   if($n == 0) return 1;
                                              $sum = 0;                                                     if($s == "") return 0;
                                              $mp = array();                                                $res = 0;
                                              $mp[0] = 1;                                                   for($i=0; $i<strlen($s)-$n+1; $i++){
                                              for ($i = 0; $i < $n; $i++) {                                     $c = 1;
                                                $sum += ord($s[$i]) - ord('0');                                 for($j=0; $j<$n; $j++) {
                                                $count += $mp[$sum - ($i + 1)];                                     $c *= (strlen($s)-$i+1+$j)-
                                                $mp[$sum - ($i + 1)] += 1;                              strlen(str_repeat(0, $n-$j))+1;
                                              }                                                                     $c = $c % 1000000;
                                              return $count;                                                    }
                                          }                                                                     $res += $c;
                                                                                                            }

                                                                                                            return $res;
                                                                                                        }
                    Figure 5: Demonstration of prompt construction in the translation setting where we
                    prepend the source language’s solution. In this translation, the generated code retains
                    similar logic as the reference solution, but has the correct syntax of the target language.

                                                                  45                                                                               50
             40                                                             in-domain                                Model                                                 Source language
                                                                  40
             35                                                             out-of-domain                            Baseline                                                   None
                                                                  35                                                 Multi-lingual                 40                           Python
             30                                                                                                                                                                 Java
pass@1 (%)


                                                                                                                                      pass@1 (%)
                                                     pass@1 (%)


                                                                  30                                                 Python
             25                                                                                                      Java                                                       JavaScript
                                                                  25                                                 JavaScript                    30
             20                                                   20
             15                                                   15                                                                               20
             10                                                   10
              5                                                    5                                                                               10
              0                                                    0
                  MBJP MBJSP MBPHP MBRBP MBKP                            MBPP MBJP MBJSP MBPHP MBRBP MBKP                                               MBPP MBJP MBJSP MBPHPMBRBP MBKP
                        Model Size: 13B                                          Model Size: 13B                                                          Model Size: 13B
                     (a) Translation                                   (b) Few-shot prompting                                                 (c) Effects of source languages

                    Figure 6: (a) Translation setting: Significant gain in function completion ability when
                    using reference solutions in Python. (b) Few-shot prompting: Improvement on out-of-
                    domain evaluation due to few-shot prompting, where the examples help guide the model to
                    generate more correct code in the given language. (c) Translation with different source lan-
                    guages: Reference solutions in different source languages have unequal effects on trans-
                    lation performance. Note: The dots in (a) and (b) indicate the baseline without few-shot
                    or translation. All results are from the 13B multi-lingual model.

              Unequal effects of different source languages We find that different source languages can in-
              teract quite differently with each target language. For instance, JavaScript yields better translation
              performance as a source language compared to Python, when evaluated on datasets such as Kotlin
              (MBKP) or Ruby (MBRBP). Languages that are too close in terms of syntax can confuse the model
              when used together in the translation setting. For instance, Python as a source language for transla-
              tion to Ruby can sometimes lead the model to generate code in Python, which is undesirable. For
              each evaluation language, the best source language is fairly consistent, relatively consistent across
              models. We discuss the language compatibility with respect to translation further in Appendix H.1.

              4.4    F EW-S HOT P ROMPTING

              Few-shot prompting is a technique that can provide additional information to a language model,
              which can help it perform better on specific tasks (Brown et al., 2020). In our experiment, we
              construct few-shot prompts consisting of three correct functions from the respective MBXP dataset
              (see Appendix G.2 for prompt format). We observe consistent improvement in execution accuracies,
              especially for out-of-domain evaluations, as shown in Figure 6b.
              One possible explanation for this improvement is that the few-shot prompt can help disambiguate
              programming languages, which is most beneficial in out-of-domain evaluations when the models


                                                                                                    7
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                      non-assertion error                                     MBKP with few-shot prompting                          MBKP with JavaScript translation source
                         100                                                         1.00                                                       1.00
                                      id-baseline           ood-baseline


fraction of errors (%)
                         80           id-few-shot           ood-few-shot
                                                                                     0.75                                                       0.75
                                                                                                                        Few-shot                                                 Translation


                                                                            solve rate


                                                                                                                                       solve rate
                         60
                                                                                     0.50                                    with               0.50                                  with
                         40                                                                                                  without                                                  without
                                                                                     0.25                                                       0.25
                         20

                          0                                                          0.00                                                       0.00
                               125M      672M
                                                models
                                                         2.7B         13B                          task ids ranked by solve rate                             task ids ranked by solve rate

                                (a) Non-assertion errors                                     (b) Few-shot solve rate                                   (c) Translation solve rate

                                 Figure 7: (a): Few-shot prompts results in lower non-assertion (compile, parsing, syntax)
                                 errors on out-of-domain (ood) evaluation but has no effect on in-domain (id). (b) and (c):
                                 For each task, we show a fraction of generations that pass the tests over the total number of
                                 samples (solve rate), where the task indices are ranked to show increasing difficulty. In the
                                 translation setting, tasks that are previously difficult (low solve rate for the baseline) can
                                 become easily solvable, demonstrating that models can leverage reference solutions in the
                                 source language to solve hard tasks. In contrast, the solve rates with few-shot prompting
                                 do not deviate as much per task from the baseline solve rate.
                                                reference solution                       sample generation in non-translation mode                    in translation mode
                                                                            $max_num = $r / $l;                                             $l = max(1, $l);
                                            if (2*l <= r):                  for ($i = $l; $i <= $max_num; $i++) {                           $r = max(1, $r);
                                                return (l,2*l)                  if ($i % $l == 0 && $i % $r == 0) {                         if (2*$l <= $r) {
                                            else:                                   return $i;                                                  return [$l, 2*$l];
                                                return (-1)                     }                                                           }
                                                                 Python     }                                   PHP                         return [-1];       PHP


                                                                            var sumByRow: (row : Int) -> Int = (r :
                                                                            Int) ->
                                            result = sorted(M,
                                                                                m.get(r).reduce { it + it }                                  return m.sortedBy
                                            key=sum)
                                                                            var sumByCol: (col : Int) -> Int = (c :                          { it.sum() }
                                            return result
                                                                            Int) ->
                                                                 Python         m.mapIndexed { it.get(c) }     Kotlin                                                   Kotlin



                                 Figure 8: Code generation model can use the style and content of a reference solution in
                                 the translation setting to generate a correct solution in a different language.

             are not familiar with the target language. For example, in MBRBP evaluation (Ruby), the Ruby
             function signature can be very similar to that of Python, which can lead to confusion and the model
             generating Python code without the few-shot prompt. The error analysis in Figure 7a demonstrates
             that compilation, syntax, or parsing errors (non-assertion errors) drop significantly due to the few-
             shot prompts.
             The improvement due to few-shot prompts also applies to other datasets such as MathQA (Appendix
             D.1). These observations suggest that soft prompts obtained via prompt tuning or its variants (Lester
             et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021b;a; Li & Liang, 2021) could further help condition models to perform
             better in out-of-domain or scarce programming languages.

             4.5                  ROBUSTNESS E VALUATION : R -MBXP

             We evaluate the robustness of models across r-MBXP datasets perturbed by common transforma-
             tions in NL-Augmenter (Dhole et al., 2021), a standard collection of data augmentations for ro-
             bustness evaluation on text. Our experiments show that multi-lingual models are more robust on
             average, with less percentage of performance drops (7.80% vs 9.39% for multi- and mono-lingual
             models) and higher pass@1 scores across most perturbed datasets compared to mono-lingual models.
             For more details and other interesting observations on robustness, we refer readers to Appendix J.
             As the first code-generation robustness benchmark, we encourage researchers to further investigate
             robustness evaluation metrics, data augmentations, adversarial attacks, and defenses based on our
             released datasets.

             4.6                  C ODE I NSERTION : I -MBXP

             We introduce i-MBXP, an insertion-based variant of our MBXP benchmark, which is the first
             execution-based multi-lingual code insertion benchmark. Each data sample consists of left and right


                                                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


contexts where we split the original function signature and the canonical solution into left context,
right context, and ground truth insertion code. Code insertion is evaluated in an execution-based
manner by using the same test statements as in MBXP. We benchmark using the publicly available
insertion-based model, InCoder (Fried et al., 2022).
Both models show that incorporating right context can significantly boost performance compared
to using only the left context. In InCoder, we observed 23.2%, 14.4%, and 37.6% relative im-
provements on Python, JavaScript, and Java respectively compared to the case without right context.
Ablation studies on the performance versus the number of right context lines show a positive cor-
relation, indicating the models’ abilities to incorporate partial right context information to improve
prediction.
We provide further details on dataset construction and results in Appendix K. This work demon-
strates the usefulness of our MBXP benchmark for code insertion and highlights the need for further
research in execution-based multi-lingual code insertion evaluation.

4.7   C ODE S UMMARIZATION : S -MBXP

We evaluate the ability of models to perform code summarization, where we use a function signature
along with its solution as the prompt, with the natural language description in the docstring removed.
Based on this prompt, we induce the model to generate the description of the code’s functionality.
Our results show that, in both zero-shot and few-shot settings, multi-lingual models generally out-
perform mono-lingual models, consistent with the performance trends observed in other evaluation
tasks discussed in Section 4.2.3. In the few-shot case, we observe noticeable improvements com-
pared to the zero-shot setting, with more significant improvement on larger models. We provide
examples and detailed results in Appendix L.

5     R ELATED W ORK
Many other evaluation datasets can be considered for the conversion to multi-lingual counterparts
such as APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and CodeContest (Li et al., 2022a). These datasets in its
original forms are execution-based datasets containing challenging algorithmic competition prob-
lems and tests that are language-agnostic, but can be converted to Python and many other languages.
Existing benchmarks for code generation are primarily either match-based or focused mostly on
Python, if not language-agnostic. Our work fills a gap in the literature by providing a multi-lingual
code evaluation framework that includes synthetic solutions, handles datasets beyond HumanEval
(e.g., MBPP and MathQA), and investigates various types of code generation abilities. Concur-
rent work by Cassano et al. (2022) converts prompts and test cases of HumanEval into multiple
languages. Recent work by Orlanski et al. (2023) presents BabelCode, a framework for execution-
based evaluation, and investigates the effectiveness of balancing the distribution of languages in a
training dataset.Together, these works provide a valuable resource for researchers to evaluate multi-
lingual code generation. We provide further discussion of related work in Appendix B.

6     D ISCUSSION
Our release of these datasets is a significant contribution to the field of code generation research, pro-
viding researchers with a valuable resource to evaluate various aspects of code generation abilities.
The findings from our evaluations have shed light on interesting areas such as multi- vs mono-lingual
models, out-of-domain performance, zero-shot translation abilities, and multi-lingual code insertion,
all of which hold potential for advancing the state-of-the-art in code generation.
Our observations suggest that large multi-lingual models are more effective than multiple mono-
lingual models in code generation tasks, benefiting from the data spillover across languages. The
success of our multi-lingual models in out-of-domain evaluations and robustness testing demon-
strates their potential to generalize to new languages and tasks. However, to comprehensively eval-
uate the complexities of real-world software development tasks, it may be necessary to include
additional language-specific evaluations where appropriate. Overall, our datasets provide a solid
foundation for future research to explore and enhance various aspects of code generation, with the
potential to lead to significant advancements in the field.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Karan Aggarwal, Mohammad Salameh, and Abram Hindle. Using machine translation for con-
  verting python 2 to python 3 code. Technical report, PeerJ PrePrints, 2015. URL https:
  //peerj.com/preprints/1459/.
Wasi Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang. Unified pre-training for pro-
 gram understanding and generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
 Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp.
 2655–2668, 2021a.
Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Md Golam Rahman Tushar, Saikat Chakraborty, and Kai-Wei Chang. Avatar:
 A parallel corpus for java-python program translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.11590, 2021b.
Miltiadis Allamanis and Charles Sutton. Mining source code repositories at massive scale using
 language modeling. In 2013 10th Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (MSR),
 pp. 207–216. IEEE, 2013.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell I. Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David
  Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie J. Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc V. Le, and Charles Sutton. Pro-
  gram synthesis with large language models. CoRR, abs/2108.07732, 2021. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732.
Shraddha Barke, Michael B. James, and Nadia Polikarpova. Grounded copilot: How program-
  mers interact with code-generating models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.
  15000.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler,
  Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan,
  and Hsuan-Tien Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Federico Cassano, John Gouwar, Daniel Nguyen, Sydney Nguyen, Luna Phipps-Costin, Donald
  Pinckney, Ming Ho Yee, Yangtian Zi, Carolyn Jane Anderson, Molly Q Feldman, Arjun Guha,
  Michael Greenberg, and Abhinav Jangda. A scalable and extensible approach to benchmarking
  nl2code for 18 programming languages, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.
  08227.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared
 Kaplan, Harrison Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri,
 Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan,
 Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavar-
 ian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plap-
 pert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol,
 Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William
 Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan
 Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Pe-
 ter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech
 Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021.
 URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Tree-to-tree neural networks for program transla-
  tion. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/file/
  d759175de8ea5b1d9a2660e45554894f-Paper.pdf.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,
  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret
  Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick,
  Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Er-
  ica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang,
  Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern,
  Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language model-
  ing with pathways. CoRR, abs/2204.02311, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.02311.

Colin Clement, Shuai Lu, Xiaoyu Liu, Michele Tufano, Dawn Drain, Nan Duan, Neel Sundaresan,
  and Alexey Svyatkovskiy. Long-range modeling of source code files with eWASH: Extended
  window access by syntax hierarchy. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4713–4722, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic,
  November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.
  387. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.387.

Kaustubh D Dhole, Varun Gangal, Sebastian Gehrmann, Aadesh Gupta, Zhenhao Li, Saad Ma-
  hamood, Abinaya Mahendiran, Simon Mille, Ashish Srivastava, Samson Tan, et al. Nl-augmenter:
  A framework for task-sensitive natural language augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.02721,
  2021.

Zhiyu Fan, Xiang Gao, Abhik Roychoudhury, and Shin Hwei Tan. Improving automatically gener-
  ated code from codex via automated program repair. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10583, 2022.

Zhangyin Feng, Daya Guo, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Xiaocheng Feng, Ming Gong, Linjun Shou, Bing
  Qin, Ting Liu, Daxin Jiang, and Ming Zhou. Codebert: A pre-trained model for programming and
  natural languages. CoRR, abs/2002.08155, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2002.
  08155.

Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong,
  Wen-tau Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Incoder: A generative model for code infilling
  and synthesis. CoRR, abs/2204.05999, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2204.05999. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.05999.

Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Shuai Lu, Zhangyin Feng, Duyu Tang, Shujie Liu, Long Zhou, Nan Duan,
  Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Shengyu Fu, et al. Graphcodebert: Pre-training code representations with
  data flow. In ICLR, 2021.

Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Saurav Kadavath, Mantas Mazeika, Akul Arora, Ethan Guo,
  Collin Burns, Samir Puranik, Horace He, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring
  coding challenge competence with APPS. In Joaquin Vanschoren and Sai-Kit Yeung (eds.),
  Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Bench-
  marks 1, NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks 2021, December 2021, virtual, 2021. URL
  https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
  hash/c24cd76e1ce41366a4bbe8a49b02a028-Abstract-round2.html.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
  degeneration. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis
  Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020. OpenReview.net, 2020. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH.

Hamel Husain, Ho-Hsiang Wu, Tiferet Gazit, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Marc Brockschmidt.
  CodeSearchNet challenge: Evaluating the state of semantic code search. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1909.09436, 2019.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dhiraj Kalamkar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Naveen Mellempudi, Dipankar Das, Kunal Banerjee,
  Sasikanth Avancha, Dharma Teja Vooturi, Nataraj Jammalamadaka, Jianyu Huang, Hector Yuen,
  et al. A study of bfloat16 for deep learning training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12322, 2019.

Svetoslav Karaivanov, Veselin Raychev, and Martin Vechev. Phrase-based statistical translation of
  programming languages. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International Symposium on New
  Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming & Software, pp. 173–184, 2014. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1145/2661136.2661148.

Sumith Kulal, Panupong Pasupat, Kartik Chandra, Mina Lee, Oded Padon, Alex Aiken, and Percy
  Liang. Spoc: Search-based pseudocode to code. CoRR, abs/1906.04908, 2019. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1906.04908.

Marie-Anne Lachaux, Baptiste Roziere, Lowik Chanussot, and Guillaume Lample.  Un-
 supervised translation of programming languages.     In Advances in Neural Infor-
 mation Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 20601–20611. Curran Associates, Inc.,
 2020a.          URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
 ed23fbf18c2cd35f8c7f8de44f85c08d-Paper.pdf.

Marie-Anne Lachaux, Baptiste Roziere, Lowik Chanussot, and Guillaume Lample. Unsupervised
 translation of programming languages, 2020b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.
 03511.

Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efficient prompt
  tuning. In Marie-Francine Moens, Xuanjing Huang, Lucia Specia, and Scott Wen-tau Yih (eds.),
  Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
  EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021, pp. 3045–
  3059. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.243.
  URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.243.

Xiang Lisa Li and Percy Liang. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation.
  In Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (eds.), Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
  Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL/IJCNLP 2021, (Volume 1: Long Pa-
  pers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021, pp. 4582–4597. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics, 2021. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.353. URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/
  2021.acl-long.353.

Yujia Li, David Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom
  Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien
  de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven
  Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Push-
  meet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code
  generation with alphacode, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.07814.

Zhenhao Li and Lucia Specia. Improving neural machine translation robustness via data augmenta-
  tion: Beyond back translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03009, 2019.

Zongjie Li, Chaozheng Wang, Zhibo Liu, Haoxuan Wang, Shuai Wang, and Cuiyun Gao. Cctest:
  Testing and repairing code completion systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08289, 2022b.

Xiao Liu, Kaixuan Ji, Yicheng Fu, Zhengxiao Du, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. P-tuning v2:
  Prompt tuning can be comparable to fine-tuning universally across scales and tasks. CoRR,
  abs/2110.07602, 2021a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07602.

Xiao Liu, Yanan Zheng, Zhengxiao Du, Ming Ding, Yujie Qian, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. GPT
  understands, too. CoRR, abs/2103.10385, 2021b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.
  10385.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-
   ence on Learning Representations, 2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Shuai Lu, Daya Guo, Shuo Ren, Junjie Huang, Alexey Svyatkovskiy, Ambrosio Blanco, Colin B.
  Clement, Dawn Drain, Daxin Jiang, Duyu Tang, Ge Li, Lidong Zhou, Linjun Shou, Long Zhou,
  Michele Tufano, Ming Gong, Ming Zhou, Nan Duan, Neel Sundaresan, Shao Kun Deng, Shengyu
  Fu, and Shujie Liu. Codexglue: A machine learning benchmark dataset for code understanding
  and generation. CoRR, abs/2102.04664, 2021.

George A Miller. Wordnet: a lexical database for english. Communications of the ACM, 38(11):
  39–41, 1995.

Margaret Mitchell, Giada Pistilli, Yacine Jernite, Ezinwanne Ozoani, Marissa Gerchick, Nazneen
 Rajani, Sasha Luccioni, Irene Solaiman, Maraim Masoud, Somaieh Nikpoor, Carlos Muñoz Fer-
 randis, Stas Bekman, Christopher Akiki, Danish Contractor, David Lansky, Angelina McMillan-
 Major, Tristan Thrush, Suzana Ilić, Gérard Dupont, Shayne Longpre, Manan Dey, Stella Bider-
 man, Douwe Kiela, Emi Baylor, Teven Le Scao, Aaron Gokaslan, Julien Launay, and Niklas
 Muennighoff. Bloom, 2022. URL https://huggingface.co/bigscience/bloom.

Anh Tuan Nguyen, Tung Thanh Nguyen, and Tien N Nguyen. Lexical statistical machine trans-
  lation for language migration. In Proceedings of the 2013 9th Joint Meeting on Foundations of
  Software Engineering, pp. 651–654, 2013. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/2491411.
  2494584.

Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese,
  and Caiming Xiong. A conversational paradigm for program synthesis. CoRR, abs/2203.13474,
  2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.13474. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.
  2203.13474.

Gabriel Orlanski, Kefan Xiao, Xavier Garcia, Jeffrey Hui, Joshua Howland, Jonathan Malmaud,
  Jacob Austin, Rishah Singh, and Michele Catasta. Measuring the impact of programming lan-
  guage distribution. CoRR, abs/2302.01973, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.01973. URL
  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2302.01973.

Gabriel Poesia, Oleksandr Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher Meek, and
  Sumit Gulwani. Synchromesh: Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2201.11227, 2022.

Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System opti-
   mizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In Proceedings
   of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
   pp. 3505–3506, 2020.

Veselin Raychev, Pavol Bielik, and Martin Vechev. Probabilistic model for code with decision trees.
  ACM SIGPLAN Notices, pp. 731–747, 2016.

Moritz Schubotz, Philipp Scharpf, Kaushal Dudhat, Yash Nagar, Felix Hamborg, and Bela Gipp.
 Introducing mathqa - A math-aware question answering system. CoRR, abs/1907.01642, 2019.
 URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1907.01642.

Freda Shi, Daniel Fried, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Sida I Wang. Natural lan-
  guage to code translation with execution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11454, 2022.

Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan
 Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model par-
 allelism. CoRR, abs/1909.08053, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.08053.

Amane Sugiyama and Naoki Yoshinaga. Data augmentation using back-translation for context-
 aware neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop on Discourse in Ma-
 chine Translation (DiscoMT 2019), pp. 35–44, 2019.

Marc Szafraniec, Baptiste Roziere, Hugh Leather Francois Charton, Patrick Labatut, and Gabriel
 Synnaeve. Code translation with compiler representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.03578,
 2022.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. CoRR, abs/1706.03762, 2017.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762.
Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq R. Joty, and Steven C. H. Hoi. Codet5: Identifier-aware unified pre-
  trained encoder-decoder models for code understanding and generation. CoRR, abs/2109.00859,
  2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.00859.
Zhiruo Wang, Grace Cuenca, Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, and Graham Neubig. Mconala: A bench-
  mark for code generation from multiple natural languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08388,
  2022.
Pengcheng Yin, Bowen Deng, Edgar Chen, Bogdan Vasilescu, and Graham Neubig. Learning to
  mine aligned code and natural language pairs from stack overflow. In International Conference
  on Mining Software Repositories, MSR, pp. 476–486. ACM, 2018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1145/
  3196398.3196408.
Jiyang Zhang, Sheena Panthaplackel, Pengyu Nie, Junyi Jessy Li, and Milos Gligoric. Coditt5: Pre-
   training for source code and natural language editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05446, 2022a.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christo-
  pher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer, Kurt
  Shuster, Daniel Simig, Punit Singh Koura, Anjali Sridhar, Tianlu Wang, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
  Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language models, 2022b. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2205.01068.
Ming Zhu, Aneesh Jain, Karthik Suresh, Roshan Ravindran, Sindhu Tipirneni, and Chandan K
 Reddy. Xlcost: A benchmark dataset for cross-lingual code intelligence. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.08474, 2022.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
Table of Contents
     A Extended Discussion                                                                          17
       A.1 Implication of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17
       A.2 Implication of Evaluation Data at Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
       A.3 Possibilities of true generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   17
       A.4 Potential proxy for general coding capabilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
       A.5 Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      17
       A.6 Generation tendency versus generation ability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        18

     B Other Related Work                                                                           18

     C Evaluation Setup                                                                             20
       C.1 Sample Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        20
       C.2 Stopping Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
       C.3 Code Execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       20

     D Evaluation Results on Additional Datasets                                                    21
       D.1 Multi-lingual MathQA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       21
       D.2 Multi-lingual HumanEval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        23

     E Language “Spillover” in Training Data                                                        24
       E.1 Types of Cross-Language Data Spillover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
       E.2 Example 1: Embedded JavaScript in Python files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         24
       E.3 Example 2: Java and Python integration as Jython . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         25

     F Execution-Based Function Completion Results                                                  26
       F.1 Performance Trend with Respect to Model Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         26
       F.2 Comprehensive Sampling Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         27

     G Few-Shot Prompting                                                                           31
       G.1 Evaluation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     31
       G.2 Qualitative Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       31

     H Translation                                                                                  35
       H.1 Translation Results from Various Language Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          35
       H.2 Comparing translation performance of multi-lingual and mono-lingual models . .           37
       H.3 Generated Translation Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         40

     I   Analysis: Effects of few-shot and translation prompts                                      42
         I.1 Test case error versus non-assertion error . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   42
         I.2 Solve rate per problem due to few-shot prompting and translation . . . . . . . .       42

     J   Robustness Evaluation: r-MBXP                                                              44
         J.1 Dataset Preparation and Evaluation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     44
         J.2 Evaluation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   44
         J.3 Qualitative Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     45

     K Code Insertion: i-MBXP                                                                       47
       K.1 Dataset Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      47
       K.2 Evaluation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47
       K.3 Evaluation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        K.4 Qualitative examples for i-MBXP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     47

     L Code Summarization: s-MBXP                                                                 51
       L.1 Dataset Preparation and Evaluation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     51
       L.2 Evaluation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   51
       L.3 Qualitative Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     51

     M Evaluating Public Models                                                                   56

     N Training                                                                                   60
       N.1 Model architecture and training details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    60
       N.2 Observations on validation losses versus performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       60

     O Dataset Conversion Framework                                                               62
       O.1 Language Conversion of Prompts and Test Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        62
       O.2 Potential Use of Transcoder for Dataset Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     64

     P Synthetic Canonical Solutions                                                              65
       P.1 Multi-stage data bootstrapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     65
       P.2 Discussion: Ground truth assumptions of test cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     65

     Q Quality Check of Converted Datasets                                                        67

     R Datasets                                                                                   68
       R.1 MBXP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     68
       R.2 Multi-lingual HumanEval . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      77
       R.3 Multi-lingual MathQA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     77


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     E XTENDED D ISCUSSION

A.1   I MPLICATION OF FINDINGS

From our findings, it is clear that a large multi-lingual model compared to multiple mono-lingual
is a better choice if we are to consider deploying code generation models. This is due to the data
spillover from each language source which reinforces the knowledge of the model in the multi-
lingual training. However, such model needs to be of sufficient size to capture all the available
knowledge. For our controlled setting, model sizes 2.7B and above begin to clearly outperform all
mono-lingual models. It is possible that as the number of languages in the training set increase,
the required size for the multi-lingual model to be superior to individual mono-lingual models can
increase.

A.2   I MPLICATION OF E VALUATION DATA AT S CALE

Our parallel datasets provide a valuable resource for studying the translation abilities of code genera-
tion models. By leveraging the canonical solutions in our source language, we can evaluate how well
the models generate code in any other supported language. This opens up a range of research ques-
tions, such as how well the models generalize across languages, what factors contribute to successful
or unsuccessful translations, and how different modeling strategies affect translation performance.

A.3   P OSSIBILITIES OF TRUE GENERALIZATION

Out-of-domain evaluations from our controlled experiments reveal interesting behavior of how code
in multiple languages present themselves in natural data. We hypothesize that the out-of-domain
code generation abilities are mainly due to the data spillover. However, we believe it is also possible
that a true generalization plays a role where the model is able to complete code in a new language
that is not in the training data at all. To test this, we can design a new language which avoids the
complication of data spillover in the any training dataset. We can use our framework to construct
the evaluation set in such language and use it to evaluate the existing models. However, we note
that such new language likely are similar to existing languages in the training set in some aspects.
For instance, the control flows (if clause), loops, variable declaration, or objects such as lists or
dictionaries potentially might not differ much from each component of existing languages. Even
with the new language constructed, the boundary between evaluating a true generalization versus
generalization between data spillover can be somewhat unclear.

A.4   P OTENTIAL PROXY FOR GENERAL CODING CAPABILITIES

MBXP and other code completion benchmarks such as HumanEval measure the general understand-
ing of basic tasks from natural language description with function signature and the model’s ability
to complete such tasks. Given the description of these problems in natural language and function
signature where a competent human coder can complete, this benchmark helps measure if a code
generation model can perform such tasks. The scores of these evaluations can be a useful proxy
for overall code capabilities if they correlate with the performance on all coding-related tasks. We
believe that such correlation is possible or likely the case if the models are not trained to adapt to
a specific distribution of evaluation datasets. By using these evaluations as proxies of general cod-
ing abilities, we implicitly accept the premise that zero-shot evaluation on a slice of all possible
problems (the slice being MBXP, for instance) is an unbiased proxy to measure overall model’s ca-
pabilities in each language. Hence, in this paper, we particularly avoid finetuning even though results
in the literature demonstrate increased performance so that the results established can be less biased
towards specific kinds of coding problems and can better reflect models’ true coding capabilities.

A.5   L IMITATIONS

The proposed conversion framework is well suited for basic programming problems that are appli-
cable to a wide set of programming languages. While the original MBPP dataset is meant for basic
programming problems, some tasks can be more appropriate for certain languages than others. For
instance, string manipulation problems can be naturally encountered in languages such as Python


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


or PHP more than C++. By design, our conversion “naively” assumes that a problem is relevant to
the target language which might not be true for all problems in a given dataset. That is, the scores
obtained from MBXP benchmark might not align with the distribution of natural usage in different
languages equally.
In addition, the programming problems in MBXP do not cover language-specific functionalities;
for instance, there are no specific questions related to web development for JavaScript, or memory
allocation for C++. Therefore, it can be unclear how the conclusion from MBXP benchmark trans-
fers to coding performance in the wild given the complexity of real-world software development.
The test conversion we support are value-oriented which do not cover all possible types of testing.
The value-oriented test performs assertion by checking if the values match. If the assertion process
is more complex such as in deep integration tests with specific code packages or APIs, the con-
version process is not applicable. In fact, we explicitly define the types of Python objects that we
support converting from in Appendix O. We suggest that it can be beneficial to complement MBXP
evaluation with other language-specific evaluation, if available.

A.6   G ENERATION TENDENCY VERSUS GENERATION ABILITY

The prompts in our benchmark heavily guide the model to generate in a particular language. For
example, when a prompt contains function method_name(, the model is highly encouraged
to generate code that has such syntax, in this case PHP, but not Python where the function signature
would have started with def method_name(. In that sense, this benchmark measures the ability
of a model to conform to the guided prompt and the completion ability based on the function sig-
nature that has already started, and not necessarily the tendency to generate in particular languages.
Note that without explicit guidance or special tags, models can generate code in any languages,
especially multi-lingual models, which makes fair evaluation of code completion harder since we
might not penalize correct code that is correct but in a different language. Our prompt format helps
isolate evaluation of the generation ability in a desired language from the generation tendency. This
is contrast to free-form prompt style in datasets like the original MBPP, APPs, or CodeContests
where the model generates its own function signature. However, in our case, if the evaluation is out-
of-domain, it is still possible that with explicit guidance of function signature, the model can still
generate in a similar yet different language, as in the case of confusion between Ruby and Python
with similar function signature syntax.
We also observe that while this benchmark is about generic understanding of basic programming
tasks and does not particular attempt to measure the knowledge of a model in terms of specific
syntax in the desired language , we observe that language-specific syntax usage typically emerge,
for instance, the usage of list.select in Ruby, or nums.filter in Kotlin to select elements
of a list, instead of a generic for loop. We provide sample generations for all converted languages in
Section R.1.


B     OTHER R ELATED W ORK

Code Generation Models Language models for code generation is a rising domain in recent years.
CodeBERT (Feng et al., 2020) is the first BERT-based language model trained on code. GraphCode-
BERT Guo et al. (2021) improves upon CodeBERT by leveraging AST and data flow. CodeT5 Wang
et al. (2021) and PLBART Ahmad et al. (2021a) pretrained encoder-decoder based generative lan-
guage models for code. More recently, various work have been proposed to use large language
models for code generation. Codex (Chen et al., 2021) was pretrained on Python on top of GPT-3,
resulting in up to 175B parameters code generation models. CodeGen (Nijkamp et al., 2022) was
pretrained on multiple programming languages and optimized for conversational code generation
with up to 16B parameters. InCoder (Fried et al., 2022), along with CoditT5 Zhang et al. (2022a) on
a similar line of research, is able to perform program synthesis (via left-to-right generation) as well
as editing (via infilling) with up to 6.7B parameters. Further, researchers also found that generic
(natural) language models are also able to perform code completion to a certain degree, e.g., PaLM
(Chowdhery et al., 2022) and BLOOM (Mitchell et al., 2022).
In addition, researchers proposed various ways of improving code generation models. For example,
Poesia et al. (2022) propose Target Similarity Tuning for code retrieval augmentation and Con-


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


strained Semantic Decoding to improve code generation by constraining the output to a set of valid
programs in the target language. Shi et al. (2022) introduce execution result–based minimum Bayes
risk decoding that improves choosing a single correct program from among a generated set. Another
line of work is to “repair” the generated code by language models, e.g., (Fan et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022b).
Our work is model-agnostic and complimentary to all the above works that serves as a testbed of
code generation.

Code Completion Resources Many code completion evaluation benchmarks have been proposed
recently, but they differ in style and focus. Lu et al. (2021) composed a token and line completion
datasets in Java and Python based on existing benchmarks (Allamanis & Sutton, 2013; Raychev
et al., 2016). Clement et al. (2021) presented a method generation dataset in Python based on
CodeSearchNet (Husain et al., 2019). All these datasets are primarily collected from open-source
projects or GitHub and focus on match-based evaluation (using n-gram metrics). In contrast to
these efforts, recent works promote unit tests-based execution evaluation to assess the functional
correctness of ML-based code completion techniques.
In this line of work, Austin et al. (2021) introduced the MBPP dataset focusing on basic program-
ming problems where the prompt format consists of a natural language description and assert state-
ments in Python. HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) focuses on more challenging algorithmic problems
with prompts containing function signatures in Python along with docstring descriptions of the prob-
lems, including test case descriptions. APPS (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and CodeContest (Li et al.,
2022a) contain language-agnostic problems in algorithmic competition style and tend to be very
challenging. Both datasets expect solutions (complete programs, unlike functions in other datasets)
in any language that uses standard input and output to consume and return values. The output is
compared directly with the expected values without test cases written in any particular language
to test for correctness. In contrast, HumanEval and MBPP use test statements written directly in
Python. We show all the dataset formats for comparison in Section R.1.
We find that the HumanEval format aligns best with how programmers would write in a typical
coding environment; therefore, we use this format for our converted MBXP benchmark. We also
convert the original Python MBPP dataset to be of this format as well for comparison consistency.
Our benchmark, MBXP, is the first execution-based function completion benchmark available in
multiple languages for all (or most) tasks in parallel.

Code Translation Resources Several works in the literature have developed parallel corpus to
facilitate source code translation. Earlier works (Nguyen et al., 2013; Karaivanov et al., 2014) fo-
cused on building semi-automatic tools to find similar functions in Java and C# from open source
projects. Subsequent works used libraries and transcompilers to construct parallel corpora in Python
2 and Python 3 (Aggarwal et al., 2015), and CoffeeScript and JavaScript (Chen et al., 2018). Among
the recent works, Lachaux et al. (2020a) collected a corpus of parallel functions in Java, Python,
and C++ from GeeksforGeeks and provided unit tests for execution-based evaluation. Very re-
cently, Szafraniec et al. (2022) extended the dataset in Go and Rust languages. On a similar line,
Zhu et al. (2022) introduce a new dataset which is parallel across 7 programming languages on both
snippet level and program level based on GeeksforGeeks data. Another work (Ahmad et al.,
2021b) aggregated a comparatively larger parallel corpus in Java and Python by collecting program-
ming problem solutions from several sources. Different from the prior works, our proposed dataset,
MBXP, covers a wide range of languages with unit tests to facilitate the evaluation of functional
accuracy of ML-based code translation models.

Multi-lingual Evaluation of Code Generation Models Wang et al. (2022) proposed MCoNaLa,
a multi-lingual version of CoNaLa Yin et al. (2018) in various natural languages. This is orthogonal
to our work that extends multi-linguality on programming languages. Similar approaches could be
applied to MBXP to expand the dataset to multiple natural languages and we leave it as one of the
future directions.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C       E VALUATION S ETUP
C.1      S AMPLE G ENERATION

We use nucleus sampling with p = 0.95 (Holtzman et al., 2020). For all experiments, limit the input
length to be 1792 and generate up to 256 tokens. If the context exceeds 1792 tokens, we perform
truncation from the left. Note that the truncation can happen more often in the case of few-shot
prompting or translation settings.

C.2      S TOPPING C RITERIA

We categorize languages into groups where each group has the same stopping criteria.

         • Curly-brace style with standalone function: JavaScript, TypeScript, Go, Kotlin, PHP, C++,
           Rust. We truncate right after the closing } character.
         • Curly-brace style with function wrapped under class: Java, C#. We truncate right after the
           closing } and add \n} to close the higher-level class wrapper. This is slightly different
           from letting the model generate a closing } for the wrapper class. We find that if we do let
           the model generate a closing } on its own, it can go on to generate another function, which
           technically should not harm the evaluation, but it can cause the generation to be too long
           and can hit the maximum token limit. Therefore, we find that it is fair and more efficient to
           close out the class right away after the current function is generation.
         • Other keywords: ‘end’ for Ruby

Note that it is possible to extend these stopping criteria to include multi-function evaluation, where
the first function can refer to other functions that follow. However, it is out of scope for this current
paper.

C.3      C ODE E XECUTION

We adapted the human-eval† repository by OpenAI which provides multi-thread execution-based
evaluation framework in Python along with unbiased pass@k calculation. Our adaptation supports
execution in all languages in MBXP where we use Python’s subprocess to execute native com-
mand in each respective language. For instance, we execute with node file.js for JavaScript.
The test statements for each language are such that exceptions are thrown if the test cases fail. Each
task can also fail due to improper generated code that does not parse or compile. We capture the
failure or success of each execution via exit code as well as standard error message for further
analysis.


    †
        https://github.com/openai/human-eval


                                                   20
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     D      E VALUATION R ESULTS ON A DDITIONAL DATASETS
     D.1     M ULTI - LINGUAL M ATH QA

     We evaluate our 13B multi-lingual and mono-lingual models on MathQA datasets in different pro-
     gramming languages. The original MathQA dataset was formatted to the Python version by Austin
     et al. (2021), after which we use our conversion framework to obtain the corresponding data in dif-
     ferent languages for analyses. We do not leverage the training and validation sets of MathQA to
     finetune our models. The purpose of this evaluation is to investigate the generalization capability of
     our models on complex context, which requires mathematical reasoning. Similar to Section 4.4 and
     4.3, we compare the models with respect to adding few-shot prompts, conducting canonical solution
     translation, as well as the normal function completion.

           Table 1: Evaluating pass@100 execution scores (%) on multi-lingual MathQA using sam-
           pling with temperature=0.8

            Mode       Model     Param. Size      MathQA-Python         MathQA-Java        MathQA-JS
                       Multi        672M               N/A                 91.66             94.21
           Translate   Multi         13B               N/A                 96.33             98.08
                       Mono          13B               N/A                 94.31             96.49
                       Multi        672M              15.61                13.54             13.54
           Few-shot    Multi         13B              21.50                26.21             24.96
                       Mono          13B              22.78                15.29             19.33
                       Multi         13B              13.43                18.05             10.67
           Normal
                       Mono          13B              20.23                14.86             10.78

     Specifically, for the few-shot setup, we prepend the first 4 examples in the MathQA training data
     with their canonical solutions. For MathQA-Python, the canonical solutions are given; we manually
     adapt the Python solutions to other languages for these four examples. For solution translation, we
     evaluate the models on Java and JavaScript with the Python canonical solutions given in the context.
     The mono-lingual models are only evaluated on the MathQA dataset of the same language.
     Following findings are summarized below based on Table 1.

             • Both multi-lingual and monolingual models perform very well for solution translation
               (>94%), probably because the solutions required for solving MathQA problems are usually
               simple mathematical calculations. Converting them to different languages are straightfor-
               wards, if python solutions are provided.
             • Prepending few-shot examples achieves better performances than normal predictions for
               both multi-lingual and monolingual models. As illustrated in the MathQA example in
               Section R.3, the context are significantly different from the training corpus. Involving a few
               examples from MathQA domain in the context does help alleviate the domain divergence.
             • The multi-lingual models do not consistently outperform the monolingual counterparts.
               This may be due to the nature of MathQA problems that emphasizes the models’ mathe-
               matical reasoning capability.

     Below, we present a correct prediction and a failed case for MathQA-Java examples under the trans-
     lation mode. The case below demonstrates that the model understands that exponentiation in Python
     (a**b) and is able to translate to Math.pow(a,b).
 1
 2 ---------- Problem: MathQA/2 (Correct prediction)
 3 ---------- Python prompt+canonical Solution ----------
 4 def problem():
 5     """
 6     what will be the difference between simple and compound interest at 14 % per annum on a
            sum of rs . 1000 after 4 years ? n0 = 14.0 n1 = 1000.0 n2 = 4.0
 7         """
 8         n0 = 14.0
 9         n1 = 1000.0
10         n2 = 4.0



                                                        21
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


11       t0 = n0 / 100.0
12       t1 = t0 + 1.0
13       t2 = n1 * t0
14       t3 = n2 * t2
15       t4 = t1**min(n2, 5)
16       t5 = n1 * t4
17       t6 = t5 - n1
18       answer = t6 - t3
19       return answer

 1   ---------- Java prompt + Translation result ----------
 2
 3   import java.io.*;
 4   import java.lang.*;
 5   import java.util.*;
 6   import java.math.*;
 7
 8
 9   class Problem {
10       /**
11        * what will be the difference between simple and compound interest at 14 % per annum on a
           sum of rs . 1000 after 4 years ? n0 = 14.0 n1 = 1000.0 n2 = 4.0
12        */
13       public static double problem() {
14           // n0 = 14.0
15           // n1 = 1000.0
16           // n2 = 4.0
17           double n0 = 14.0;
18           double n1 = 1000.0;
19           double n2 = 4.0;
20
21           double t0 = n0 / 100.0;
22           double t1 = t0 + 1.0;
23           double t2 = n1 * t0;
24           double t3 = n2 * t2;
25           double t4 = Math.pow(t1, Math.min(n2, 5));
26           double t5 = n1 * t4;
27           double t6 = t5 - n1;
28           double answer = t6 - t3;
29
30           return answer;
31
32       }
33 }


     Illustrated by the failed example below, despite the good overall performance, the model some-
     times fails to translate mathematical built-in functions from Python to Java (eg. max in Python vs.
     Math.max in Java). Additionally, math.log in Python can take a second argument for logarithmic
     base, while Math.log in Java specifically means natural logarithm, taking only one argument. The
     translation model ignores this difference.
 1 ---------- Problem: MathQA/1822 (Wrong prediction)
 2 ---------- Python prompt+canonical Solution ----------
 3 def problem():
 4     """
 5     find the least number of complete years in which a sum of money put out at 45 % compound
          interest will be more than double of itself ? n0 = 45.0
 6       """
 7       import math
 8       n0 = 45.0
 9       t0 = n0 / 100.0
10       t1 = math.log(max(1e-5, 2.0), 2)
11       t2 = t0 + 1.0
12       t3 = math.log(max(1e-5, t2), 2)
13       t4 = t1 / t3
14       t5 = t4 + 1.0
15       answer = math.floor(t5)
16       return answer

 1   ---------- Java prompt+translation result ----------
 2
 3   import java.io.*;
 4   import java.lang.*;
 5   import java.util.*;
 6   import java.math.*;
 7
 8
 9   class Problem {



                                                     22
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


10         /**
11           * find the least number of complete years in which a sum of money put out at 45 %
            compound interest will be more than double of itself ? n0 = 45.0
12           */
13         public static double problem() {
14              double n0 = 45.0;
15              double t0 = n0 / 100.0;
16              double t1 = Math.log(max(1e-5, 2.0), 2);
17              // Error: cannot find symbol "max". Also, math.log in Python can take a second
            argument for logarithmic base, while Math.log in Java specifically means natural
            logarithm, taking only one argument.
18              double t2 = t0 + 1.0;
19              double t3 = Math.log(max(1e-5, t2), 2); // Error
20              double t4 = t1 / t3;
21              double t5 = t4 + 1.0;
22              int answer = (int) Math.floor(t5);
23              return answer;
24         }
25 }


     D.2     M ULTI - LINGUAL H UMAN E VAL

     We present the results on multi-lingual HumanEval in Section M using our models as well as pub-
     licly available models. We find that the results on few-shot prompting and translation are generally
     consistent with MBXP. Details on multi-lingual HumanEval dataset preparation can be found in
     Section R.2


                                                     23
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     E     L ANGUAGE “S PILLOVER ” IN T RAINING DATA
     Our evaluation indicates that code generation models typically have out-of-domain generalization
     performance (see Section 4.2). We hypothesize that it is due to the effect of data spillover that are
     quite common especially in cross-lingual code projects where each file can have multiple languages
     present. In this section, we provide discussion and examples of such cross-lingual code occurrences.

     E.1   T YPES OF C ROSS -L ANGUAGE DATA S PILLOVER

     We provide discussion on types of data observed for code in the wild where multiple languages can
     co-occur. In particular, there are four categories:

           1. Source code from two programming languages occurring in the same file via explicit lan-
              guage embedding mechanism other than “putting code in strings”. There are actually
              two categories — “deep” and “shallow” embeddings of the guest language into the host
              language. A good example of this in Python is https://nyu-cds.github.io/
              python-numba/05-cuda/ which uses python syntax but does not have the seman-
              tics of the corresponding python program.
           2. Source code from two programming languages occurring in the same file, where the
              “guest language” is included in the “host language” via the host language’s string
              type. Most web code will fit in this category, but also stuff like code generators (e.g.
              https://github.com/LS-Lab/KeYmaeraX-release/blob/master/
              keymaerax-webui/src/main/scala/edu/cmu/cs/ls/keymaerax/
              codegen/CExpression.scala)
           3. Source code from two programming languages occurring in the same project, but always
              in separate files. This is another potential source of cross-lingual data, but it does not apply
              to the models trained in our paper since we filter languages per file, not per project.
           4. Combinations of programming languages via a Foreign Function Interface, where the host
              language does not explicitly use any source code from the source language but does, e.g.,
              refer to identifiers or function names in compiled bytecode.

     E.2   E XAMPLE 1: E MBEDDED JAVA S CRIPT IN P YTHON FILES

     The example below taken from https://github.com/brython-dev/brython/blob/
     master/scripts/make_encoding_js.py#L30 shows JavaScript written in Python strings
     throughout the code file make_encoding_js.py.
 1   """Create a Javascript script to encode / decode for a specific encoding
 2   described in a file available at
 3   http://unicode.org/Public/MAPPINGS/VENDORS/MICSFT/WINDOWS/<ENCODING>.TXT
 4   """
 5
 6   import os
 7   import re
 8   import json
 9   import urllib.request
10
11   line_re = re.compile("ˆ(0x[A-Z0-9]+)\s+(0x[A-Z0-9]+)*", re.M)
12
13   tmpl = "http://unicode.org/Public/MAPPINGS/VENDORS/MICSFT/WINDOWS/{}.TXT"
14   encoding = input("Encoding name: ")
15   req = urllib.request.urlopen(tmpl.format(encoding.upper()))
16   data = req.read().decode("ascii")
17
18   root_dir = os.path.dirname(os.path.dirname(__file__))
19   libs_dir = os.path.join(root_dir, "www", "src", "libs")
20   filename = os.path.join(libs_dir, f"encoding_{encoding.lower()}.js")
21   with open(filename, "w", encoding="utf-8") as out:
22       out.write("var _table = [")
23       for line in data.split("\n"):
24           mo = line_re.match(line)
25           if mo:
26               key, value = mo.groups()
27               out.write(f"{key}, {value or -1},")
28       out.write("]\n")
29       out.write("var decoding_table = [],\n    encoding_table = []\n")



                                                        24
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


30       out.write("""for(var i = 0, len = _table.length; i < len; i += 2){
31   var value = _table[i + 1]
32   if(value !== null){
33       encoding_table[value] = _table[i]
34   }
35   decoding_table[_table[i]] = _table[i + 1]
36   }
37   $module = {encoding_table, decoding_table}
38   """)


     A simple search query‡ on Github can reveal multiple other examples.

     E.3       E XAMPLE 2: JAVA AND P YTHON INTEGRATION AS J YTHON

     This example is taken from https://jython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
     JythonAndJavaIntegration/ which shows a combination of Java and Python code in
     a cross-lingual project Jython.
 1   from org.jython.book.interfaces import CostCalculatorType
 2
 3   class CostCalculator(CostCalculatorType, object):
 4       ’’’ Cost Calculator Utility ’’’
 5
 6         def __init__(self):
 7             print ’Initializing’
 8             pass
 9
10         def calculateCost(self, salePrice, tax):
11             return salePrice + (salePrice * tax)
12
13   package org.jython.book.interfaces;
14
15   public interface CostCalculatorType {
16
17         public double calculateCost(double salePrice, double tax);
18
19   }
20
21   import java.io.IOException;
22   import java.util.logging.Level;
23   import java.util.logging.Logger;
24   import org.plyjy.factory.JythonObjectFactory;
25
26   public class Main {
27
28         public static void main(String[] args) {
29
30              JythonObjectFactory factory = JythonObjectFactory.getInstance();
31              CostCalculatorType costCalc = (CostCalculatorType) factory.createObject(
32                      CostCalculatorType.class, "CostCalculator");
33              System.out.println(costCalc.calculateCost(25.96, .07));
34
35         }
36   }


         ‡
         https://github.com/search?q=var+function+extension%3Apy+language%3APython+language%
     3APython&type=Code&ref=advsearch&l=Python&l=Python



                                                      25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F     E XECUTION -BASED F UNCTION C OMPLETION R ESULTS
F.1   P ERFORMANCE T REND WITH R ESPECT TO M ODEL S IZE

Figure 9 shows pass@1, pass@10, and pass@100 for many evaluation datasets in MBXP. We can
observe that the trends for pass@k for different k are consistent, but simply different in terms of
scale for scores. That is, the observation that multi-lingual models begin to clearly outperform
mono-lingual models when the model size temp   0.2 pass@1
                                          becomes    sufficiently large holds for any k.

                                MBPP (Python)                         MBJP (Java)                               MBJSP (JavaScript)
                                                          30
                    30
       pass@k (%)


                                                                                                 30
                                                          20
                    20                                                                           20

                    10                                    10
                                                                                                 10

                     0                                     0                                         0


                                MBPHP (PHP)                           MBRBP (Ruby)                                 MBKP (Kotlin)
                    20                                     6
                                                                              in-domain                          Model
       pass@k (%)


                    15                                                                           10
                                                           4                  out-of-domain                      Multi-lingual
                    10                                                                                           Python
                                                           2                                         5           JavaScript
                     5                                                                                           Java
                     0                                     0                                         0
                         125m     672m   2.7b       13b        125m    672m    2.7b       13b            125m         672m       2.7b   13b
                                 Model Size                            Model Size                                    Model Size
                                                             temp 0.6 pass@10
                                                      (a) Temperature 0.2 and k = 1.
                                MBPP (Python)                         MBJP (Java)                               MBJSP (JavaScript)
                    60                                                                          60
       pass@k (%)


                                                          40
                    40                                                                          40

                    20                                    20
                                                                                                20

                     0


                                MBPHP (PHP)                           MBRBP (Ruby)                                 MBKP (Kotlin)
                                                          20
                    40                                                         in-domain                        Model
       pass@k (%)


                                                          15                   out-of-domain    20              Multi-lingual
                    30
                                                                                                                Python
                                                          10
                    20                                                                                          JavaScript
                                                                                                10
                    10                                     5                                                    Java

                                                           0                                     0
                         125m     672m    2.7b      13b        125m    672m    2.7b       13b        125m            672m        2.7b   13b
                                 Model Size                            Model Size                                   Model Size
                                                         temp 0.8 pass@100
                                         (b) Temperature 0.6 and k = 10 (as in main paper).
                                MBPP (Python)                         MBJP (Java)                               MBJSP (JavaScript)
                    80                                                                          80
       pass@k (%)


                                                          60
                    60                                                                          60
                    40                                    40
                                                                                                40
                    20
                                                          20
                     0                                                                          20


                                MBPHP (PHP)                           MBRBP (Ruby)                                 MBKP (Kotlin)
                                                          40
                    60                                                         in-domain        40              Model
       pass@k (%)


                                                          30                   out-of-domain                    Multi-lingual
                                                                                                                Python
                    40
                                                          20                                    20              JavaScript
                                                          10
                                                                                                                Java
                    20
                                                                                                 0
                         125m     672m    2.7b      13b        125m    672m    2.7b       13b        125m            672m        2.7b   13b
                                 Model Size                            Model Size                                   Model Size

                                                     (c) Temperature 0.8 and k = 100.

                                                Figure 9: Performance versus model size


                                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2           C OMPREHENSIVE S AMPLING R ESULTS

                                                                                     Comparing pass@k scores of 125m Monolingual and Multi-lingual Models
         50               Multi-lingual                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual                                                                                                                           Multi-lingual
                          Python                                                                                                                              Python                                                                                 43.1                                             Python
                          Java                                                                                        40.5                                    Java                                                                                                                                    Java
         40               JavaScript
                                                                                                               38.8
                                                                                                                                                              JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         38.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JavaScript                                                                               37.1          37.0
pass@k


                                                                                                                                          pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pass@k
                                                                                            30.5                                                                                                                         31.1
         30                                                                          27.4                                                                                                                                                     27.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25.4         25.9
                                                                  21.4                                                                                                                           21.3                                                       21.720.9
         20                               16.5
                                                           18.6
                                                                                                                                                                         15.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           17.1         16.4
                                   13.8                                                                                                                                                   13.9                                  13.112.3                                                                         12.5         11.3                                                                    11.4
         10    6.6 7.9                                                                                                                             7.2             6.6
                                                                                                                                                                                5.1 4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                        7.6 6.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5.8         4.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6.5          6.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9.3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.8          3.3          3.8
                                                                                                                                                         1.7 1.5                                                                                                                                           1.2          2.2
                         0.0 0.0                 0.0 0.1                 0.0 0.1                   0.0 0.4                   0.0 1.0                                                                                                                                                           0.8
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                   MBPP (Python)                                                                                                                 MBJSP (JavaScript)                                                                                                                                    MBJP(Java)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     51.3
         50               Multi-lingual                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual                                                                                        46.145.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Multi-lingual
                          Python                                                                                                                              Python                                                                                                                                  Python
                          Java                                                                                                                                Java                                                                                                                                    Java
         40               JavaScript                                                                                                                          JavaScript                                                                                    37.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         33.0
pass@k


                                                                                                                                          pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pass@k
         30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   28.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                 20.6                                  21.1
         20                                                                                                           15.0
                                                                                                                             17.017.1                                                                             17.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18.5

                                                                                                               12.9                                                      14.1
                                                                                                                                                                                          11.9
         10                                                                          6.3 7.2 7.6
                                                                                                         8.2                                       7.2
                                                                                                                                                                   5.5          5.0 5.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                        8.6 9.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7.1 7.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.2
                                                           3.0 3.1 4.0 3.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3.5 4.1             3.4                 3.5
                                   1.9 1.7 2.7 2.1                                                                                                       1.7 2.3                                                                                                                                                 1.1 1.6 0.5 1.5           1.7 2.3 0.8 2.2                        1.6
               0.5 0.4 1.1 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.3 0.5 0.1 0.6
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                    MBPHP (PHP)                                                                                                                  MBTSP (TypeScript)                                                                                                                              MBRBP (Ruby)
         50               Multi-lingual                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual                                                                                                                           Multi-lingual
                          Python                                                                                                                              Python                                                                                                                                  Python
                          Java                                                                                                                                Java                                                                                                                                    Java
         40               JavaScript                                                                                                                          JavaScript                                                                                                                              JavaScript
pass@k


                                                                                                                                          pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pass@k
         30
         20
                                                                                                                             13.3                                                                                                                                        13.3
                                                                                                               11.710.8
         10                                                              6.3         7.3 7.8
                                                                                                   9.8
                                                                                                         6.3
                                                                                                                                    9.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.2           7.0
                                          3.1 4.4          4.2 4.8             4.1                                                                                                               3.2              4.4           4.1 3.8                                                                                                                              4.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3.3          3.7
                                   2.8               3.0                                                                                                                 2.0 1.5 2.2 3.1                1.9 2.9                                                                                                  1.6 1.4 0.5 1.3           2.5 1.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9 1.8                   1.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3.1
               1.0 0.9 1.5 1.3                                                                                                                     0.7 0.8 0.9 1.6                                                                                                                       0.6 0.5 0.2 0.6
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                     MBKP (Kotlin)                                                                                                                         MBCSP (C#)                                                                                                                                  MBGP (Go)
         50               Multi-lingual                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual                                                                                                                           Multi-lingual
                          Python                                                                                                                              Python                                                                                                                                  Python
                          Java                                                                                                                                Java                                                                                                                                    Java
         40               JavaScript                                                                                                                          JavaScript                                                                                                                              JavaScript
pass@k


                                                                                                                                          pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                pass@k


         30
         20                                                                                                    15.2
                                                                                                                      13.614.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12.1
                                                                                     10.3
         10                                                6.1
                                                                                            7.8 8.8                                 7.5                                                                                                6.4           7.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.2 4.1      6.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             9.0 8.0
                                   3.9 3.1 2.9                    4.1 4.6                                4.2                                                                        3.5                     4.6          4.5 3.6                                                                                        3.2 2.8                   4.4 3.7            3.9
               1.4 1.3 1.2 0.5                                                 2.0                                                                                       1.6 1.6                 2.6 2.2                                                                                                                                   2.1                 1.9
                                                     1.3                                                                                           0.7 0.5 1.3     0.0                    0.0                     0.0                         0.1                        0.2             0.4 1.2 1.1 0.5         1.3                 1.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                    MBCPP (CPP)                                                                                                                       MBSCP (Scala)                                                                                                                              MBSWP (Swift)
         50               Multi-lingual
                          Python
                          Java
         40               JavaScript
pass@k


         30
         20
         10
                                                                                                               3.3 2.3
               0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2     0.7 0.6 0.4 0.4         1.0 0.9 0.5 0.6           1.8 1.4 0.9 1.2                         1.4 2.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                     MBPLP (Perl)


              Figure 10: pass@k trends for 125M monlingual and multi-lingual models for in-domain
              and out-of-domain languages.


                                                                                                                                                                                                 27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                         Comparing pass@k scores of 672m Monolingual and Multi-lingual Models
                                                                                                                     64.763.9                                                                                                                                          65.7
                           Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                      Multi-lingual
         60                Python
                                                                                         53.153.0
                                                                                                                                                                        Python                                                             54.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            56.3                           Python                                                                                     57.4

                           Java                                                                                                                                         Java                                                                                                                                               Java                                                                                                     49.9
                           JavaScript                                                                                                                                   JavaScript                             42.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                45.1                                                       JavaScript                                                     46.5
                                                              41.741.8                                                                                                                                                                                                        40.3
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                 pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pass@k
         40                          34.134.5                                                                                                                                       34.9                                            33.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                35.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        38.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  29.4                               28.8                                             29.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        26.7                                                                                                                                                                 27.5
                                                                                                                                                          21.1                                                                                                                                                                                     21.0                                                                                    20.7
               18.920.4
         20                                                                                                                                                                  13.9          14.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19.7                               19.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            17.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               14.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12.5                                                                                        11.2                                                                    11.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                  9.0                                                                                                                                                                               9.3
                                                                                                                                                                 7.0                                                                                                                                                                                      7.1          6.6
                                                                                                                                                                       4.3                                                                                                                                                      3.4          4.4
                                                                                                                                   0.3 0.8                                                                                                                                                                         1.9
                          0.0 0.0                 0.0 0.0                   0.0 0.1                    0.1 0.2
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                     pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                            pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                    MBPP (Python)                                                                                                                            MBJSP (JavaScript)                                                                                                                                             MBJP(Java)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       65.8
                           Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                      Multi-lingual
         60                Python                                                                                                                                       Python                                                             53.6                               54.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            58.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Python
                           Java                                                                                                                                         Java                                                                                                                                               Java
                                                                                                                     47.0                                                                                                                                                            46.9
                           JavaScript                                                                                                                                   JavaScript                                                                              43.7                                                       JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                                               40.8
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                 pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pass@k
         40
                                                                                         32.6                                                                                       32.4                                            31.2          31.3
                                                                                                                            29.6          29.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        23.6                                             25.2
                                                              21.7                                                                 20.7
         20                          16.4                                                       17.0          17.8
                                                                                                                                                          19.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      17.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15.3
                                                                                                       11.9                                                                  12.2          11.8 11.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11.110.2             12.5
                                                                     9.5          10.5
               7.5                                      7.2                 6.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7.6 7.2              7.9                  8.3
                                            6.4                                                                                                                  4.9 5.2                                                                                                                                                                                        5.3 5.4                                 5.3
                     2.6 1.9 2.8
                                                  4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1.9 2.1 0.9 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.9 4.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.1 3.0                   3.2 4.6

          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                     pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                            pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                        MBPHP (PHP)                                                                                                                         MBTSP (TypeScript)                                                                                                                                        MBRBP (Ruby)
                           Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                      Multi-lingual
         60                Python                                                                                                                                       Python                                                                                                                                             Python
                           Java                                                                                                                                         Java                                                                                                                                               Java
                           JavaScript                                                                                                                                   JavaScript                                                                                                                                         JavaScript
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                 pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pass@k
         40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            33.8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           23.7
                                                                                                                     20.5          20.3
         20                                                                                                                 16.2                                                                               14.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              17.8          17.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             16.1
                                                                                                       12.2                               12.4                                                                                                    11.1          10.8
                                                              8.3 7.0 7.1                9.6 10.7             8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                    10.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8.5                                9.4
                                                                                  5.5                                                                                                                                 6.5 5.2 5.9                        6.5                         6.6                                                                                                  6.8           5.9                                6.6
                                     4.6 5.0 4.9 4.1                                                                                                      4.6                              4.4 4.4 3.7                                                                                                                                                          4.1 4.3 3.4                                    3.9
               2.1 2.7 2.1 2.1                                                                                                                                   2.5 2.6 1.6                                                                                                                                1.4 1.5 1.1 0.4           2.8 3.1 2.6 1.3                               2.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                     pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                            pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                        MBKP (Kotlin)                                                                                                                                    MBCSP (C#)                                                                                                                                         MBGP (Go)
                           Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                      Multi-lingual
         60                Python                                                                                                                                       Python                                                                                                                                             Python
                           Java                                                                                                                                         Java                                                                                                                                               Java
                           JavaScript                                                                                                                                   JavaScript                                                                                                                                         JavaScript
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                 pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   pass@k


         40                                                                                                          39.9
                                                                                                                            36.2
                                                                                         30.1

                                                                                                23.4                               23.6
                                                              20.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20.1
         20                          14.4                            13.2
                                                                                                       15.8
                                                                                                                                          18.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         12.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16.8                                                                                                                                                  18.2
                                                                                                              12.0                                                                                                                         11.0                               11.1                                                                                                                                                  12.3
                                            8.7                             9.3                                                                                                                                                                                                             8.3                                                                                                  9.6                  9.7
               7.6                                6.4                             6.8                                                                                                                          6.5 6.2 7.5                        7.6                                                                                                                                     6.9           7.0                                7.6
                     4.2 3.6                            4.3                                                                                                                         4.6 5.3 5.1                                                                 4.6                                                                   3.4 3.1 2.4 2.0           4.6 5.0 3.7 3.0                                5.1
                               1.9                                                                                                                        1.9 3.3 1.6 0.8                               2.1                         2.9                                                                     2.0 1.5 0.9 0.8
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                     pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                            pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                        MBCPP (CPP)                                                                                                                                 MBSCP (Scala)                                                                                                                                     MBSWP (Swift)
                           Multi-lingual
         60                Python
                           Java
                           JavaScript
pass@k


         40

         20                                                                                                          14.6

                                                                                         7.6                                6.7
                                                              3.8                               3.6
               1.0 0.4 0.1 0.3       2.3 1.2                         1.7 0.4 0.9                       1.0 1.6                     2.1 2.7
                                                  0.2 0.6
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                        MBPLP (Perl)


              Figure 11: pass@k trends for 672M monlingual and multi-lingual models for in-domain
              and out-of-domain languages.


                                                                                                                                                                                                               28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                              Comparing pass@k scores of 2.7b Monolingual and Multi-lingual Models
                                                                                                                          72.4                                                                                                                                                71.8
                              Multi-lingual                                                                                      64.8
                                                                                                                                                                              Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               63.6
                              Python                                                          62.8                                                                            Python                                                              62.3                                                                            Python
         60                   Java
                                                                                                     59.0
                                                                                                                                                                              Java                                                                                                                 54.9                           Java                                                             53.1
                              JavaScript                          50.649.2                                                                                                    JavaScript                              50.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       48.3                                                       JavaScript                                                                                                 48.0
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                      pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pass@k
                                       42.841.4                                                                                                                                           42.8                                                                                                                                                                         43.3                                      41.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     41.3
         40                                                                                                                                                                                                                                38.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         34.6                               33.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             36.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                               31.7                                                                                                                                                                  31.9
               27.2                                                                                                                                            27.1                                                                                             28.2
                      24.2                                                                                                                                                                                                   26.0                                                                                                                         25.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   22.8                                                                                                                             22.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                 20.1                               20.0                                                                                                                                                                                              20.2
         20                                                                                                                                                                        19.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        15.1                                                                                                                    14.8                                                                      15.8          17.4
                                                                                                                                                                      10.8                                                                                                                                                                                                    10.7          11.8
                                                                                                                                                                             7.2                                                                                                                                                                    8.1          8.8
                                                                                                                   3.8                         5.2                                                                                                                                                                        4.3          4.2
                                                                                       2.2
                             0.0 0.4                 0.1 1.4                    0.3                         0.6                         1.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                          pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                       MBPP (Python)                                                                                                                               MBJSP (JavaScript)                                                                                                                                              MBJP(Java)
                              Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                   Multi-lingual                                                                                   67.6                                                Multi-lingual
                              Python                                                                                                                                          Python                                                              60.5                                                                            Python
         60                   Java                                                                                        53.9                                                Java                                                                                                                 54.1                           Java
                              JavaScript                                                                                                                                      JavaScript                              48.8                                                                                                        JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       46.7
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                      pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pass@k
                                                                                                                                                                                          40.2                                                                                       41.5
         40                                                                                   39.2                               38.3
                                                                                                                                               34.4                                                                                        35.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            37.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         31.8
                                                                  27.3                               28.8          27.2                                                                                        28.6                                             27.3
                                                                                                                                        26.3                   25.8
                                       20.9
         20                                   12.2         13.1
                                                                         17.5          18.1                 18.1                                                                   17.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                 14.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    15.5                                                                                                                                                                                       15.4
               11.5                                                             10.5                                                                                                                    11.0                                                                                                                                                                                       10.6                               10.0 8.9 9.0
                                                     6.9                                                                                                              6.6 5.2                                                                                                                                                                                          7.6 5.9                            8.2 6.5 6.6
                                 6.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6.1 4.8
                      4.4 2.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.9 3.1                                2.7 2.4                    3.9 3.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.2 0.8
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                          pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                           MBPHP (PHP)                                                                                                                            MBTSP (TypeScript)                                                                                                                                         MBRBP (Ruby)
                              Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                   Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual
                              Python                                                                                                                                          Python                                                                                                                                              Python
         60                   Java                                                                                                                                            Java                                                                                                                                                Java
                              JavaScript                                                                                                                                      JavaScript                                                                                                                                          JavaScript
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                      pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pass@k
         40                                                                                                               32.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              35.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  28.8
                                                                                              23.7                                                                                                                                                                                   22.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20.4
         20                            14.5
                                                                  18.0
                                                                                                            15.3
                                                                                                                                        19.7
                                                                                                                                                                                          14.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         17.1          15.3
                                                                                                                                 11.5          12.0                                                                          10.7                                                           10.4
                                                                                10.0                 9.2           9.8                                                                                                                                          9.3
               9.1
                                                     7.2                 6.9           6.9                                                                     8.7                               8.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        6.4 6.2                     7.4 9.2                                                                                                  6.0                       7.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6.6 4.9 5.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6.1 7.7
                                              5.4          5.3                                                                                                        3.9 4.0 2.5                                                                                                                                                                                             4.1 3.4 3.9
                      2.5 3.4 3.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3.5                              3.0 2.7 3.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5 1.5 1.7
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                          pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                           MBKP (Kotlin)                                                                                                                                        MBCSP (C#)                                                                                                                                         MBGP (Go)
                              Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                   Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual
                              Python                                                                                                                                          Python                                                                                                                                              Python
         60                   Java                                                                                                                                            Java                                                                                                                                                Java
                              JavaScript                                                                                                                                      JavaScript                                                                                                                                          JavaScript
                                                                                                                          45.5
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                      pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pass@k


         40                                                                                   38.3
                                                                                                                                 31.5
                                                                  27.9
                                                                                                     25.7
                                       22.1
                                                                                                                                        20.220.8
         20    15.1
                                              13.0
                                                                         17.3                               15.615.9                                                                                                                              15.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     12.413.613.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11.9
                      7.5
                                                                                10.0 9.8                                                                                                  10.1                                                           8.9 10.110.1                                                                                                                              7.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7.9 7.6 6.7
                                                     7.0 6.6                                                                                                   5.7                               5.5 4.3 4.5                 6.8 6.2 6.4                                                                                                                               5.7 4.0                            6.0 5.5 5.4
                             3.9 3.6                                                                                                                                  3.0 1.4 2.6                                                                                                                                  3.3 1.7                   4.5 3.1                                 3.4 3.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1.2 1.7                   2.5 2.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                          pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                              pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                           MBCPP (CPP)                                                                                                                                    MBSCP (Scala)                                                                                                                                      MBSWP (Swift)
                              Multi-lingual
                              Python
         60                   Java
                              JavaScript
pass@k


         40

         20
                                                                                                                          9.5
                                                                                              7.0
                                       2.5 1.8 1.3 1.0            4.0 2.5                            4.0 2.7 2.3                               3.5
               0.9 0.7 0.4 0.4                                                  1.9 1.3
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                            MBPLP (Perl)


              Figure 12: pass@k trends for 2.7B monlingual and multi-lingual models for in-domain
              and out-of-domain languages.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                 Comparing pass@k scores of 13b Monolingual and Multi-lingual Models
                                                                                                                             80.0
         80                   Multi-lingual                                                      71.5
                                                                                                                                    77.2
                                                                                                                                                                                  Multi-lingual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  78.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Multi-lingual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     70.5
                              Python                                                                    68.3                                                                      Python                                                              69.6                                                                            Python
                              Java                                   60.4                                                                                                         Java                                    60.0                                                                         61.1                           Java                                                               62.2                                      61.5
         60                   JavaScript
                                      52.9
                                                                            57.6
                                                                                                                                                                                  JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                          52.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           55.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         58.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JavaScript                             52.8
                                                49.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50.4                                                                                                                   50.8
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                         pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pass@k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               44.8          44.9                                                                                45.9

         40    34.5
                      32.0
                                                                                                                                                                  35.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   37.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 32.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    37.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               32.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           39.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            32.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          38.7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30.1                                                                                                   29.3
                                                                                                                                                  25.3                                               25.9                               26.6
                                                                                                                                                                                       23.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                     24.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            20.8                                                                                                                                                                                  20.8
         20                                                                                                           16.1
                                                                                                                                                                         13.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        12.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16.4          16.3
                                                                                          9.7                                                                                   10.4                                                                                                                                                       8.7
                                                              6.7                                                                          5.7                                                                                                                                                                                5.7
                                   2.8                                             1.1                         2.5
                             0.1                       0.6
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                             pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                          MBPP (Python)                                                                                                                                MBJSP (JavaScript)                                                                                                                                               MBJP(Java)
         80                   Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual                                                                                   73.7                                                Multi-lingual
                              Python                                                                                         67.3                                                 Python                                                              68.1                                                                            Python
                              Java                                                                                                                                                Java                                                                                                                 61.6                           Java
         60                   JavaScript                                                         54.7                                                                             JavaScript                              57.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           53.7                                                       JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50.1
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                         pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pass@k
                                                                                                                                    47.747.2                                                  48.6
                                                                     42.7                                                                         44.0                                                                                         42.5                                                                                                                                                                                  42.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                41.6
         40                              34.5
                                                                                                        32.5
                                                                                                                      35.5
                                                                                                                                                                  32.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   34.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             39.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    33.4
                                                                                                               28.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30.2
                                                                                          25.4                                                                                                                                   25.7
                                                                            21.6                                                                                                       22.7                                             22.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                     20.018.7
         20    19.1
                                                16.2
                                                       12.4
                                                              19.2
                                                                                   16.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 14.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13.315.213.2
                      8.0          8.9                                                                                                                                   9.8 9.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9.3 9.5 9.9
                             5.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5.9                              5.6                         7.0 5.4 6.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.5                              3.6 4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.1 1.2
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                             pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                             MBPHP (PHP)                                                                                                                              MBTSP (TypeScript)                                                                                                                                          MBRBP (Ruby)
         80                   Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual
                              Python                                                                                                                                              Python                                                                                                                                              Python
                              Java                                                                                                                                                Java                                                                                                                                                Java
         60                   JavaScript                                                                                                                                          JavaScript                                                                                                                                          JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  49.4
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                         pass@k


                                                                                                                             47.2                                                                                                                                                                             pass@k
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      42.5
         40                                                                                      37.0
                                                                                                                                           33.3                                                                           31.4
                                                                     27.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                              28.4
                                                                                                               26.2                                                                                                                                                                      25.125.2
                                         22.6                                                                                                                                                 23.5                                                                         22.2                                                                                                                                                      20.3
         20    13.0                                    13.7
                                                                                   18.1
                                                                                                                                    11.7          13.7            12.2                                      13.9                 13.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16.214.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19.919.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13.3
                                                                                                                      10.7                                                                           10.5          11.2                                                                                                                                                      10.5                               10.2
                                                                                                        9.0                                                                     8.7                                                                                                                                                              8.5
                             6.0                5.2           6.2           6.4           7.5                                                                            6.1           5.9                                                                                                                             5.0                              5.2                         6.5                                4.9 6.1                     6.5 7.7
                      2.7          3.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.8 0.9 2.0                      1.9 3.1                     2.9 4.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                             pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                              MBKP (Kotlin)                                                                                                                                         MBCSP (C#)                                                                                                                                           MBGP (Go)
         80                   Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual                                                                                                                                       Multi-lingual
                              Python                                                                                                                                              Python                                                                                                                                              Python
                              Java                                                                                                                                                Java                                                                                                                                                Java
         60                   JavaScript                                                                                     52.7
                                                                                                                                                                                  JavaScript                                                                                                                                          JavaScript
pass@k


                                                                                                                                                         pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pass@k


                                                                                                 46.0

         40                                                          34.5
                                                                                                        31.9
                                                                                                                                    38.9
                                                                                                                                           31.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  34.4
                                         29.1
                                                                                                               25.2                               25.4                                                                                                25.6
                                                                            22.1                                      20.3
         20    18.6                             17.5
                                                       12.5
                                                                                   17.2
                                                                                          13.5                                                                                                12.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          16.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12.913.512.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         15.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                18.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             11.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         14.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     18.6
                      11.0                                    9.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9.6
                             7.3 5.4                                                                                                                              7.1                                7.4                         9.0 7.7 8.6                                                                                                                                                                                                8.8 9.4 8.6
                                                                                                                                                                         4.5           4.3                  5.1 6.8                                                                                                    5.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.4 3.4 4.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.6 6.1 6.3
                                                                                                                                                                                1.5                                                                                                                                           1.1 1.0 1.2               2.4 2.2 3.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                             pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100                                                                                                               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                             MBCPP (CPP)                                                                                                                                      MBSCP (Scala)                                                                                                                                       MBSWP (Swift)
         80                   Multi-lingual
                              Python
                              Java
         60                   JavaScript
pass@k


         40
                                                                                                                             20.8
         20                                                                                      16.1                               15.2
                                                                     10.3                               10.7
                                         8.3                                                                                               7.0 7.8
                                                                            6.1
               4.3                              4.4                                                            3.6 5.5
                      2.0 0.3 0.9                      0.9 2.2                     1.6 3.1
          0
               pass@1 pass@5 pass@10 pass@30 pass@100
                                                               MBPLP (Perl)


              Figure 13: pass@k trends for 13B monlingual and multi-lingual models for in-domain and
              out-of-domain languages.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  G     F EW-S HOT P ROMPTING

  In this section, we present more detailed results on few-shot prompting with prompt consisting of
  three correct functions from the respective MBXP dataset. The few-shot prompts are selected from
  three correct samples for each language. We note that this gives an automatic performance gain of
  roughly 0.3% since there are ≈ 1000 cases for each evaluation language. However, this is quite
  small compared to the gains observed. We do not tune on the few-shot examples selected; that is,
  these examples are chosen once and fixed for all usage. It is possible that this can be further tuned,
  such as the case of prompt engineering in the literature.

  G.1     E VALUATION R ESULTS

  From Figure 14, we observe that the performance gain is quite clear especially for out-of-domain
  languages (pass@1 with temperature 0.2). In some cases, there are large performance boosts for
  mono-lingual models evaluated on out-of-domain languages. For instance, with few-shot prompting,
  the pass@1 of the 13B Python model evaluated on MBJP increases from 5.7% to 10.3%. Similarly,
  the pass@1 of the 13B multi-lingual model increases from 5.9% to 12.2% with few-shot prompting.

  G.2     Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

  We demonstrate the few-shot prompts for select languages. Each of these prompts precede the
  function completion prompt for each evaluation.

  G.2.1    P YTHON FEW- SHOT PROMPT

1 def find_char_long(text):
2     """
3     Write a function to find all words which are at least 4 characters long in a string by
        using regex.
 4     >>> find_char_long(’Please move back to stream’)
 5     [’Please’, ’move’, ’back’, ’stream’]
 6     >>> find_char_long(’Jing Eco and Tech’)
 7     [’Jing’, ’Tech’]
 8     >>> find_char_long(’Jhingai wulu road Zone 3’)
 9     [’Jhingai’, ’wulu’, ’road’, ’Zone’]
10     """
11     import re
12
13     return re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text)
14
15
16 def square_nums(nums):
17     """
18     Write a function to find squares of individual elements in a list using lambda function.
19     >>> square_nums([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])
20     [1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100]
21     >>> square_nums([10,20,30])
22     ([100,400,900])
23     >>> square_nums([12,15])
24     ([144,225])
25     """
26     return list(map(lambda x: x**2, nums))
27
28
29 def test_duplicate(arraynums):
30     """
31     Write a function to find whether a given array of integers contains any duplicate element.
32     >>> test_duplicate(([1,2,3,4,5]))
33     False
34     >>> test_duplicate(([1,2,3,4, 4]))
35     True
36     >>> test_duplicate([1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4,5])
37     True
38     """
39     if len(arraynums) == len(set(arraynums)):
40         return False
41     else:
42         return True


                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                        Few shot pass@1 with temperature 0.2
                             8.6
                                                                 8.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Model
                   8                                                   7.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Baseline
                                               7.3
                                                                                                                         6.5                                                                                                                                                                                          Multi-lingual
                   6
                       6.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Python
                                                                                   5.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Java
          pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      JavaScript
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4.2
                                                                                                                                            4.0
                   4                                                                                                                                                                              3.6 3.4
                                                                                                                               3.3                                                                                                                                     3.1
                                                                                                                                                                          2.9                                 2.9
                                                                                                                                                  2.5               2.6                                                                               2.6
                                                                                                                                                        2.2                                 2.2                                                 2.3                                2.2         2.3 2.1         2.2
                                                           2.1
                   2                     1.6
                                                                                                                 1.8                  1.8                     1.6
                                                                                                                                                                                1.9
                                                                                                                                                                                      1.6                                                                    1.7 1.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1.9
                                                     1.2                                       1.2                                                                                                                                        1.2
                                                                             1.0         1.1         1.0 1.1                                                                                                              1.1                                                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0.6 0.7                                                  0.7                         0.7     0.7
                               0.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.4
                       6.6 7.9 0.0 0.0         7.2 1.7 1.5 6.6         5.8 0.8 4.8 1.2         0.5 0.4 1.1 0.4           7.2 1.7 2.3 5.5          0.2 0.4 0.1 0.6         0.9 0.3 1.5 1.3         0.7 0.8 0.9 1.6         0.6 0.5 0.2 0.6       1.4 1.3 1.2 0.5        0.7 0.5 1.3 0.0         0.4 1.2 1.1 0.5       0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1
                   0
                        MBPP MBJSP MBJP                                                        MBPHP MBTSP MBRBP MBKP MBCSP                                                                                                MBGP                 MBCPP MBSCP MBSWP MBPLP
                       (Python) (JavaScript) (Java)                                             (PHP) (TypeScript) (Ruby) (Kotlin)     (C#)                                                                                 (Go)                 (CPP) (Scala) (Swift) (Perl)
                                                                                                                       Model Size: 125M

                                               19.9
               20.0       18.7
                       18.2                                                                                             17.8
               17.5                                          16.2 16.3
               15.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                12.8
               12.5
      pass@k


                                                                                                                                        12.0
                                                                               10.7
               10.0                                                                            8.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                  7.5                                                                  7.5
                7.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                6.3
                                                                                                                                                  6.0
                                                     4.9                                                                       4.9                      5.0               5.4                           5.1 5.0 5.5                                   5.2
                5.0                                                          3.9
                                                                                                                 4.5                  4.3                           4.6               4.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.7                                3.8 3.9         4.0
                                                           3.5                           3.2         3.2 2.9                                                  2.8               3.0         3.3                                                                                                3.2 3.2 3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2.7
                2.5            1.2 1.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.2 2.0                                                    2.1                         2.2 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                       18.920.40.0 0.0         21.17.0 4.313.9 17.31.911.23.4                  7.5 2.6 1.9 2.8          19.54.9 5.212.2           1.9 2.1 0.9 1.0         0.3 2.7 2.1 2.1         4.6 2.5 2.6 1.6         1.4 1.5 1.1 0.4       7.6 4.2 3.6 1.9        1.9 3.3 1.1 0.8         2.0 1.5 0.9 0.8       1.0 0.4 0.1 0.2
                0.0
                        MBPP MBJSP MBJP                                                        MBPHP MBTSP MBRBP MBKP MBCSP                                                                                                MBGP                 MBCPP MBSCP MBSWP MBPLP
                       (Python) (JavaScript) (Java)                                             (PHP) (TypeScript) (Ruby) (Kotlin)     (C#)                                                                                 (Go)                 (CPP) (Scala) (Swift) (Perl)
                                                                                                                       Model Size: 672M
                                               27.8
                                                                                                                        25.4
                 25    24.6
                                                                       23.5
                          21.6
                                                             20.6
                 20
                                                                                                                                        17.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16.2
        pass@k


                 15                                                            14.5            14.0


                                                                                                                                                                          9.7                     10.1
                 10                                  8.8                     8.2
                                                                                                                                                  9.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8.3              8.4
                                                                                                                 8.0
                                                                                                                               7.2                                                                                  7.2
                                                                                                     5.8                                                6.3                                             6.3
                                                                                         5.0                                                                        5.1                                       5.3                                            5.2 5.1               5.6 5.5
                                                                                                                                      4.8
                   5                                       4.7                                             4.0
                                                                                                                                                              3.3               3.7
                                                                                                                                                                                      4.4
                                                                                                                                                                                            3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4.1               4.0 3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3.3 3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.3
                                   3.0                                                                                                                                                                                                2.5 3.0                                                                            2.7
                               1.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.4 1.7
                       27.224.20.0 0.3         27.110.87.219.3 22.84.314.84.2                  11.54.5 2.9 6.3          25.86.6 5.217.4           3.9 3.1 1.2 0.6         9.1 2.5 3.4 3.1         8.7 3.9 4.0 2.5         3.5 1.5 1.5 1.7       15.17.5 3.9 3.6        5.7 3.0 1.3 2.6         3.3 1.7 1.2 1.7       0.9 0.7 0.4 0.4
                   0
                        MBPP MBJSP MBJP                                                        MBPHP MBTSP MBRBP MBKP MBCSP                                                                                                MBGP                 MBCPP MBSCP MBSWP MBPLP
                       (Python) (JavaScript) (Java)                                             (PHP) (TypeScript) (Ruby) (Kotlin)      (C#)                                                                                (Go)                 (CPP) (Scala) (Swift) (Perl)
                                                                                                                        Model Size: 2.7B
                                               35.9
                 35
                       31.931.3                                                                                         31.6
                                                                       30.3
                 30
                 25                                          24.4

                                                                                                                                        20.8                                                                                                    21.5
        pass@k


                                                                               20.0            20.5
                 20
                                                                                                                                                                          14.7
                 15                               13.1                                                                                                                                            13.7
                                                                                                                 11.8          11.5               12.2                                                                                                11.8
                                                                          10.3 10.4                                                                     9.7
                 10                                        8.2
                                                                                                     9.4
                                                                                                           7.5
                                                                                                                                      8.5                                             8.9                           8.6                                         8.8
                                                                                                                                                                    7.0                                       7.4         6.9                                                            7.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                        6.5                                                                  5.7 5.7                                 6.3
                                         5.4                                                                                                                  5.5                                                               4.9                                                            5.4
                   5               3.2
                                                                                                                                                                                4.6         4.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.0 3.5                                                        3.0 3.4 3.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4.5 3.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.8                                                                  2.2
                       34.532.00.1 2.8         35.313.810.423.6 30.15.719.68.7                 19.18.0 5.8 8.9          32.79.8 9.922.7           5.9 3.5 0.9 1.0         13.00.3 0.4 3.7         12.26.1 8.7 5.9         5.0 2.8 0.9 2.0       18.611.07.3 5.4        7.1 4.5 1.2 4.3         5.9 1.1 1.0 nan       4.3 2.0 0.3 0.9
                   0
                        MBPP MBJSP MBJP                                                        MBPHP MBTSP MBRBP MBKP MBCSP                                                                                                MBGP                 MBCPP MBSCP MBSWP MBPLP
                       (Python) (JavaScript) (Java)                                             (PHP) (TypeScript) (Ruby) (Kotlin)      (C#)                                                                                (Go)                 (CPP) (Scala) (Swift) (Perl)
                                                                                                                        Model Size: 13B


    Figure 14: Performance difference due to few-shot prompting (pass@1 with temperature
    0.2).


                                                                                                                                                                          32
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     G.2.2   JAVA S CRIPT FEW- SHOT PROMPT
 1   /**
 2    * Write a javascript function to identify non-prime numbers.
 3    * > isNotPrime(2)
 4    * false
 5    * > isNotPrime(10)
 6    * true
 7    * > isNotPrime(35)
 8    * true
 9    */
10   function isNotPrime(n) {
11       for (let i = 2; i < n; i++) {
12           if (n % i === 0) {
13               return true;
14           }
15       }
16       return false;
17   }
18
19   /**
20    * Write a javascript function to remove all digits from a list of strings.
21    * > remove(["4words", "3letters", "4digits"])
22    * ["words", "letters", "digits"]
23    * > remove(["28Jan", "12Jan", "11Jan"])
24    * ["Jan", "Jan", "Jan"]
25    * > remove(["wonder1", "wonder2", "wonder3"])
26    * ["wonder", "wonder", "wonder"]
27    */
28   function remove(list) {
29       return list.map(item => item.replace(/\d+/g, ’’));
30   }
31
32   /**
33    * Write a javascript function to determine whether all the numbers are different from each
          other are not.
34    * > testDistinct([1, 5, 7, 9])
35    * true
36    * > testDistinct([2, 4, 5, 5, 7, 9])
37    * false
38    * > testDistinct([1, 2, 3])
39    * true
40    */
41   function testDistinct(data) {
42     return data.every((item, index) => {
43       return data.indexOf(item) === index;
44     });
45   }



     G.2.3   PHP FEW- SHOT PROMPT
 1   <?php
 2
 3   /**
 4    * You are an expert PHP programmer, and here is your task.
 5    * Write a function of recursion list sum.
 6    * php > recursiveListSum([1, 2, [3, 4], [5, 6]])
 7    * 21
 8    * php > recursiveListSum([7, 10, [15, 14], [19, 41]])
 9    * 106
10    * php > recursiveListSum([10, 20, [30, 40], [50, 60]])
11    * 210
12    */
13   function recursiveListSum($dataList) {
14       $sum = 0;
15       $i = 0;
16       foreach ($dataList as $item) {
17           if (is_array($item)) {
18               $sum += recursiveListSum($item);
19           } else {
20               $sum += $item;
21           }
22       }
23       return $sum;
24   }
25
26   /**
27    * You are an expert PHP programmer, and here is your task.
28    * Write function to find the sum of all items in the given dictionary.



                                                    33
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


29    * php > returnSum(["a" => 100, "b" => 200, "c" => 300])
30    * 600
31    * php > returnSum(["a" => 25, "b" => 18, "c" => 45])
32    * 88
33    * php > returnSum(["a" => 36, "b" => 39, "c" => 49])
34    * 124
35    */
36   function returnSum($dict) {
37       $sum = 0;
38       foreach ($dict as $key => $value) {
39           $sum += $value;
40       }
41       return $sum;
42   }
43
44   /**
45    * You are an expert PHP programmer, and here is your task.
46    * Write a function to find squares of individual elements in a list using lambda function.
47    * php > squareNums([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])
48    * [1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100]
49    * php > squareNums([10, 20, 30])
50    * [100, 400, 900]
51    * php > squareNums([12, 15])
52    * [144, 225]
53    */
54   function squareNums($nums) {
55       $squares = [];
56       foreach ($nums as $num) {
57           $squares[] = $num * $num;
58       }
59       return $squares;
60   }
61
62   ?>
63   </s>



     G.2.4   RUBY FEW- SHOT PROMPT
 1   ##
 2   # You are an expert Ruby programmer, and here is your task.
 3   # Write a Ruby function to remove all digits from a list of strings.
 4   # irb> remove(["4words", "3letters", "4digits"])
 5   # => ["words", "letters", "digits"]
 6   # irb> remove(["28Jan", "12Jan", "11Jan"])
 7   # => ["Jan", "Jan", "Jan"]
 8   # irb> remove(["wonder1", "wonder2", "wonder3"])
 9   # => ["wonder", "wonder", "wonder"]
10   def remove(list)
11      return list.map { |word| word.gsub(/\d+/, ’’) }
12   end
13
14   ##
15   # You are an expert Ruby programmer, and here is your task.
16   # Write a Ruby function to remove even numbers from a given list.
17   # irb> remove_even([1, 3, 5, 2])
18   # => [1, 3, 5]
19   # irb> remove_even([5, 6, 7])
20   # => [5, 7]
21   # irb> remove_even([1, 2, 3, 4])
22   # => [1, 3]
23   def remove_even(l)
24      return l.reject {|x| x % 2 == 0}
25   end
26
27   ##
28   # You are an expert Ruby programmer, and here is your task.
29   # Write a Ruby function to find the minimum of two numbers.
30   # irb> minimum(1, 2)
31   # => 1
32   # irb> minimum(-5, -4)
33   # => -5
34   # irb> minimum(0, 0)
35   # => 0
36   def minimum(a, b)
37      return a < b ? a : b
38   end


                                                    34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H     T RANSLATION

H.1    T RANSLATION R ESULTS FROM VARIOUS L ANGUAGE S OURCES

In this section, we show translation results using (1) multi-lingual and mono-lingual models of
various scales and (2) three different languages as source solutions (Python, Java, JavaScript). We
note that the canonical solutions from Java and JavaScript are from the data bootstrapping using a
separately trained model, as detailed in Section P. For tasks that we do not have solutions for, we do
not prepend anything to the usual target-language prompt.
While the training data can potentially consist of translation-like data which allow the model to per-
form zero-shot translation, we do not know the volume of such translation-related data and suspect
such volume to be low. In addition, the model is not trained specifically on certain languages such
as Kotlin or PHP for multi-lingual models, or even on Java for Python-only models, for instance.
Figures 15 illustrate the zero-shot translation results for multi-lingual, Python, JavaScript and Java
mono-lingual models respectively. In most settings, we observe improvements due to zero-shot
translation over the baseline.

Out-of-domain evaluation languages benefit more from translation We can observe consistent
performance gains due to translation as opposed to without using reference solution. The perfor-
mance gain is drastic in certain cases. For example, for Ruby, the 13B multi-lingual model obtains
5.9% pass@1 in the normal mode and 15.9% in the translation mode with JavaScript as a source
language, or for PHP, the performance improvement is from 19.1% to 46.5% with Java as a source
language.

Effects of language compatibility or affinity for zero-shot translation Based on the trends of
performance gains from the translation settings, we observe that different source languages have
unequal effects as reference solutions. For instance, based on the multi-lingual 672M and 13B mod-
els, Java is the source language that yields the highest performance for MBPHP, whereas JavaScript
seems to be the best for MBRBP and MBKP. These compatibility trends can change slightly but
are roughly consistent. For instance, for MBJSP, JavaScript is the best source language for the 13B
JavaScript and Java monolingual models, whereas Python is the best source language for MBJSP in
many other settings. However, for MBKP and MBRBP, JavaScript consistently is the best source
language across all model types. We summarize the best model types for each evaluation set below
in Table 2. We observe that it is not necessarily the source languages that are closest in syntax that
is the best source language, since it has potential to confuse the models during translation and lead
the model to generate in an incoorect syntax.

      Table 2: Source language that yields the best zero-shot translation scores for each evalua-
      tion language

                                                          Model Type
 Evaluation Dataset
                         Multi-lingual            Python           JavaScript                Java
       MBPP              None or Java              Java               Java                  Python
        MBJP                Python                Python         None or Python             Python
       MBJSP            Python or Java            Python              Java                   Java
       MBPHP                 Java                 Python              Java            Java or JavaScript
       MHRBP              JavaScript            JavaScript         JavaScript             JavaScript
       MBKP               JavaScript       JavaScript or Python    JavaScript             JavaScript

We provide some examples in Section H.3.

Mono-lingual versus multi-lingual models For mono-lingual models, we observe large perfor-
mance boost, partly due to mono-lingual models not performing well for baseline to start with.

Trends with respect to model sizes Larger models typically perform better, as observed in the
normal code completion case and also in the translation case as well.


                                                  35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Model knowledge of source language versus target language It is likely the case that the knowl-
edge of the target language is more important than the source language for translation performance.
We note that Python model obtains high scores with translation on MBJSP with Python as source
(13.8% → 30.7%). JavaScript model also obtains high scores with translation on MBJSP with
Python as source, with better performance compared to Python model, which is in part due to better
baseline performance to start with (23.3% → 32.8%).

                        Zero-Shot Translation with Different Translation Sources: Multi   lingual Models                                          Zero-Shot Translation with Different Translation Sources: Python Models
                                                                                                                                         12
               12.5                                                                                Source language                                                                                                     Source language
                                                                                                        None                             10                                                                                 None
               10.0                                                                                     Python                                                                                                              Python
  pass@1 (%)


                                                                                                                            pass@1 (%)
                                                                                                        Java                              8                                                                                 Java
                 7.5                                                                                    JavaScript                                                                                                          JavaScript
                                                                                                                                          6
                 5.0                                                                                                                      4
                 2.5                                                                                                                      2
                 0.0                                                                                                                      0
                   25
                                                                                                                                         20
                   20
      pass@1 (%)


                                                                                                                            pass@1 (%)
                                                                                                                                         15
                   15
                                                                                                                                         10
                   10

                    5                                                                                                                     5

                    0                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                         25
                   30



                                                                                                                            pass@1 (%)
      pass@1 (%)


                                                                                                                                         20

                   20                                                                                                                    15

                                                                                                                                         10
                   10
                                                                                                                                          5

                 50                                                                                                                     50
                 40                                                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                           pass@1 (%)
    pass@1 (%)


                 30                                                                                                                     30

                 20                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                        10
                 10
                         MBPP            MBJP            MBJSP           MBPHP            MBRBP            MBKP                                MBPP            MBJP           MBJSP           MBPHP           MBRBP            MBKP
                        (Python)         (Java)        (JavaScript)       (PHP)           (Ruby)           (Kotlin)                           (Python)         (Java)       (JavaScript)       (PHP)          (Ruby)           (Kotlin)
                                                           Model Size: 13B                                                                                                       Model Size: 13B

                          Zero-Shot Translation with Different Translation Sources: JavaScript Models                                               Zero-Shot Translation with Different Translation Sources: Java Models
                 10                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                   Source language                                                                                                     Source language
                                                                                                        None                                                                                                                None
                   8                                                                                    Python                           6                                                                                  Python
   pass@1 (%)


                                                                                                                            pass@1 (%)


                                                                                                        Java                                                                                                                Java
                   6                                                                                    JavaScript                                                                                                          JavaScript
                                                                                                                                         4
                   4
                                                                                                                                         2
                   2

                   0                                                                                                                     0
                 20

                                                                                                                                        15
                 15
   pass@1 (%)


                                                                                                                        pass@1 (%)


                 10                                                                                                                     10

                   5                                                                                                                     5

                   0                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                        25
                 25
                                                                                                                                        20
                 20
                                                                                                                        pass@1 (%)
   pass@1 (%)


                 15                                                                                                                     15

                 10                                                                                                                     10

                   5                                                                                                                     5

                   0                                                                                                                     0



               30                                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                                       pass@1 (%)
  pass@1 (%)


               20                                                                                                                   20

               10                                                                                                                   10

                   0                                                                                                                     0
                         MBPP            MBJP           MBJSP           MBPHP             MBRBP            MBKP                                MBPP           MBJP            MBJSP           MBPHP           MBRBP            MBKP
                        (Python)         (Java)       (JavaScript)       (PHP)            (Ruby)           (Kotlin)                           (Python)        (Java)        (JavaScript)       (PHP)          (Ruby)           (Kotlin)
                                                           Model Size: 13B                                                                                                       Model Size: 13B


                   Figure 15: Zero-Shot Translation with Translation Sources from Different Languages:
                   Multi-lingual Models


                                                                                                                      36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H.2    C OMPARING TRANSLATION PERFORMANCE OF MULTI - LINGUAL AND MONO - LINGUAL
       MODELS


                                     Zero-Shot Translation pass@1 with Translation Sources from Python
                                                                              9.1
                                                                                                                                                                      Model
                           8
                                                                                                   7.3
                                                                                                                                                                      Baseline
                                                   6.9                                                                                                                Multi-lingual
                           6                                                                                                                                          Python
                                                                                                                                                                      Java
                  pass@k                                                                                                                    4.1
                           4                                                                                                         3.8
                                                                                                                                                        3.4
                                                                                            3.2
                                                                                                                                                  2.9         2.9
                                                                                                                                                                            2.6
                                                                                                                                                                                   2.4
                                                                                                                        1.9
                           2                                     1.6                 1.7                                                                              1.5
                                                          1.2           1.0
                                                                                                          0.6 0.4     0.6
                               6.6 7.9 0.0 0.0     5.8 0.8 4.8 1.2            7.2 1.7 1.5 6.6             0.5 0.4 1.1 0.4            0.2 0.4 0.1 0.6          0.9 0.3 1.5 1.3
                           0
                                  MBPP                    MBJP                  MBJSP           MBPHP                                      MBRBP                      MBKP
                                 (Python)                 (Java)              (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                     (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                   Model Size: 125M
                                                                              24.9
                         25
                                                   22.1
                                                                                                   20.0
                         20                                      18.8

                                                                                     15.5                 15.6
                pass@k


                         15

                         10
                                                                                                                                                              7.6
                                                                                            6.5                  6.8          6.3                                     6.5
                                                                        5.8                                                                                                 5.6
                                                                                                                                     4.8 4.6 4.4 4.2
                           5                              3.5                                                           3.4                                                        4.0


                               18.9 20.4 0.0 0.0   17.3 1.9 11.2 3.4          21.1 7.0 4.3 13.9           7.5 2.6 1.9 2.8            1.9 2.1 0.9 1.0          0.3 2.7 2.1 2.1
                           0
                                  MBPP                    MBJP                  MBJSP           MBPHP                                      MBRBP                      MBKP
                                 (Python)                 (Java)              (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                     (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                   Model Size: 672M
                                                                                                          31.2
                         30                        29.5
                                                                              27.9
                                                                                                   25.9
                         25                                      24.5
                                                                                     21.4
                         20
                pass@k


                         15
                                                                                            10.5                 10.9
                         10                               8.4
                                                                                                                              9.4
                                                                                                                                                                      7.5
                                                                        6.3                                                          6.0 5.5                                6.5 7.2
                                                                                                                        5.5
                           5                                                                                                                      4.2 4.6

                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                               27.2 24.2 0.0 0.3   22.8 4.3 14.8 4.2          27.1 10.8 7.2 19.3          11.5 nan 2.9 6.3           3.9 3.1 1.2 0.6          9.1 2.5 3.4 3.1
                           0
                                  MBPP                    MBJP                  MBJSP           MBPHP                                      MBRBP                      MBKP
                                 (Python)                 (Java)              (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                     (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                   Model Size: 2.7B
                                                   40.9
                         40
                                                                 36.3         36.3                        36.6
                         35                                                                        32.8
                                                                                     30.7
                         30
                         25
                pass@k


                                                                                                                 20.1
                         20                               17.6
                                                                                                                              15.9
                         15                                                                                                                                   14.4
                                                                                            12.8
                                                                                                                        9.5                                                 10.3
                         10                                             7.6
                                                                                                                                                                      8.9
                                                                                                                                     6.7                                           5.8
                                                                                                                                            5.5
                           5                                                                                                                      4.1 4.6
                               34.5 32.0 0.1 2.8   30.1 5.7 19.6 8.7          35.3 13.8 10.4 23.6         19.1 8.0 5.8 8.9           5.9 3.5 0.9 1.0          13.0 0.3 0.4 3.7
                           0
                                  MBPP                    MBJP                  MBJSP           MBPHP                                      MBRBP                      MBKP
                                 (Python)                 (Java)              (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                     (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                    Model Size: 13B


      Figure 16: Translation performance compared to baseline (dot) for multi- and mono-
      lingual models, with Python as a source language.


                                                                                                   37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    Zero-Shot Translation pass@1 with Translation Sources from JavaScript
                        12          11.7            11.4
                                                                                                                                                               Model
                        10                                                                                                                                      Baseline
                             8.5                                                                                                                                Multi-lingual
                         8                                        7.9                                                                                           Python
                                                                                                                                                               7.4
                                                                                                                                                           7.0
                                                                                                                                                                Java
               pass@k


                                                                                                                                                                         6.1
                         6                                                                                                               5.2
                                                                                                                                                                                4.8
                                                                                                                                  4.0
                         4                                 3.2
                                                                                                      3.6
                                                                                                                    3.1
                                                                         2.6                                                                         2.4
                                                                                                                           2.0
                         2                                                                                                                     1.3
                                              1.0                                                         0.8
                             6.6 7.9 0.0 0.0        5.8 0.8 4.8 1.2             7.2 1.7 1.5 6.6       0.5 0.4 1.1 0.4             0.2 0.4 0.1 0.6          0.9 0.3 1.5 1.3
                         0
                                    MBPP                   MBJP                   MBJSP           MBPHP                                 MBRBP                      MBKP
                                   (Python)                (Java)               (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                     Model Size: 125M
                                    21.8

                        20
                             17.8
                                                    16.7
                                                                  15.3
                        15                                                                            13.4
               pass@k


                        10                                                                                                        8.8                      9.3
                                                                                                                                                                   8.2 8.5
                                                                                                                                         6.7                                    6.5
                                                           5.1                                               5.1 4.8       5.6
                                                                                                                                               4.8 4.5
                         5                                               4.3


                             18.9 20.4 0.0 0.0      17.3 1.9 11.2 3.4           21.1 7.0 4.3 13.9     7.5 2.6 1.9 2.8             1.9 2.1 0.9 1.0          0.3 2.7 2.1 2.1
                         0
                                    MBPP                   MBJP                   MBJSP           MBPHP                                 MBRBP                      MBKP
                                   (Python)                (Java)               (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                     Model Size: 672M
                                                    32.1

                        30   27.7
                                    26.5                                                              27.1

                        25                                        24.3


                        20
               pass@k


                        15
                                                                                                                           10.2                            10.9
                        10                                               8.6                                                      8.6 8.9                          8.8 9.2 8.4
                                                           6.3                                               6.8 7.1                           6.9
                         5                                                                                                                           3.9
                                       1.5 2.1
                             27.2 24.2 0.0 0.3      22.8 4.3 14.8 4.2           27.1 10.8 7.2 19.3    11.5 nan 2.9 6.3            3.9 3.1 1.2 0.6          9.1 2.5 3.4 3.1
                         0
                                    MBPP                   MBJP                   MBJSP           MBPHP                                 MBRBP                      MBKP
                                   (Python)                (Java)               (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                     Model Size: 2.7B
                        50   48.0 48.3


                        40                                                                            39.0
                                                    34.4          35.6

                        30
               pass@k


                        20                                                                                                 17.2                            18.3
                                                                         16.0                                                     15.9
                                                                                                             14.1
                                                           11.4                                                                                                          12.2
                                              9.7                                                                   10.5                 10.4 9.8                               9.5
                        10                                                                                                                           6.7
                                                                                                                                                                   8.9

                                       3.3
                             34.5 32.0 0.1 2.8      30.1 5.7 19.6 8.7           35.3 13.8 10.4 23.6   19.1 8.0 5.8 8.9            5.9 3.5 0.9 1.0          13.0 0.3 0.4 3.7
                         0
                                    MBPP                   MBJP                   MBJSP           MBPHP                                 MBRBP                      MBKP
                                   (Python)                (Java)               (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                (Ruby)                    (Kotlin)
                                                                                      Model Size: 13B


    Figure 17: Translation performance compared to baseline (dot) for multi- and mono-
    lingual models, with JavaScript as a source language.


                                                                                             38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Zero-Shot Translation pass@1 with Translation Sources from Java
                                                                       13.1
                                                                                                                                                             Model
                        12                                                                                                                                   Baseline
                                                                                            10.3
                        10                                                                                                                                   Multi-lingual
                                                                                                                                                             Python
                                                                              7.9
                         8                                                                                                                                   Java
               pass@k


                                    6.6                                              6.9

                         6   5.8


                         4                                                                         3.1
                                                                                                                 3.5           3.5
                                                                                                                                      3.0
                                                                                                                        2.2
                         2
                                         0.4                                                           0.3                                 0.7          0.5 0.3 0.4 0.4
                             6.6 7.9 0.0 0.0       5.8 0.8 4.8 1.2     7.2 1.7 1.5 6.6             0.5 0.4 1.1 0.4             0.2 0.4 0.1 0.6          0.9 0.3 1.5 1.3
                         0
                                    MBPP               MBJP              MBJSP           MBPHP                                       MBRBP                  MBKP
                                   (Python)            (Java)          (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                      (Ruby)                (Kotlin)
                                                                            Model Size: 125M
                                                                       23.5
                                                                                                   21.6

                        20          19.6



                        15                                                    14.4
               pass@k


                                                                                            11.3
                             9.9                                                     9.7
                        10
                                                                                                          7.1           6.5           6.6

                         5
                                                                                                                 3.2                        2.8 3.3
                                                                                                                               2.1
                             18.9 20.4 0.0 0.0     17.3 1.9 11.2 3.4   21.1 7.0 4.3 13.9           7.5 2.6 1.9 2.8             1.9 2.1 0.9 1.0          0.0 2.7
                                                                                                                                                        0.3 0.0 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                0.0 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                    0.0
                         0
                                    MBPP               MBJP              MBJSP           MBPHP                                       MBRBP                  MBKP
                                   (Python)            (Java)          (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                      (Ruby)                (Kotlin)
                                                                            Model Size: 672M
                                                                       36.3
                        35
                        30                                                                         27.5

                        25
               pass@k


                        20   18.3
                                                                                     19.2 18.6
                                    15.7                                      15.5
                        15                                                                                              13.4
                                                                                                          10.2
                        10                                                                                                     8.3                          9.1 9.5
                                                                                                                 6.3                  7.1                             7.0
                         5                                                                                                                  4.3
                                                                                                                                                  3.4
                                       1.2                                                                                                              1.5
                             27.2 24.2 0.0 0.7
                                           0.3     22.8 4.3 14.8 4.2   27.1 10.8 7.2 19.3          11.5 nan 2.9 6.3            3.9 3.1 1.2 0.6          9.1 2.5 3.4 3.1
                         0
                                    MBPP               MBJP              MBJSP           MBPHP                                       MBRBP                  MBKP
                                   (Python)            (Java)          (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                      (Ruby)                (Kotlin)
                                                                            Model Size: 2.7B
                                    45.4                                                           46.5


                        40                                                                  38.0
                             34.5                                                    33.5
                                                                       32.6
                        30
               pass@k


                                                                                                                        25.4
                                                                              21.1
                        20                                                                                18.4
                                                                                                                 14.2          13.0

                        10                                                                                                            8.4 7.4
                                                                                                                                                  6.2
                                           3.9                                                                                                          2.8
                                           1.8                                                                                                               0.8 1.5 1.2
                             34.5 32.0 0.1 2.8     30.1 5.7 19.6 8.7   35.3 13.8 10.4 23.6         19.1 8.0 5.8 8.9            5.9 3.5 0.9 1.0          13.0 0.3 0.4 3.7
                         0
                                    MBPP               MBJP              MBJSP           MBPHP                                       MBRBP                  MBKP
                                   (Python)            (Java)          (JavaScript)       (PHP)                                      (Ruby)                (Kotlin)
                                                                             Model Size: 13B


    Figure 18: Translation performance compared to baseline (dot) for multi- and mono-
    lingual models, with Java as a source language.


                                                                                            39
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     H.3     G ENERATED T RANSLATION E XAMPLES

     H.3.1     MBPHP (PHP)
 1   def find_Sum(arr,n):
 2       """
 3       Write a python function to find the sum of repeated elements in a given array.
 4       >>> find_Sum([1,2,3,1,1,4,5,6],8)
 5       3
 6       >>> find_Sum([1,2,3,1,1],5)
 7       3
 8       >>> find_Sum([1,1,2],3)
 9       2
10       """
11
12         return sum([x for x in arr if arr.count(x) > 1])
13
14   <?php
15
16   /**
17    * You are an expert PHP programmer, and here is your task.
18    * Write a PHP function to find the sum of repeated elements in a given array.
19    * php > findSum([1, 2, 3, 1, 1, 4, 5, 6], 8)
20    * 3
21    * php > findSum([1, 2, 3, 1, 1], 5)
22    * 3
23    * php > findSum([1, 1, 2], 3)
24    * 2
25    */
26   function findSum($arr, $n) {
27       $count = array_count_values($arr);
28       return array_sum(array_filter($arr, function ($value) use ($count) {
29           return $count[$value] > 1;
30       }));
31   }

 1   def find_Product(arr,n):
 2       """
 3       Write a python function to find the product of non-repeated elements in a given array.
 4       >>> find_Product([1,1,2,3],4)
 5       6
 6       >>> find_Product([1,2,3,1,1],5)
 7       6
 8       >>> find_Product([1,1,4,5,6],5)
 9       120
10       """
11
12         arr.sort()
13         prod = 1
14         for i in range(0,n,1):
15             if (arr[i - 1] != arr[i]):
16                  prod = prod * arr[i]
17         return prod;
18
19   <?php
20
21   /**
22    * You are an expert PHP programmer, and here is your task.
23    * Write a PHP function to find the product of non-repeated elements in a given array.
24    * php > findProduct([1, 1, 2, 3], 4)
25    * 6
26    * php > findProduct([1, 2, 3, 1, 1], 5)
27    * 6
28    * php > findProduct([1, 1, 4, 5, 6], 5)
29    * 120
30    */
31   function findProduct($arr, $n) {
32       $arr = array_unique($arr);
33       $prod = 1;
34       foreach($arr as $key => $value) {
35           if($key == 0 || $value != $arr[$key - 1]) {
36               $prod = $prod * $value;
37           }
38       }
39       return $prod;
40   }



     H.3.2     MBRBP (RUBY )


                                                     40
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 1   /**
 2    * Write a javascript function to find the element occurring odd number of times.
 3    * > getOddOccurrence([1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1], 7)
 4    * 1
 5    * > getOddOccurrence([1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 1, 3], 7)
 6    * 3
 7    * > getOddOccurrence([2, 3, 5, 4, 5, 2, 4, 3, 5, 2, 4, 4, 2], 13)
 8    * 5
 9    */
10   function getOddOccurrence(arr, arrSize) {
11
12         for i in range(0, arr_size):
13             count = 0
14             for j in range(0, arr_size):
15                 if arr[i] == arr[j]:
16                     count += 1
17             if count % 2 != 0:
18                 return arr[i]
19         return -1
20
21
22   ##
23   # You are an expert Ruby programmer, and here is your task.
24   # Write a Ruby function to find the element occurring odd number of times.
25   # irb> get_odd_occurrence([1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1], 7)
26   # => 1
27   # irb> get_odd_occurrence([1, 2, 3, 2, 3, 1, 3], 7)
28   # => 3
29   # irb> get_odd_occurrence([2, 3, 5, 4, 5, 2, 4, 3, 5, 2, 4, 4, 2], 13)
30   # => 5
31
32   def get_odd_occurrence(arr, arr_size)
33     occurrences = Hash.new
34     for i in 0...arr_size
35       occurrences[arr[i]] ||= 0
36       occurrences[arr[i]] += 1
37     end
38     result = nil
39     occurrences.each_pair do |k, v|
40       if v % 2 != 0 && result == nil
41         result = k
42       end
43     end
44     result
45
46   end



     H.3.3     MBKP (KOTLIN )
 1 def sort_matrix(M):
 2     """
 3     Write a function to sort a given matrix in ascending order according to the sum of its
           rows.
 4     >>> sort_matrix([[1, 2, 3], [2, 4, 5], [1, 1, 1]])
 5     [[1, 1, 1], [1, 2, 3], [2, 4, 5]]
 6     >>> sort_matrix([[1, 2, 3], [-2, 4, -5], [1, -1, 1]])
 7     [[-2, 4, -5], [1, -1, 1], [1, 2, 3]]
 8     >>> sort_matrix([[5,8,9],[6,4,3],[2,1,4]])
 9     [[2, 1, 4], [6, 4, 3], [5, 8, 9]]
10     """
11     result = sorted(M, key=sum)
12     return result
13
14 /**
15  * You are an expert Kotlin programmer, and here is your task.
16  * Write a function to sort a given matrix in ascending order according to the sum of its rows
           .
17  * >>> sortMatrix([[1, 2, 3], [2, 4, 5], [1, 1, 1]])
18  * [[1, 1, 1], [1, 2, 3], [2, 4, 5]]
19  * >>> sortMatrix([[1, 2, 3], [-2, 4, -5], [1, -1, 1]])
20  * [[-2, 4, -5], [1, -1, 1], [1, 2, 3]]
21  * >>> sortMatrix([[5, 8, 9], [6, 4, 3], [2, 1, 4]])
22  * [[2, 1, 4], [6, 4, 3], [5, 8, 9]]
23  */
24 fun sortMatrix(m : List<List<Int>>) : List<List<Int>> {
25     return m.sortedBy { it.sum() }
26 }


                                                    41
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I                          A NALYSIS : E FFECTS OF FEW- SHOT AND TRANSLATION PROMPTS
Below, we show an extended version of the analysis in main text (Figure 7) where we demonstrate
the differences in qualitative behaviors of few-shot prompting versus translation settings and their
effects on helping the usual function completion task. The differences in these two modes are
simply the prompts the precede the function completion prompt. That is, the few-shot setting uses
3 examples in the corresponding language and the translation mode uses the solution from the same
problem in a different language. The translation setting helps the model solve difficult tasks that are
very difficult to solve without a reference solution (Figure 21) whereas the the few-shot prompting
helps condition the model to generate code properly in that respective syntax (See Section I.1).

I.1                             T EST CASE ERROR VERSUS NON - ASSERTION ERROR

We categorize the failure of each generation code sample into two main categories: assertion or test-
based errors versus non-assertion errors, which consist of all other errors such as compile, parsing,
or runtime error not related to test cases. We use the results from temperature 0.2 with 30 samples
for each problem and calculate the fraction of non-assertion errors over the number of all samples.
The results in Figure 19 show that the few-shot prompting results in lower non-assertion errors for
out-of-domain languages, indicating that few-shot prompts help models generate code with more
precise syntax in each language. In contrast, there is little effect even evaluated on the in-domain
languages, since the models already are fluent in these languages where the additional signals from
the few-shot prompts do not help further. For the translation case, interesting we observe higher
non-assertion errors on in-domain evaluation.
                                       MBPP dataset                                                               MBJP dataset                                                        MBJSP dataset
                          100                                                                        100                                                                 100
                                                              baseline
non-assertion error (%)


                                                                           non-assertion error (%)


                                                                                                                                               non-assertion error (%)
                          80                                  few-shot                               80                                                                  80
                                                              translate
                          60                                                                         60                                                                  60

                          40                                                                         40                                                                  40

                          20                                                                         20                                                                  20

                           0                                                                          0                                                                   0
                                125M   672M            2.7B          13B                                   125M   672M            2.7B   13B                                   125M   672M            2.7B   13B
                                              models                                                                     models                                                              models
                                       MBPHP dataset                                                              MBRBP dataset                                                       MBKP dataset
                          100                                                                        100                                                                 100
non-assertion error (%)


                                                                           non-assertion error (%)


                                                                                                                                               non-assertion error (%)


                          80                                                                         80                                                                  80

                          60                                                                         60                                                                  60

                          40                                                                         40                                                                  40

                          20                                                                         20                                                                  20

                           0                                                                          0                                                                   0
                                125M   672M            2.7B          13B                                   125M   672M            2.7B   13B                                   125M   672M            2.7B   13B
                                              models                                                                     models                                                              models

                            Figure 19: The percentage of test case non-assertion error out of all the error cases on
                            different in-domain (upper) and out-of-domain (lower) datasets.


I.2                             S OLVE RATE PER PROBLEM DUE TO FEW- SHOT PROMPTING AND TRANSLATION

We perform sampling to generate 100 samples with temperature 0.8. For each task id, we calculate
the fraction of number of code samples that pass the test over a total of 100 samples. We repeat this
experiment for the function completion baseline, few-shot prompting, and translation settings. In
Figure 21, we sort the task ids by the solve rate of the function completion baseline, which indicates
the difficulty of various tasks in each dataset. We observe differences in how the solve rates for few-
shot prompting or translation settings accumulate. For the few-shot case, the accumulation of the
solve rates per task revolve near the baseline solve rate, indicating that the difficulty of the problem
given the few-shot prompts do not deviate much from the difficulty in the baseline case. However,
in the translation case, some tasks ids that correspond to low baseline solve rate have much higher
solve rate in the translation case, sometimes with perfect rate 1.0.


                                                                                                                     42
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    MBPP dataset                                                                                    MBJP dataset                                                                                         MBJSP dataset
                              100                                                                                           100                                                                                             100
                                                                                        baseline
                              80                                                        few-shot                            80                                                                                              80
        assertion error (%)


                                                                                                      assertion error (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                      assertion error (%)
                                                                                        translate
                              60                                                                                            60                                                                                              60

                              40                                                                                            40                                                                                              40

                              20                                                                                            20                                                                                              20

                               0                                                                                             0                                                                                               0
                                    125M             672M               2.7B                    13B                               125M              672M                      2.7B              13B                               125M                    672M             2.7B               13B
                                                            models                                                                                         models                                                                                                models
                                                   MBPHP dataset                                                                               MBRBP dataset                                                                                              MBKP dataset
                              100                                                                                           100                                                                                             100

                              80                                                                                            80                                                                                              80
        assertion error (%)


                                                                                                      assertion error (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                      assertion error (%)
                              60                                                                                            60                                                                                              60

                              40                                                                                            40                                                                                              40

                              20                                                                                            20                                                                                              20

                               0                                                                                             0                                                                                               0
                                    125M             672M               2.7B                    13B                               125M              672M                      2.7B              13B                               125M                    672M             2.7B               13B
                                                            models                                                                                         models                                                                                                models

                                Figure 20: The percentage of test case assertion error out of all the error cases on different
                                in-domain (upper) and out-of-domain (lower) datasets.
                              MBKP with few-shot prompting                                MBKP with Python translation source                                           MBKP with JavaScript translation source                                          MBKP with Java translation source
          1.00                                                                      1.00                                                                            1.00                                                                          1.00

          0.75                                                                      0.75                                                                            0.75                                                                          0.75
                                                         Few-shot                                                                   Translation                                                    Translation                                                                    Translation
solve rate


                                                                           solve rate


                                                                                                                                                           solve rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         solve rate
          0.50                                                with                  0.50                                                  with                      0.50                                              with                        0.50                                 with
                                                              without                                                                     without                                                                     without                                                          without
          0.25                                                                      0.25                                                                            0.25                                                                          0.25

          0.00                                                                      0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                          0.00
                                    task ids ranked by solve rate                                task ids ranked by solve rate                                                  task ids ranked by solve rate                                                 task ids ranked by solve rate

                                                                                                                                         (a) MBKP (Kotlin)
                              MBPHP with few-shot prompting                               MBPHP with Python translation source                                     MBPHP with JavaScript translation source                                           MBPHP with Java translation source
          1.00                                                                      1.00                                                                            1.00                                                                          1.00

          0.75                                                                      0.75                                                                            0.75                                                                          0.75
                                                         Few-shot                                                                   Translation                                                    Translation                                                                    Translation
solve rate


                                                                           solve rate


                                                                                                                                                           solve rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         solve rate



          0.50                                                with                  0.50                                                  with                      0.50                                              with                        0.50                                 with
                                                              without                                                                     without                                                                     without                                                          without
          0.25                                                                      0.25                                                                            0.25                                                                          0.25

          0.00                                                                      0.00                                                                            0.00                                                                          0.00
                                    task ids ranked by solve rate                                task ids ranked by solve rate                                                  task ids ranked by solve rate                                                 task ids ranked by solve rate

                                                                                                                                         (b) MBPHP (PHP)
                              MBRBP with few-shot prompting                               MBRBP with Python translation source                                     MBRBP with JavaScript translation source                                           MBRBP with Java translation source
          1.00                                                                                                                                                      1.00                                                                          1.00
                                                                                        0.8
          0.75                                                                                                                                                      0.75                                                                          0.75
                                                         Few-shot                       0.6
                                                                                                                                    Translation                                                    Translation                                                                    Translation
solve rate


                                                                             solve rate


                                                                                                                                                           solve rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         solve rate


          0.50                                                with                      0.4                                               with                      0.50                                              with                        0.50                                 with
                                                              without                                                                     without                                                                     without                                                          without
          0.25                                                                          0.2                                                                         0.25                                                                          0.25

          0.00                                                                          0.0                                                                         0.00                                                                          0.00
                                    task ids ranked by solve rate                                task ids ranked by solve rate                                                  task ids ranked by solve rate                                                 task ids ranked by solve rate

                                                                                                                                     (c) MBRBP (Ruby)

                                Figure 21: For each task, we show a fraction of generations that pass the tests over the
                                total number of samples (solve rate), where the task indices are ranked to show increasing
                                difficulty. In the translation setting, tasks that are previously difficult (low solve rate for the
                                baseline) can become easily solvable, demonstrating that models can leverage reference
                                solutions in the source language to solve hard tasks. In contrast, the solve rates with few-
                                shot prompting do not deviate as much from the baseline solve rate. Translation from
                                different language sources exhibit similar trends where the source solution can help solve
                                hard tasks where we observe unequal effects from different source languages.


    Figure 21 also demonstrates consistent effects of source languages. For a language such as Java, we
    observe that it can help solve many of the hard problems for MBPHP (PHP) evaluation, based on
    the high concentration of points around solve rate 1.0. This analysis also complements Section H
    which demonstrates unequal effects of source languages.


                                                                                                                                                       43
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J                ROBUSTNESS E VALUATION : R -MBXP

J.1                 DATASET P REPARATION AND E VALUATION S ETUP

Robustness is an important indicator of the reliability of code generation models in practice. Here
we provide a robustness benchmark for all the trained models across MBXP datasets. Specifically,
we consider three natural data augmentations (1) Paraphrase by Back Translation (Li & Specia,
2019; Sugiyama & Yoshinaga, 2019) (e.g., “create a function” to “write one function”) (2) Character
Case Change (“Create A FunctioN”) and (3) Synonym Substitutions (Miller, 1995) (“generate a
function”) as basic transformations to perturb the docstrings in prompts. We use the default settings
and implementations of these three transformations from NL-Augmenter§ , a standard collection of
data augmentations for robustness evaluation on text (Dhole et al., 2021). We select these three
transformations since they can mostly maintain the naturalness for the tasks of code generations
based on our observations. We then measure the average pass@1 with greedy decoding for all the
models on datasets perturbed by each transformation. Here multi-lingual models are trained with
multiple languages including Python, Java, Javascript (JS) while mono-lingual models are trained
with each language individually. To simplify the comparisons, we call Ruby, PHP, and Kotlin as
out-of-domain datasets for all the evaluated models while Python, Java, JS as in-domain datasets.


J.2                 E VALUATION R ESULTS

We present the detailed results in Figure 22 and summarize several interesting observations below.
(1) The percentages of pass@1 drops on perturbed datasets over regular ones are consistent across
different sizes of the models. In specific, the average pass@1 over all the datasets drops from 2.26
to 2.07 for 125M models (8.56% drop), 6.40 to 5.87 for 672M models (8.25% drop), 9.20 to 8.33
for 2.7B models (9.40% drop), and 12.63 to 11.62 (8.02% drop). (2) For in-domain datasets, multi-
lingual models have less percentage of performance drops compared to mono-lingual models under
perturbations. On average, pass@1 of multi-lingual models drops from 21.36 to 19.73 (7.63% drop)
while pass@1 of mono-lingual models drops from 16.90 to 15.24 (9.81% drop). (3) For out-of-
domain datasets, multi-lingual models also have less percentage of performance drops compared to
mono-lingual models under perturbations. On average, pass@1 of multi-lingual models drops from
6.78 to 6.24 (7.98% drop) while pass@1 of mono-lingual models drops from 2.72 to 2.47 (8.97%
drop).

                                    MBPP dataset                                              MBJP dataset                                           MBJSP dataset
             35       multi (N)                                           30    multi (N)                                          35   multi (N)
                      python (N)                                                python (N)                                              python (N)
             30       java (N)                                            25    java (N)                                           30   java (N)
                      js (N)                                                    js (N)                                                  js (N)
             25       multi (P)                                                 multi (P)                                          25   multi (P)
                                                                          20
    Pass@1


                                                                 Pass@1


                                                                                                                          Pass@1


                      python (P)                                                python (P)                                              python (P)
             20       java (P)                                                  java (P)                                           20   java (P)
                                                                          15
             15       js (P)                                                    js (P)                                                  js (P)
                                                                                                                                   15
                                                                          10
             10                                                                                                                    10
              5                                                            5                                                        5
              0                                                            0                                                        0
                     125M           672M            2.7B   13B                 125M          672M            2.7B   13B                 125M         672M            2.7B   13B
                                           Models                                                   Models                                                  Models
                                    MBPHP dataset                                            MBRBP dataset                                           MBKP dataset
                       multi (N)                                          6    multi (N)                                                multi (N)
             17.5                                                                                                                  14
                       python (N)                                              python (N)                                               python (N)
             15.0      java (N)                                           5    java (N)                                            12   java (N)
                       js (N)                                                  js (N)                                                   js (N)
             12.5      multi (P)                                          4    multi (P)                                           10   multi (P)
    Pass@1


                                                                 Pass@1


                                                                                                                          Pass@1


                       python (P)                                              python (P)                                               python (P)
             10.0      java (P)                                                java (P)                                             8   java (P)
                                                                          3
                       js (P)                                                  js (P)                                                   js (P)
              7.5                                                                                                                   6
                                                                          2
              5.0                                                                                                                   4
              2.5                                                         1                                                         2
              0.0                                                         0                                                         0
                      125M          672M            2.7B   13B                 125M          672M            2.7B   13B                 125M         672M            2.7B   13B
                                           Models                                                   Models                                                  Models


                  Figure 22: Pass@1 measured on nominal datasets (N) and perturbed datasets (P) across
                  different model sizes for each dataset.


             §
                  https://github.com/GEM-benchmark/NL-Augmenter


                                                                                                44
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     J.3   Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

     In this subsection, we provide qualitative examples to illustrate the three types of perturbations
     applied to the datasets. A successful and a failure MBPP sample completions before and after each
     type of perturbation are provided based on the code completion results by 672M python model
     on MBPP dataset. We performed similar perturbations for all the other datasets for robustness
     evaluation (quantitative results shown in Section J.2).
     MBPP Example 1 for Back Translation Paraphrasing
 1   [672M_python completion on normal prompt] (passed: True)
 2   def left_Rotate(n,d):
 3       """
 4       Write a python function to left rotate the bits of a given number.
 5       >>> left_Rotate(16,2)
 6       64
 7       >>> left_Rotate(10,2)
 8       40
 9       >>> left_Rotate(99,3)
10       792
11       """
12   ### Begin of code completion ###
13       return n << d
14   ### End of code completion ###
15
16
17   [672M_python completion on perturbed prompt] (passed: False)
18   def left_Rotate(n,d):
19       """
20       Write a Python function to rotate the bits of a given number to the left.
21       >>> left_Rotate(16,2)
22       64
23       >>> left_Rotate(10,2)
24       40
25       >>> left_Rotate(99,3)
26       792
27       """
28   ### Begin of code completion ###
29       return n >> d | (n & (1 << d))
30   ### End of code completion ###


     MBPP Example 2 for Character Case Changing
 1   [672M_python completion on normal prompt] (passed: True)
 2   def text_match_string(text):
 3    """
 4        Write a function that matches a word at the beginning of a string.
 5        >>> text_match_string(" python")
 6        (’Not matched!’)
 7        >>> text_match_string("python")
 8        (’Found a match!’)
 9        >>> text_match_string(" lang")
10        (’Not matched!’)
11        """
12   ### Begin of code completion ###
13        return "Not matched!" if text.startswith(" ") else "Found a match!"
14   ### End of code completion ###
15
16   [672M_python completion on perturbed prompt] (passed: False)
17   def text_match_string(text):
18       """
19       Write a function that matches a word at the BeginNing of a strinG.
20       >>> text_match_string(" python")
21       (’Not matched!’)
22       >>> text_match_string("python")
23       (’Found a match!’)
24       >>> text_match_string(" lang")
25       (’Not matched!’)
26       """
27   ### Begin of code completion ###
28       return "Not matched!"
29   ### End of code completion ###


     MBPP Example 3 for Synonym Substitutions
 1 [672M_python completion on normal prompt] (passed: True)
 2 def check_value(dict, n):
 3     """



                                                    45
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 4       Write a function to check if all values are same in a dictionary.
 5       >>> check_value({’Cierra Vega’: 12, ’Alden Cantrell’: 12, ’Kierra Gentry’: 12, ’Pierre Cox
          ’: 12},10)
 6       False
 7       >>> check_value({’Cierra Vega’: 12, ’Alden Cantrell’: 12, ’Kierra Gentry’: 12, ’Pierre Cox
          ’: 12},12)
 8       True
 9       >>> check_value({’Cierra Vega’: 12, ’Alden Cantrell’: 12, ’Kierra Gentry’: 12, ’Pierre Cox
          ’: 12},5)
10       False
11       """
12   ### Begin of code completion ###
13       for key in dict:
14           if dict[key] != n:
15               return False
16       return True
17   ### End of code completion ###
18
19 [672M_python completion on perturbed prompt] (passed: False)
20 def check_value(dict, n):
21     """
22     Write a function to check if all values are like in a dictionary.
23     >>> check_value({’Cierra Vega’: 12, ’Alden Cantrell’: 12, ’Kierra Gentry’: 12, ’Pierre Cox
          ’: 12},10)
24       False
25       >>> check_value({’Cierra Vega’: 12, ’Alden Cantrell’: 12, ’Kierra Gentry’: 12, ’Pierre Cox
          ’: 12},12)
26       True
27       >>> check_value({’Cierra Vega’: 12, ’Alden Cantrell’: 12, ’Kierra Gentry’: 12, ’Pierre Cox
          ’: 12},5)
28       False
29       """
30   ### Begin of code completion ###
31       for key in dict:
32           if type(dict[key]) != int:
33               return False
34       return True
35   ### End of code completion ###


                                                    46
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K     C ODE I NSERTION : I -MBXP
K.1    DATASET P REPARATION

Assume there are n lines of code in canonical solution, we skip problems with n < 2 and randomly
mask out m = [1, 8] consecutive lines for remaining problems. For each problem, we run multiple
times (say, 1 if n < 5, 2 if n < 12, otherwise 3) to generate variants and remove duplicate masks.
We report data statistice in Table 3.

      Table 3: Data statistics for i-MBxP. We report total number of problems and the number
      of problems as a function of the number of insertion lines.

                            total    0     1       2       3       4     5       6     7
               i-MBPP       1489     1     922     246     138     69    62      28    23
               i-MBJP       1813     19    805     328     217     172   119     114   39
               i-MBJSP      1521     38    739     266     159     138   83      71    27

K.2    E VALUATION S ETUP

We evaluate InCoder-6.7B model (Fried et al., 2022) pretrained on 159 GB of code, 52 GB in
Python and 107 GB in other 28 languages, and 57 GB of text content from StackOverflow. We
do greedy search and report averaged execution accuracy over all problems. We feed a sequence
left <Mask:0> right <Mask:0> to the model as prompt, where left denotes the right
context and <Mask:0> denotes a sentinel token of Incoder model. We apply two stopping criteria:
(1) <EOM> is generated and (2) any token from the predefined list ["\nclass", "\ndef",
"\n#", "\nif"] is generated for Python or braces that close the function scope for Java and
Javascript. After that, we match generated tokens with right context and remove duplicated tokens.
We compare it against left-right (L-R) baseline where we feed left to the model as prompt and
follow the same stopping criteria.

K.3    E VALUATION R ESULTS

Results in Table 4 show that right context can significantly boost performance across all languages.
We also studied the effect of the number of lines of right context and observed increasing accuracy
as we add more lines of right context (in Table 5), which is intuitive since more context is beneficial.
Furthermore, qualitative examples (K.4) show that models are able to leverage right context to fill in
the blank. In example example 1, given index j and k in the right context, InCoder model can fill in
two inner loops L15-L16. Otherwise, it fails to do so. In example 2, given add operator in the right
context, the InCoder model can mimic the behavior in L33-L38. Otherwise, model might generate
irrelevant operator remove. In example 3, given result[char] = 1 in the right context, InCoder
model generate result[char]+ = 1. Otherwise, the model will replace 1 with countStr[char]
which results in wrong outputs.

                   Table 4: Pass@1 accuracy on code insertion datasets: i-MbXP

                           Model          i-MBPP         i-MBJSP     i-MBJP
                           L-R            30.1           48.65       41.7
                           Insertion      37.07          55.68       57.41

                      Table 5: Pass@1 vs the number of lines of right context.

                           dataset     0         1       2       3       ALL
                           i-MBPP      30.1      32.1    35.6    36.4    37.07

K.4    Q UALITATIVE EXAMPLES FOR I -MBXP

The example below shows that the model is able to use the right context information and generate
appropriate insertion code that are consistent with the right context. In contrast, the left-to-right


                                                    47
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     approach does not make use of the right context which leads to a very different implementation that
     would not be consistent with the right context.
     Example 1: Python insertion mode
 1 def find_triplet_array(A, arr_size, sum):
 2         """
 3         Write a function to find if there is a triplet in the array whose sum is equal to a
         given value.
 4         >>> find_triplet_array([1, 4, 45, 6, 10, 8], 6, 22)
 5         (4, 10, 8)
 6         >>> find_triplet_array([12, 3, 5, 2, 6, 9], 6, 24)
 7         (12, 3, 9)
 8         >>> find_triplet_array([1, 2, 3, 4, 5], 5, 9)
 9         (1, 3, 5)
10         """
11
12         for i in range( 0, arr_size-2):
13 ### begin of insertion ###
14                 for j in range( i+1, arr_size-1):
15                          for k in range( j+1, arr_size):
16 ### end of insertion ###
17                                  if A[i] + A[j] + A[k] == sum:
18                                          return A[i],A[j],A[k]
19                                          return True
20         return False


     Example 1: Python left-to-right mode
 1 ### begin of left-right ###
 2                 if A[i] + A[i+1] + A[i+2] == sum:
 3                         return (A[i], A[i+1], A[i+2])
 4
 5         return None
 6 ### end of left-right ###


     Example 2: Java insertion mode
 1   import java.io.*;
 2   import java.lang.*;
 3   import java.util.*;
 4
 5   class CountVariable {
 6
 7       /**
 8        * Write a function to iterate over elements repeating each as many times as its count.
 9        * > CountVariable.countVariable(4, 2, 0, -2)
10        * ["p", "p", "p", "p", "q", "q"]
11        * > CountVariable.countVariable(0, 1, 2, 3)
12        * ["q", "r", "r", "s", "s", "s"]
13        * > CountVariable.countVariable(11, 15, 12, 23)
14        * ["p", "p", "p", "p", "p", "p", "p", "p", "p", "p", "p", "q", "q", "q", "q", "q", "q", "
          q", "q", "q", "q", "q", "q", "q", "q", "q", "r", "r
15   ", "r", "r", "r", "r", "r", "r", "r", "r", "r", "r", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "
          s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s", "s
16   ", "s", "s", "s", "s"]
17        */
18       public static List<String> countVariable(int a, int b, int c, int d) {
19           // Write your code here
20           List<String> finalResult = new ArrayList<>();
21           List<String> countableList = new ArrayList<>();
22           countableList.add("p");
23           countableList.add("q");
24           countableList.add("r");
25           countableList.add("s");
26
27         int countFor = a;
28         for (int index = 0; index < countFor; index++) {
29             finalResult.add(countableList.get(0));
30
31 ### begin of insertion ###
32         }
33
34         countFor = b;
35         for (int index = 0; index < countFor; index++) {
36             finalResult.add(countableList.get(1));
37         }
38 ### end of insertion ###
39         countFor = c;
40         for (int index = 0; index < countFor; index++) {



                                                     48
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


41             finalResult.add(countableList.get(2));
42         }
43
44         countFor = d;
45         for (int index = 0; index < countFor; index++) {
46             finalResult.add(countableList.get(3));
47         }
48
49         return finalResult;
50     }
51 }


  Example 2: left-to-right mode
 1 ### begin of left-right ###
 2             countableList.remove(countableList.get(0));
 3         }
 4         countFor = b;
 5         for (int index = 0; index < countFor; index++) {
 6             finalResult.add(countableList.get(0));
 7             countableList.remove(countableList.get(0));
 8         }
 9         countFor = c;
10         for (int index = 0; index < countFor; index++) {
11             finalResult.add(countableList.get(0));
12             countableList.remove(countableList.get(0));
13         }
14         countFor = d;
15         for (int index = 0; index < countFor; index++) {
16             finalResult.add(countableList.get(0));
17             countableList.remove(countableList.get(0));
18         }
19         return finalResult;
20     }
21 }
22 ### end of left-right ###


  Example 3: JavaScript insertion mode
1 /**
2  * Write a function to find all anagrams of a string in a given list of strings using lambda
       function.
 3  * > anagramLambda(["bcda", "abce", "cbda", "cbea", "adcb"], "abcd")
 4  * ["bcda", "cbda", "adcb"]
 5  * > anagramLambda(["recitals", " python"], "articles")
 6  * ["recitals"]
 7  * > anagramLambda([" keep", " abcdef", " xyz"], " peek")
 8  * [" keep"]
 9  */
10 function anagramLambda(texts, str) {
11   const countFunc = (str) => {
12     let result = {};
13     for (let i = 0; i < str.length; i++) {
14       let char = str[i];
15       if (result[char]) {
16         result[char] += 1;
17       } else {
18         result[char] = 1;
19       }
20     }
21     return result;
22   };
23   const countStr = countFunc(str);
24   return texts.filter((word) => {
25     let result = {};
26     for (let i = 0; i < word.length; i++) {
27       let char = word[i];
28
29 ### begin of insertion ###
30       if (result[char]) {
31         result[char] += 1;
32 ### end of insertion ###
33       } else {
34         result[char] = 1;
35       }
36     }
37     return Object.keys(countStr).every((char) => {
38       return countStr[char] === result[char];
39     });
40   });



                                                 49
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


41 }


  Example 3: JavaScript left-to-right mode
1 ### begin of left-right ###
2       if (result[char]) {
3         result[char] += countStr[char];
4       } else {
5         result[char] = countStr[char];
6       }
7     }
8     return Object.values(result).reduce((a, b) => a + b, 0) === Object.values(countStr).reduce
       ((a, b) => a + b, 0);
 9   });
10 }
11 ### end of left-right ###


                                                 50
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     L     C ODE S UMMARIZATION : S -MBXP
     L.1   DATASET P REPARATION AND E VALUATION S ETUP

     Here we re-purpose the original MBXP datasets for code summarization task. We remove the natural
     language description from the original prompt and use the function signature and the canonical solu-
     tion as the model input for code summarization. To induce the model to generation natural language
     in comments, we design two types of prompt in zero-shot and few-shot setting, respectively.
     Zero-shot Evaluation. In this setting, we append “The above code writes a ” in the format of code
     comment after the original code prompt. For example, in Python, the appended sequence is “# The
     above code writes a ”. See examples in different languages in Section L.3.
     Few-shot Evaluation. In this setting, we select three code-summary pairs and prepend them before
     the original prompt. Examples are shown in Section L.3.
     To evaluate the code summarization performance, we use smoothed BLEU score as the metrics
     following the setting in CodeXGLUE (Lu et al., 2021) that compare the generated outputs with the
     groundtruth docstrings. In MBXP datasets, the summarizations are short paragraphs with one or two
     sentences which makes smoothed BLEU score a suitable metrics (Feng et al., 2020).

     L.2   E VALUATION R ESULTS

     Experimental results are shown in Figure 23 covering Python, JavaScript and Java. Overall, we
     found that performances are improved along with the increasing of the model size. For example, the
     BLEU-4 scores on Python language in 13B, 672M and 125M models are 6.07, 5.59, 3.20 under zero-
     shot settings, and 34.10, 24.72, 20.75 under few-shot settings. We also noticed that multi-lingual
     models achieve better performances compared with monolingual models trained on individual lan-
     guages. An interesting observation is that though the monolingual models are trained on a specific
     language, they can generalize to other languages well when few-shot examples are provided. From
     the table we can also notice that the improvements brought by few-shot settings are more significant
     on larger models. Comparing the multi-lingual models and monolingual models under few-shot
     settings, we found that the multi-lingual models are more robust to the few-shot examples while
     monolingual models in smaller sizes show unstable performances.


                 Figure 23: Code summarization evaluation in BLEU scores for all models.


     L.3   Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES

     Zero-shot Prompt Examples. Here we list some examples in Python, JavaScript and Java to show
     the zero-shot prompts, generation from models and their ground-truth.
 1   Example Python-0
 2   ------ begin of prompt ------
 3   def discriminant_value(x,y,z):
 4       discriminant = (y**2) - (4*x*z)
 5       if discriminant > 0:
 6           return ("Two solutions",discriminant)
 7       elif discriminant == 0:
 8           return ("one solution",discriminant)
 9       elif discriminant < 0:
10           return ("no real solution",discriminant)
11   # The above code writes a
12   ------ end of prompt ------



                                                     51
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


13
14 # Groundtruth: Write a function to calculate the discriminant value.
15
16 # Generation: Write a "function" that returns the value of the discriminant of a quadratic
         equation.
17
18   Example Python-1
19   ------ begin of prompt ------
20   from collections import Counter
21   def add_dict(d1,d2):
22      add_dict = Counter(d1) + Counter(d2)
23      return add_dict
24   # The above code writes a
25   ------ end of prompt ------
26
27   # Groundtruth: Write a function to combine two dictionaries by adding values for common keys.
28   # Generation: Write a "add_dict" function that adds two dictionaries together.

 1   Example Java-0
 2   ------ begin of prompt ------
 3   import java.io.*;
 4   import java.lang.*;
 5   import java.util.*;
 6
 7
 8   class ChangeDateFormat {
 9
10      public static String changeDateFormat(String dt) {
11          String[] tokens = dt.split("-");
12          return tokens[2] + "-" + tokens[1] + "-" + tokens[0];
13      }
14   }
15   // The above code writes a
16   ------ end of prompt ------
17
18   // Groundtruth: Write a function to convert a date of yyyy-mm-dd format to dd-mm-yyyy format.
19   // Generation: Write a .txt file with the date in the format "dd-mm-yyyy"

 1   Example JavaScript-0
 2   ------ begin of prompt ------
 3   function swapList(newlist) {
 4       let first = newlist[0];
 5       let last = newlist[newlist.length - 1];
 6       newlist[0] = last;
 7       newlist[newlist.length - 1] = first;
 8       return newlist;
 9   }
10   // The above code writes a
11   ------ end of prompt ------
12
13 // Groundtruth: Write a javascript function to interchange the first and last elements in a
        list.
14 // Generation: Write a "swap" function that swaps the first and last elements of a list.



     Few-shot Prompt Examples. The following examples show the few-shot prompts in different
     languages.
 1   Example Python-0
 2   ------ begin of prompt ------
 3   # summarize the functionality of the code
 4
 5   # Code
 6   import re
 7   def find_char_long(text):
 8       return (re.findall(r"\b\w{4,}\b", text))
 9   # Summary: Write a function to find all words which are at least 4 characters long in a string
           by using regex.
10   ###
11   # Code
12   def find_Rotations(str):
13       tmp = str + str
14       n = len(str)
15       for i in range(1,n + 1):
16           substring = tmp[i: i+n]
17           if (str == substring):
18                return i
19       return n
20   # Summary: Write a python function to find the minimum number of rotations required to get the
           same string.



                                                    52
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


21   ###
22   # Code
23   def square_nums(nums):
24       square_nums = list(map(lambda x: x ** 2, nums))
25       return square_nums
26   # Summary: Write a function to find squares of individual elements in a list using lambda
          function.
27   ###
28   # Code
29   def check_tuples(test_tuple, K):
30       res = all(ele in K for ele in test_tuple)
31       return (res)
32   # Summary:
33   ------ end of prompt ------
34
35 # Groundtruth: Write a function to check if the given tuple contains only k elements.
36 # Generation: Write a function to check if a tuple is a subset of a list.

 1   Example Java-0
 2   ------ begin of prompt ------
 3   // summarize the functionality of the code
 4
 5   // Code
 6   import java.io.*;
 7   import java.lang.*;
 8   import java.util.*;
 9
10
11   class FindCharLong {
12
13       public static List<String> findCharLong(String text) {
14         List<String> result = new ArrayList<>();
15
16         for (String str : text.split(" ")) {
17           if (str.length() >= 4) {
18             result.add(str);
19           }
20         }
21         return result;
22       }
23   }n// Summary: Write a function to find all words which are at least 4 characters long in a
          string by using rege
24   x.
25   ///
26   // Code
27   import java.io.*;
28   import java.lang.*;
29   import java.util.*;
30
31
32 class FindRotations {
33
34     public static int findRotations(String str) {
35
36         String tmp = str + str;
37         int n = str.length();
38         for (int i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
39             String substring = tmp.substring(i, i + n);
40             if (str.equals(substring)) {
41                 return i;
42             }
43         }
44         return n;
45     }
46 }
47 // Summary: Write a javascript function to find the minimum number of rotations required to
          get the same string
48   .
49   ///
50   // Code
51   import java.io.*;
52   import java.lang.*;
53   import java.util.*;
54
55
56   class SquareNums {
57
58       public static List<Integer> squareNums(List<Integer> nums) {
59
60
61           List<Integer> squareList = new ArrayList<Integer>();



                                                    53
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


62         for (Integer num : nums)
63             squareList.add(num*num);
64
65         return squareList;
66     }
67 }
68 // Summary: Write a function to find squares of individual elements in a list using lambda
          function.
69   ///
70   // Code
71
72   import java.io.*;
73   import java.lang.*;
74   import java.util.*;
75
76
77   class RecurGcd {
78
79       public static int recurGcd(int a, int b) {
80           int low = Math.min(a, b);
81           int high = Math.max(a, b);
82           if (low == 0) {
83               return high;
84           } else if (low == 1) {
85               return 1;
86           }
87           return recurGcd(low, high % low);
88       }
89   }
90   // Summary:
91   ------ end of prompt ------
92
93 // Groundtruth: Write a function to find the greatest common divisor (gcd) of two integers by
        using recursion.
94 // Generation: Write a function to find the greatest common divisor of two numbers.

 1   Example JavaScript-0
 2   ------ begin of prompt ------
 3   // summarize the functionality of the code
 4
 5   // Code
 6   function findCharLong(text) {
 7     let regex = /\b\w{4,}\b/g;
 8     return text.match(regex);
 9   }
10   // Summary: Write a function to find all words which are at least 4 characters long in a
          string by using regex.
11   ///
12   // Code
13   function findRotations(str) {
14       let tmp = str + str
15       let n = str.length
16
17     for (let i = 1; i <= n; i++) {
18         let substring = tmp.substring(i, i + n)
19         if (str === substring) {
20              return i
21         }
22     }
23     return n
24 }
25 // Summary: Write a javascript function to find the minimum number of rotations required to
          get the same string.
26   ///
27   // Code
28   function squareNums(nums) {
29     // Write code here
30     let square_nums = nums.map(function (num) {
31       return num ** 2;
32     });
33     return square_nums;
34   }
35   // Summary: Write a function to find squares of individual elements in a list using lambda
          function.
36   ///
37   // Code
38   function findMin(arr, low, high) {
39       while (low < high) {
40           mid = low + (high - low) >> 1;
41           if (arr[mid] > arr[high]) {
42               low = mid + 1;



                                                      54
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


43          }
44          if (arr[mid] < arr[high]) {
45              high = mid;
46          }
47      }
48      return arr[high];
49   }
50   // Summary:
51   ------ end of prompt ------
52
53 // Groundtruth: Write a javascript function to find the minimum element in a sorted and
        rotated array.
54 // Generation: Write a function to find the minimum element in a list using lambda function.


                                                    55
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M    E VALUATING P UBLIC M ODELS
We used MBXP to evaluate several public models such as OPT (Zhang et al., 2022b), BLOOM
(Mitchell et al., 2022), and CodeGen (Nijkamp et al., 2022). We use pass@1 to evaluate these
models, where we generate the samples using greedy decoding. We generate 256 tokens per example
and truncate the output to one function for evaluations. The trends we observe with public models are
aligned with those observed with our models. In general, we observe a log-linear performance gain
with model sizes, across all model families, and better execution accuracy in in-domain languages.
Among the general large-language models we observe that BLOOM models outperform OPT mod-
els (See Table 6). This can be attributed to the fact that 13.4% of the pretraining data used for
BLOOM models is code, while OPT does not train on code specifically. BLOOM’s pretraining data
includes code in PHP, Java, Python, Javascript, and Ruby among others, making them all in-domain
languages. This explains relatively similar performance across all languages barring Kotlin and
Ruby.
CodeGen models are trained in three stages, first is text pretraining, which is followed by code
pretraining and python-only training. Here pretraining code data includes code in Python, Java,
Javascript, C++, and Go. The CodeGen-multi refers to the models at the end of the code pretraining
stage without the python-only training, while the CodeGen-mono is models at the end of all three
training stages.
Experiments with CodeGen models show similar performance trends as our models listed in Section
4.2. Specifically, we observe that large models show better than log-linear performance on out-
of-domain languages (Kotlin, Java, and PHP). Interestingly, when compared with CodeGen-multi,
CodeGen-mono 16B models show 6%, and 8% improvements on JavaScript, and PHP, respectively
(See Table 6). We speculate the additional training with python data has improved model perfor-
mance in other languages as well.
With few-shot prompting, we observe significant improvements in out-of-domain languages. Specif-
ically, accuracy with Ruby (which is typically confused with python by the models) increased from
3.5% to 16.46% with few-shot prompting on CodeGen-multi models with few-shot learning (See
Table 8). In translation mode, barring Ruby, we find significant improvements in all languages (See
Table 10).


                                                 56
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Table 6: Evaluating pass@1 execution accuracy of publicly available models on MBXP
    using greedy decoding

    Model Family      Model Size     Python    Java    JavaScript   Kotlin   Ruby       PHP
                          350M         1.54     3.21        3.21     0.83     0.00       2.80
                          760M         4.52     4.76        4.66     0.83     0.00       5.90
    BLOOM                  1.3B        5.34     4.66        5.49     2.07     0.00       6.94
                           2.5B        6.88     6.83       10.14     4.66     0.00      11.59
                           6.3B        6.98     7.76        7.35     6.21     0.00       6.94
                           1.3B        0.10     0.00        0.83     0.52     0.00       0.41
                           2.7B        2.05     0.00        1.14     0.93     0.00       0.31
                           6.7B        2.05     1.97        1.35     1.55     0.00       1.66
    OPT
                            13B        1.35     1.35        1.76     2.17     0.00       0.72
                            30B        1.64     1.45        2.69     1.45     0.00       1.55
                            66B        3.70     2.28        3.73     1.76     0.00       2.17
                          350M         7.90     8.17        7.45     1.14     1.04        0.8
                             2B       18.78    19.56       17.70     3.93     4.76       2.90
    CodeGen-multi
                             6B       22.48    21.74       22.87     4.55     4.24       5.90
                            16B       24.22    28.05       26.29     7.04     3.52      10.35
                          350M        18.37     1.86        6.00     1.04     1.55       1.35
                             2B       31.72    16.66       22.04     3.21     2.90       9.21
    CodeGen-mono
                             6B       37.16    19.77       27.74     3.83     1.66      10.14
                            16B       40.55    26.81       32.81     6.63     5.90      18.94
                          125M         6.37     5.59        6.94     1.04     0.21       0.52
                          672M        19.71    17.29       21.43     4.55     1.86       7.76
    Ours-multi
                           2.7B       27.00    22.46       27.23     9.73     3.93      11.28
                            13B       35.32    30.33       36.13    14.18     6.73      18.84
                          125M         8.11     4.35        7.45         -       -          -
                          672M        19.82    11.39       14.39         -       -          -
    Ours-mono
                           2.7B       24.13    15.32       19.67         -       -          -
                            13B       33.57    19.77       23.60         -       -          -



  Model Family      Model Size     go       c++     c#      Typescript   Perl   swift     scala
                         1.3B       0.11     0.35    0.00            0    0.1     0.1      0.52
                         2.7B       0.43     0.47    0.00            0    0.1    0.83      0.21
  OPT
                         6.7B       1.28     1.53    3.31        3.31    0.52    0.93      0.31
                          13B         1.7    1.06    3.31        3.31    0.31    1.97      0.31
                         1.1B        3.3     5.07    0.31        0.31    0.21    0.62      0.21
                         1.7B       4.15     6.01    0.31        0.31     0.1    2.07      0.41
  Bloom
                           3B       6.28     8.61   10.95       10.95    1.55    4.24      0.62
                         7.1B       7.77    15.09   13.84       13.84    3.31    5.07      0.21
                        350M        1.38     5.19    7.13        7.13     0.1    1.14       0.1
                           2B       5.11    17.69   20.76       20.76    0.83    2.59       0.1
  CodeGen-Mono
                           6B       3.83    17.33   19.21       19.21    1.24    4.14         0
                          16B      10.54    29.13   29.96       29.96    2.48    4.55      0.31
                        350M        6.39     9.32    7.13        7.13     0.1    1.66         0
                           2B      12.03    18.04   17.25       17.25    2.07    2.17      0.62
  CodeGen-Multi
                           6B      11.61    17.69   17.46       17.46    2.07     2.8      0.31
                          16B      15.23    26.06   21.49       21.49    7.14    3.62      0.41
                        125M        0.64     1.53    0.62        6.61     0.1    0.41         0
                        672M            0    7.67    4.34       19.83    1.35    1.76      0.52
  Ours
                           2B           0   15.68    8.16       26.14    0.93    3.11         0
                          13B       5.22    18.75   10.54       32.85    4.14    6.52       0.1


                                               57
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Table 7: Evaluating pass@1 execution accuracy of publicly available models on Hu-
    maneval using greedy decoding

 Model Family     Model Size   PY       Java      JS      Kotlin   Ruby     PHP       Perl     Swift   Scala
                        1.1B    3.66     3.73      2.48    0.62    0.00      2.48     0.62     0.62     8.07
                        1.7B    3.66     1.86      4.97    0.62    0.00      4.35     0.00     0.62    24.22
 Bloom
                          3B    7.93     4.97      5.59    2.48    0.00      4.97     0.62     1.24    29.19
                        7.1B    7.93     8.07      6.21    0.62    0.00      3.11     0.62     2.48    34.16
                        1.3B    0.00     0.00      0.62    0.62    0.00      0.00     0.00     0.62     0.00
                        2.7B    0.00     0.00      0.00    0.00    0.00      1.86     0.00     0.00     0.00
 OPT
                        6.7B    0.61     0.62      0.62    0.62    0.00      1.24     0.00     0.62     9.32
                        13B     0.61     0.62      2.48    0.62    0.00      1.24     0.00     0.62    12.42
                       350M    10.37     1.24      3.11    0.00    0.00      0.62     0.00     0.62     5.59
                          2B   20.73     4.97     10.56    1.24    0.00      3.73     1.24     0.62     8.07
 CodeGen-Mono
                          6B   19.51     8.70     11.18    1.24    0.00      4.35     1.24     0.62     6.21
                        16B    22.56    17.39     12.42    0.62    0.00     11.80     2.48     0.62    16.15
                       350M     7.32     4.97      4.35    0.62    0.00      0.62     0.00     0.62     1.86
                          2B   10.98    11.18      6.83    3.11    0.00      1.86     1.24     0.62    21.12
 CodeGen-Multi
                          6B   15.24    10.56     11.80    3.11    0.62      3.73     1.24     0.62    10.56
                        16B    17.07    16.15     16.15    1.86    0.00      5.59     3.11     0.62    16.15
                       125M     7.32     3.73      4.35    1.24    0.00      0.62     0.00     0.62     1.86
                       672M    17.07     9.32     13.04    1.86    0.00      1.86     1.24     0.62     1.24
 Ours
                          2B   19.51    14.29     14.91    1.86    0.00      4.97     0.00     0.62     1.86
                        13B    22.56    22.36     20.50    8.07    0.00     11.80     3.11     0.62     4.35



    Table 8: Evaluating pass@1 execution accuracy of publicly available models on MBXP
    with few-shot prompting using greedy decoding

    Model Family      Model Size       Python     Java    JavaScript      Kotlin     Ruby      PHP
                          350M           7.80     10.56        8.28        2.28       4.24       3.2
                             2B         20.02     22.15       21.43        7.76      12.73       8.8
    Codegen-multi
                             6B         23.10     24.53       24.84       10.66       9.01     13.87
                            16B         26.69     29.92       28.26       11.59      16.46     17.60
                          350M          17.04      3.73        5.18        2.69       4.35      2.69
                             2B         28.95     15.42       15.53        5.69       8.07     11.70
    CodeGen-mono
                             6B         39.53     21.43       19.15        7.14      10.35      16.4
                            16B         46.41     27.64       26.50       11.08      15.11      20.2
                          125M           6.06      7.14        6.94        2.90       2.59      0.93
                          672M          19.40     16.56       19.46        5.90       5.90      8.90
    Ours-multi
                           2.7B         24.23     24.12       27.95       11.08       9.42     14.29
                            13B         31.93     30.75       37.37       15.11      12.53     20.19
                          125M           8.93      5.38        7.35            -         -         -
                          672M          18.89     10.56       16.87            -         -         -
    Ours-mono
                           2.7B         21.77     15.11       21.43            -         -         -
                            13B         31.31     21.22       25.16            -         -         -



  Model Family      Model Size      Go         C++     C#      Typescript     Perl     Swift     Scala
                        350M         1.17       4.25    4.03        3.93      1.45      2.90     28.78
                           2B        5.86      19.34    8.99       16.94      4.97      4.45     26.29
  CodeGen-Mono
                           6B        6.50      19.69   12.71       18.08      3.42      4.24     26.50
                          16B       13.84      32.31   16.63       28.20      8.18      5.49     28.67
                        350M         6.39       9.91    5.68        9.19      1.66      3.62     30.43
                           2B       14.59      19.46   11.05       18.80      4.24      3.83     37.68
  CodeGen-Multi
                           6B       12.78      21.58   13.43       19.83      6.00      4.55     28.26
                          16B       20.77      29.36   17.46       24.38      8.49      4.55     28.57



                                                  58
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Table 9: Evaluating pass@1 execution accuracy of publicly available models on Hu-
    manEval with few-shot prompting using greedy decoding

 Model Family     Model Size   PY      Java    JS      Kotlin      Ruby     PHP      Perl   Swift   Scala
                        350M   12.80    3.11    2.48        1.86   2.48      1.24    0.62    0.62   19.25
                          2B   21.95    8.07   10.56        3.11   3.11      6.83    1.86    0.62   15.53
 CodeGen-Mono
                          6B   23.17    8.07    8.70        3.11   2.48      7.45    1.24    0.62   13.66
                         16B   28.66   16.77   11.18        4.97   5.59      9.94    3.73    1.24   18.63
                        350M    7.93    4.97    4.35        1.86   1.24      1.24    1.24    1.24   22.98
                          2B   13.41   10.56   12.42        4.35   7.45      4.35    4.35    0.62   24.22
 CodeGen-Multi
                          6B   14.02   12.42   11.80        3.11   4.97      3.11    3.73    1.24   13.04
                         16B   20.12   17.39   13.66        4.35   8.07      9.94    5.59    0.62   16.15
                        125M    7.32    4.35    5.59        1.24   0.62      1.86    0.00    0.62    0.62
                        672M   17.07    8.70   11.18        3.73   2.48      4.97    1.24    1.24    1.86
 Ours
                          2B   19.51   14.29   14.91        4.97   3.11      8.07    2.48    1.24    3.11
                         13B   22.56   18.01   26.09        4.97   6.21     10.56    3.72    0.62    5.59


    Table 10: Evaluating pass@1 execution accuracy of publicly available models on MBXP
    in translation mode (Python as a source language).

     Model Family       Model Size     Java    JavaScript     Kotlin      Ruby      PHP     Go
                            350M        3.83       10.24       3.11        4.66      2.07    3.94
                               2B      22.57       22.87       5.18        4.35     21.74    8.41
     CodeGen-Mono
                               6B      30.95       35.92       8.07        6.63     30.23   11.93
                              16B      43.48       54.14      10.56        4.55     36.85   22.36
                            350M        7.35        9.93       1.55        3.83      1.76    7.14
                               2B      23.19       36.12       3.42        4.76     22.46   16.83
     CodeGen-Multi
                               6B      38.41       37.99       6.83        4.66     27.74   20.77
                              16B      44.82       50.10       8.28        5.18     40.17   26.41
                            125M        7.04        9.52       3.21        3.73      0.41    2.77
                            672M       22.98       24.53       7.97        5.07     16.15    6.28
     Ours
                               2B      30.75       28.47      10.56        6.52     33.02    6.92
                              13B      41.93       37.06      14.80        6.73     37.06    8.52



        Model Family    Model Size     C++     C#      Typescript         Perl      Swift   Scala
                            350M        8.37    3.93       11.78           0.21      1.24    0.00
                               2B      30.19   16.01       31.51           4.14      6.83    0.00
        CodeGen-Mono
                               6B      35.14   23.45       36.67           7.56      7.04    0.10
                              16B      49.65   36.67        0.41           7.04     10.97    0.10
                            350M       10.85    1.86        5.89           0.00      0.83    0.00
                               2B      23.00    6.71       10.54           5.18      3.62    0.00
        CodeGen-Multi
                               6B      40.45   22.52       26.96           8.39      6.21    0.10
                              16B      46.58   28.51        5.89          14.18      8.18    0.10
                            125M        1.06    1.76       10.54           0.52      1.76    0.00
                            672M       16.51   10.43       19.11           4.66      3.93    0.10
        Ours
                               2B      28.18   13.33       24.90           5.07      6.52    0.10
                              13B      33.14   25.52       44.52          10.56      8.49    0.10


                                               59
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N       T RAINING

N.1             M ODEL ARCHITECTURE AND TRAINING DETAILS

We train using 210B tokens for mono-lingual models, and 630B tokens for multi-lingual models
with 210B tokens from each language. Across all models, we use max sequence length of 2048,
and use larger batch size for larger models, while reducing max steps accordingly to train all models
with same amount of per-language tokens. For example, for 13B, we use batch size of 1024 and
max steps of 100,000 with 2048 sequence length, resulting in total 210B training tokens for each
language. For multi-lingual models, there are three languages and we increase max steps by three
times to 630B tokens. We use AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2018) with β1 = 0.9,
β2 = 0.95, and ϵ = 10−8 . We use warm up steps of 2000 steps with cosine annealing after peak
learning rate, and the mininum learning rate being 10% of corresponding peak learning rate, weight
decay of 0.01, and gradient clipping of 1.0. We rescale the initialization weight standard deviation
for larger models following (Shoeybi et al., 2019) for better training stability. Our training pipeline
is based on PyTorch Lightning ¶ and we use bfloat16 (Kalamkar et al., 2019) and DeepSpeed (Rasley
et al., 2020) for training optimization. We randomly split 0.1% data as validation set. The validation
loss curve for different sizes of multi-lingual and monolingual models are shown in Fig. 24.

                                            Code Pretraining                                                                      Code Pretraining
                                                                  128m multi-python                                                                     672m multi-python
                             1.4                                  128m python                                      1.4                                  672m python
                                                                  128m multi-java                                                                       672m multi-java
                                                                  128m java                                                                             672m java
                                                                  128m multi-javascript                            1.2                                  672m multi-javascript
                             1.2                                  128m javascript                                                                       672m javascript
           validation loss


                                                                                                 validation loss


                                                                                                                   1.0
                             1.0

                                                                                                                   0.8
                             0.8
                                                                                                                   0.6
                             0.6
                                                                                                                   0.4
                                   0   50         100             150            200                                     0   50         100             150            200
                                             # tokens (billion)                                                                    # tokens (billion)

                                            (a) 128M                                                                              (b) 672M
                                            Code Pretraining                                                                      Code Pretraining
                                                                  2.7b multi-python                                                                      13b multi-python
                           1.4                                    2.7b python                                    1.4                                     13b python
                                                                  2.7b multi-java                                                                        13b multi-java
                                                                  2.7b java                                                                              13b java
                           1.2                                    2.7b multi-javascript                          1.2                                     13b multi-javascript
                                                                  2.7b javascript                                                                        13b javascript
         validation loss


                                                                                               validation loss


                           1.0                                                                                   1.0

                           0.8                                                                                   0.8

                           0.6                                                                                   0.6

                           0.4                                                                                   0.4

                                   0   50         100             150           200                                      0   50         100             150           200
                                             # tokens (billion)                                                                    # tokens (billion)

                                             (c) 2.7B                                                                              (d) 13B
        Figure 24: Validation loss curves for 128M, 672M, 2.7B and 13B multi-lingual and mono-
        lingual models.

N.2             O BSERVATIONS ON VALIDATION LOSSES VERSUS PERFORMANCE

We plot the validation loss of multi/mono-lingual models on each programming languages in Figure
25. We can see that the trend of validation loss roughly follows log-linear relationship with respect
to model sizes.
By comparing the validation loss curves between multi-lingual models and mono-lingual models,
we can see that mono-lingual models consistently achieves lower loss than multi-lingual ones. This
    ¶
        https://www.pytorchlightning.ai/



                                                                                          60
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                               Code Pretraining
                                                                       multi-python
                                        1.0                            python
                                                                       multi-java
                                        0.9                            java
                                                                       multi-javascript
                                        0.8                            javascript


                      validation loss
                                        0.7

                                        0.6

                                        0.5

                                        0.4

                                        0.3
                                                   100                         101
                                              # parameters (Billion)
     Figure 25: Validation loss vs number of parameters for 128M, 672M, 2.7B and 13B multi-
     lingual and mono-lingual models.

demonstrate that it is more difficult for the same size of model to fit multi-lingual datasets since with
limited model capacity it needs to learn more diverse information while mono-lingual models can
be more concentrated.
However, although the validation loss of mono-lingual models is generally lower, from Section
4.2, we observe that in terms of execution performance pass@k, multi-lingual models actually out-
perform mono-lingual ones especially when model sizes go beyond 672M. In fact, as model size
increases, the improvement of multi-lingual models over mono-lingual models get more and more
significant. The reason could be that although models get distracted to fit multiple languages, the
knowledge sharing across different languages helps model to learn better in solving problems. For
example, similar tasks might exist in different programming languages, hence models are easier to
learn to transfer from one language to another. And larger models have better capability in knowl-
edge sharing/transfer learning, with the evidence that the zero-shot learning performance of multi-
lingual models on unseen programming languages get significantly better than mono-lingual ones
as model sizes increases.


                                                      61
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O     DATASET C ONVERSION F RAMEWORK
In this section, we describe a dataset conversion framework that transforms an execution-based
evaluation in one programming language to another. In particular, we focus on a function completion
format of execution-based evaluation as shown in Figure 2. Each problem in a function completion
dataset consists of a prompt, a test statement, and a canonical solution. The prompt contains a
function signature along with a docstring describing the desired functionality of the code. The
canonical solution is an example of a function body that fulfills such functionality, usually written
by human annotators. Given a candidate function body generated by the model, we can test whether
the corresponding function is correct by executing the test statement against the candidate function.
To construct a evaluation dataset for function completion in a new language, we recognize that
it is sufficient to convert only the prompts and the test statements (Section O.1). That is, we do
not need to transform the canonical solutions, since they are simply examples and are not used
to measure correctness in the test-based framework. This key feature of a test-based evaluation
makes it possible to perform mapping of an evaluation set from one language to many others by
static analyses, as outline below. For other code-related evaluations that require access to canonical
solutions, we synthesize solutions by generating many code versions based on the converted prompt
and use our converted test statement to filter for correctness (Section O.1.11).

O.1     L ANGUAGE C ONVERSION OF P ROMPTS AND T EST C ASES

O.1.1    F ORMAT CHOICE
The purpose of this work is to build datasets that allow us to measure multi-lingual code generation
abilities. The function completion format helps steer the model to generate code in a specific lan-
guage since the prompt consists of a partial function that has already been started, i.e. a function
signature. This is in contrast to other formats such as that of the original MBPP where the prompt
does not consist of a function signature, but contains more implicit information such as assert state-
ments, example function calls, and a description such as “Write code in Python” (see Appendix
R.1.1 for examples). Compared to other formats, the execution-based function completion aligns
well with how an ML-driven model would perform code suggestion in a typical coding environ-
ment. Therefore, we process our converted datasets and the original datasets (MBPP, MathQA) to
be of this format, except for the original HumanEval dataset whose format is already consistent.

O.1.2    I NFERRING ARGUMENT AND RETURN TYPES
This step is applicable for statically typed target languages such as Java, C#, etc. The process
starts from inferring the types of function arguments, which can be done by inspecting the argument
values. We perform mapping of types from Python to types in a target language; for instance, to
convert to Java, we map list → ArrayList or dict → HashMap. Values for different test
cases can have different types, therefore we infer the common superclass of all observed types for
each argument. Since there can also be many levels of types, due to containers such as list or sets,
we recursively infer the types among each level to be consistent. For example, “list of list” and “list
of object” has a common type of “list of object”. The return type is inferred via expected return
values in the test cases.

O.1.3    S UPPORTED T YPES OF O BJECT C ONVERSION
Our conversion framework depends on the structure of basic programming problems which involve
object types of the following:

        • Integer or long version of integer
        • Float or double
        • Boolean
        • String. We assume any string of single character is also of type string for the purpose of
          conversion.
        • None. This depends whether the target language also supports None/null/nil types.


                                                  62
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        • List. Tuples in Python are also converted to list in all languages.
        • Dictionary
        • Set

For any container type, we recursively perform object conversion for all nested structure within the
container.

O.1.4    C ONSTRUCTING REPRESENTATIONS OF CODE OBJECTS

We convert the argument and return values from Python to a target language by generating strings
that represent the target language’s objects. For example, the object [1,2,3] in Python is con-
verted to Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3) in Java, as shown in Figure 2. We recursively construct
container elements for any nested structures.

O.1.5    C ONVERTING TEST STATEMENT

We construct objects for function argument inputs, using above information regarding constructed
objects and types, as well as expected output. We build the test statement in a target language using
appropriate assertion to match the returned value with the expected output. We perform deep object
comparison with an appropriate comparator for each language.

O.1.6    P ROMPT CONSTRUCTION

We ensure that the converted function, argument, and class names are stylistically appropriate for
each language, e.g. camel case versus snake case, etc. We construct function call examples in the
docstring to look representative without being too verbose, e.g., we use [1,2,3] in Java’s docstring
to represent a list, instead of an actual ArrayList. We avoid using language-reserve words for
variable names such as end for Ruby or char for Java or C++ and escape certain substrings that
are keywords such as /* or //.
We also deal with all formats in the prompt with great care. For instance, docstrings for Java and
JavaScript are to be before the function signature, following the convention. For Java, this is crucial,
otherwise it would be too out of distribution and the model would not generate anything, if docstring
is below function signature.

O.1.7    D OCSTRING AND NATURAL LANGUAGE CONVERSION

The natural language statements for datasets such as MBPP can contain python-specific statements
that might not be applicable to Java or Javascript such as “Write a function in Python to ...” or “...
if the object does not exist, return None”. We substitute ”Python” with the target language name,
”None” as appropriate null values.

O.1.8    VALIDATION

We validate that converted objects, test statements and function signatures parse and/or compile with
respect to each language.

O.1.9    Q UALITY C HECK VIA R EVIEWERS

To gauge the quality of our conversion, we also request annotators to manually review the converted
programming problems in sample languages, namely, Java and JavaScript. We ask language experts
to identify issues with converted examples consisting of natural language statement, test cases, and
function signature and use this process to help iteratively improve our conversion algorithm. For
the final review, annotators have not found issues specifically related to language conversion, but
observed ambiguity in some cases attributed to the original dataset. In the future, any updates to
the original datasets can propagated to all converted languages programmatically. We provide the
detailed analysis of evaluation by annotators in Appendix Q.


                                                   63
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     O.1.10    C OMPARISON TO OFF - THE - SHELF ML TRANSLATOR
     We find ML translators to be insufficient to perform the dataset conversion, due to limited support
     for language pairs, restriction on format, as well as transformation errors related to types and object
     construction. In contrast, our framework can convert data to many target languages and does not have
     non-deterministic errors related to type inference or object mapping. We provide further discussion
     and examples in Appendix O.2.

     O.1.11    S YNTHETIC CANONICAL SOLUTIONS
     The availability of canonical solutions in each converted language can open up the possibilities
     to perform other types of evaluation. To generate such synthetic solutions for each language, we
     sample up to 10, 000 versions of code per problem and filter them for correctness with our converted
     tests. In order to generate at least one correct solution for as many problems as possible, we use
     both the function completion and zero-shot translation settings (see Section 4.3) where we prepend
     the Python solution, provided in the original datasets by human annotators, to the beginning of
     the function signature prompt. With high-temperature sampling, we are able to generate correct
     solutions for a large portion of all problems, with 96% coverage for JavaScript, 93% for Java, and
     even on an out-of-domain language such as PHP with 93% coverage (more details in Appendix P).

     O.2   P OTENTIAL U SE OF T RANSCODER FOR DATASET C ONSTRUCTION

     We conduct preliminary experiments using a publicly available code translation model Transcoder
     (Lachaux et al., 2020b) to perform dataset conversion. Overall, there are two main limitations of this
     approach. First, these models typically support a limited number of language pairs, which means that
     we would not be able to perform conversion to 10+ languages like with our proposed framework.
     Second, we find that there are some common errors associated with type inference, for instance,
     when the return type should be boolean, the translation model can predict int as a return type.
     These types of error cause false negatives and can impact overall quality of the converted datasets. In
     contrast, we do not have these types of errors in our conversion framework due to the static analysis
     implementation.
     In particular, Transcoder (Lachaux et al., 2020b) supports Python, Java, and C++. In this setup,
     we use a complete function in Python as an input prompt. The transcoder model then generates a
     complete function in Java and C++. Here, we are interested in whether the model is able to translate
     function signatures that capture necessary information.

     Example 1 While the model seems able to translate the function signature, the function name for
     Java and C++ appear to be in snake case, which is not the standard for these languages.
 1   ==================== TASK_ID: 6 ===========================
 2   -------------------- Input in Python -----------------------
 3   def differ_At_One_Bit_Pos(a,b):
 4       return is_Power_Of_Two(a ˆ b)
 5   -------------------- Translation in Java -------------------
 6   public static boolean differAt_One_Bit_Pos ( int a , int b ) {
 7     .
 8     .
 9   -------------------- Translation in C++ --------------------
10   bool Differ_At_One_Bit_Pos ( int a , int b ) {
11     .
12     .



     Example 2 The model seems to adapt the function name to be entirely different, i.e.,
     is_undulating to isAbundulating or isSkundulating.
 1   ==================== TASK_ID: 92 ==========================
 2   -------------------- Input in Python -----------------------
 3   def is_undulating(n):
 4     if (len(n) <= 2):
 5       return False
 6     for i in range(2, len(n)):
 7       if (n[i - 2] != n[i]):
 8         return False
 9     return True
10   -------------------- Translation in Java -------------------



                                                       64
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


11 public static boolean isAbundulating ( int [ ] n ) {
12   .
13   .
14 -------------------- Translation in C++ --------------------
15 bool isSkundulating ( string n ) {
16   .
17   .



     Example 3 Incorrect type inference where a nested list nestedList is Python is mapped to a
     string in C++, or simply a flat list of strings in Java.
 1   ==================== TASK_ID: 111 =========================
 2   -------------------- Input in Python -----------------------
 3   def common_in_nested_lists(nestedlist):
 4       result = list(set.intersection(*map(set, nestedlist)))
 5       return result
 6   -------------------- Translation in Java -------------------
 7   public static String commonInNestedLists ( String [ ] nestedlist ) {
 8     .
 9     .
10   -------------------- Translation in C++ --------------------
11   string commonInNestedLists ( string nestedlist ) {
12     .
13     .



     Example 4 A list test_list is incorrectly inferred to have a type string in C++.
 1   ==================== TASK_ID: 117 (fn: 1_of_1) ====================
 2   -------------------- Input in Python -----------------------
 3   def list_to_float(test_list):
 4     res = []
 5     for tup in test_list:
 6       temp = []
 7       for ele in tup:
 8         if ele.isalpha():
 9           temp.append(ele)
10         else:
11           temp.append(float(ele))
12       res.append((temp[0],temp[1]))
13     return (str(res))
14   -------------------- Translation in Java -------------------
15   public static String listToDouble ( ArrayList < String > testList ) {
16     .
17     .
18
19   -------------------- Translation in C++ --------------------
20   string listToDouble ( string testList ) {
21     .
22     .


     P     S YNTHETIC C ANONICAL S OLUTIONS

     P.1   M ULTI - STAGE DATA BOOTSTRAPPING

     We combine solutions for (1) normal function completion or with few-shot prompting if the language
     is out-of-domain and (2) translation settings. This is because these different generation modes can
     synthetic correct solutions for different problems, according to our evaluation analyses in Section
     4.2. We perform data generation in multiple stages. We first sample n = 100 samples for all cases,
     after which we sample for n = 1000 cases for the problems where we have not found at least one
     correct solution. The last step contains uses n = 10000 samples. We use temperature 0.8, 1.0 and
     1.2 respectively.

     P.2   D ISCUSSION : G ROUND TRUTH ASSUMPTIONS OF TEST CASES

     Our synthetic generation of canonical solutions make heavy use of test cases to filter whether each
     code is correct or not. The process implicitly assumes that the test cases act as a ground truth verifier
     that provides necessary and sufficient conditions for the correctness of each task’s functionality.
     Such assumptions might not hold if the test cases are not thoroughly written in the original dataset.


                                                        65
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In fact, false positives of execution-based datasets can typically occur as indicated in several previous
work (Li et al., 2022a). Our framework do not aim to inject additional knowledge per each test case
but merely acts to translate a task in one language to another, while carrying the information captured
in test cases of the original dataset to the corresponding datasets in other languages. Any corrections
to the benchmark shall be done upstream in the original dataset, and can easily propagate to the
rest of the converted datasets, since the conversion process for prompts and test cases is purely
programmatic. The usefulness of the conversion framework lies in the automated conversion into
many languages which can be repeatedly done if the test cases in original datasets are updated, or
new tasks are added. This helps reduce human effort to perform such manual translation of a dataset
in one language to many others.
One step that can be done to improve thoroughness of the test cases is to use the provided canonical
solutions in the original dataset to synthetically generate additional test cases, with the hope that
additional test cases can provide test coverage for the functionality. However, this proposal also
relies heavily on the canonical solution as the ground truth that captures the true functionality of
the task, which might not necessarily be true since during the annotation process, annotators might
write canonical solutions that are only partially correct but pass the specified test cases. Therefore,
we leave this investigation as future work.


                                                   66
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q    Q UALITY C HECK OF C ONVERTED DATASETS
During the manual review process, we provide the converted programming problem in Java and
Javascript to annotators and ask them to check if the problem is correct and clear. Below we catego-
rize the issues identified by annotators, with examples. Almost all of these cases can be attributed
to the source dataset we use for conversion. On the other hand, the conversion process itself does
not introduce additional errors. For future work, we plan to thoroughly check for errors in the orig-
inal MBPP. Any changes from there can be easily propagated to the converted datasets due to the
automatic conversion.

      • Natural language statement is ambiguous.
       1
       2   import java.io.*;
       3   import java.lang.*;
       4   import java.util.*;
       5
       6
       7   class CountCommon {
       8
       9       /**
      10        * Write a function to count the most common words in a dictionary.
      11        * > CountCommon.countCommon(["red", "green", "black", "pink", "black", "white", "
                black", "eyes", "white", "black", "orange", "pink", "pink", "red", "red", "white
                ", "orange", "white", "black", "pink", "green", "green", "pink", "green", "pink",
                 "white", "orange", "orange", "red"])
      12        * [["pink", 6], ["black", 5], ["white", 5], ["red", 4]]
      13        * > CountCommon.countCommon(["one", "two", "three", "four", "five", "one", "two",
                 "one", "three", "one"])
      14        * [["one", 4], ["two", 2], ["three", 2], ["four", 1]]
      15        * > CountCommon.countCommon(["Facebook", "Apple", "Amazon", "Netflix", "Google",
                "Apple", "Netflix", "Amazon"])
      16        * [["Apple", 2], ["Amazon", 2], ["Netflix", 2], ["Facebook", 1]]
      17        */
      18       public static List<List<Object>> countCommon(List<String> words) {
      19
      20 // Comment: The problem should explicit state to count the 4 most common words.


      • Spelling mistake.
       1
       2 /**
       3  * Write a javascript function to count numbers whose oth and nth bits are set.
       4  * > countNum(2)
       5  * 1
       6  * > countNum(3)
       7  * 2
       8  * > countNum(1)
       9  * 1
      10  */
      11 function countNum(n) {
      12
      13 // Comment: "oth" should be "0th"


      • One or more test cases are wrong.
       1
       2   import java.io.*;
       3   import java.lang.*;
       4   import java.util.*;
       5
       6
       7   class FirstRepeatedChar {
       8
       9       /**
      10        * Write a java function to find the first repeated character in a given string.
      11        * > FirstRepeatedChar.firstRepeatedChar("Google")
      12        * "o"
      13        * > FirstRepeatedChar.firstRepeatedChar("data")
      14        * "a"
      15        * > FirstRepeatedChar.firstRepeatedChar("python")
      16        * "\x00"
      17        */
      18       public static String firstRepeatedChar(String str) {
      19
      20   // Comment: The last test case is incorrect.
      21


                                                 67
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  R     DATASETS
  R.1     MBXP

  Below, we show examples of the samples from the original dataset as well as the converted dataset.

        Table 11: MBXP Datasets in 10+ Languages. The dataset names are loosely inspired
        by each language’s file extension. For instance, the Scala or Perl dataset is MBSCP or
        MBPKP due to the file extension being .sc or .pl.

                                     Language     Dataset Name
                                       Python        MBPP
                                        Java         MBJP
                                     JavaScript      MBJSP
                                     TypeScript     MBTSP
                                         Go          MBGP
                                         C#         MBCSP
                                        PHP         MBPHP
                                        Ruby        MBRBP
                                       Kotlin        MBKP
                                        C++         MBCPP
                                        Perl        MBPLP
                                        Scala       MBSCP
                                        Swift       MBSWP


  R.1.1    MBPP: P YTHON
  Note that we convert the original MBPP dataset (Austin et al., 2021) which has a slightly different
  format into HumanEval format (Chen et al., 2021) with function signature and docstring, as shown
  below. The use of function signature and docstring in the formatted MBPP makes it consistent with
  the converted datasets in all other languages.
1 # ---------------------     MBPP/1:   PROMPT        ---------------------
2 def min_cost(cost, m, n):
3     """
4     Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
        cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 5     >>> min_cost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 6     8
 7     >>> min_cost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 8     12
 9     >>> min_cost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
10     16
11     """
12 # ---------------------      CANONICAL SOLUTION      ---------------------
13     R = 3
14     C = 3
15
16     tc = [[0 for x in range(C)] for x in range(R)]
17     tc[0][0] = cost[0][0]
18     for i in range(1, m+1):
19         tc[i][0] = tc[i-1][0] + cost[i][0]
20     for j in range(1, n+1):
21         tc[0][j] = tc[0][j-1] + cost[0][j]
22     for i in range(1, m+1):
23         for j in range(1, n+1):
24             tc[i][j] = min(tc[i-1][j-1], tc[i-1][j], tc[i][j-1]) + cost[i][j]
25     return tc[m][n]
26
27 # ---------------------             TEST             ---------------------
28
29 def check(candidate):
30     assert candidate([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2) == 8
31     assert candidate([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2) == 12
32     assert candidate([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2) == 16



  R.1.2    MBJP: JAVA


                                                  68
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 1   // ---------------------       MBJP/1:   PROMPT        ---------------------
 2   import java.io.*;
 3   import java.lang.*;
 4   import java.util.*;
 5   import java.math.*;
 6
 7
 8   class MinCost {
 9
10       /**
11         * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the
          given cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
12         * > MinCost.minCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
13         * 8
14         * > MinCost.minCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
15         * 12
16         * > MinCost.minCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
17         * 16
18         */
19       public static int minCost(List<List<Integer>> cost, int m, int n) {
20   // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
21            int[][] dp = new int[m][n];
22            for (int i = 0; i < m; i++) {
23                for (int j = 0; j < n; j++) {
24                    if (i == 0 && j == 0) {
25                        dp[i][j] = cost.get(i).get(j);
26                    } else if (i == 0) {
27                        dp[i][j] = dp[i][j - 1] + cost.get(i).get(j);
28                    } else if (j == 0) {
29                        dp[i][j] = dp[i - 1][j] + cost.get(i).get(j);
30                    } else {
31                        dp[i][j] = Math.min(dp[i - 1][j], dp[i][j - 1]) + cost.get(i).get(j);
32                    }
33                }
34            }
35            return dp[m - 1][n - 1];
36       }
37   }
38   // ---------------------               TEST            ---------------------
39   class Main {
40       public static boolean compare(Object obj1, Object obj2) {
41            return obj1.equals(obj2);
42       }
43
44       public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
45            int x0 = MinCost.minCost(Arrays.asList(Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3), Arrays.asList(4, 8, 2),
            Arrays.asList(1, 5, 3)), 2, 2);
46            if (!(compare(x0, 8))) {
47                throw new java.lang.Exception("Exception -- test case 0 did not pass. x0 = " + x0)
          ;
48            }
49
50             int x1 = MinCost.minCost(Arrays.asList(Arrays.asList(2, 3, 4), Arrays.asList(5, 9, 3),
             Arrays.asList(2, 6, 4)), 2, 2);
51             if (!(compare(x1, 12))) {
52                 throw new java.lang.Exception("Exception -- test case 1 did not pass. x1 = " + x1)
         ;
53             }
54
55          int x2 = MinCost.minCost(Arrays.asList(Arrays.asList(3, 4, 5), Arrays.asList(6, 10, 4)
         , Arrays.asList(3, 7, 5)), 2, 2);
56          if (!(compare(x2, 16))) {
57              throw new java.lang.Exception("Exception -- test case 2 did not pass. x2 = " + x2)
         ;
58          }
59
60       }
61 }


     R.1.3     MBJSP: JAVA S CRIPT
 1 // ---------------------     MBJSP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2 /**
 3  * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
          cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 4    * > minCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 5    * 8
 6    * > minCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 7    * 12



                                                       69
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 8    * > minCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
 9    * 16
10    */
11   function minCost(cost, m, n) {
12   // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
13     const dp = new Array(m + 1).fill(0).map(() => new Array(n + 1).fill(0));
14     for (let i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
15       for (let j = 1; j <= n; j++) {
16         dp[i][j] = cost[i - 1][j - 1] + Math.min(dp[i - 1][j], dp[i][j - 1]);
17       }
18     }
19     return dp[m][n];
20   }
21
22   // ---------------------             TEST             ---------------------
23   const _ = require("lodash")
24
25   function compare(object1, object2){
26       return _.isEqual(object1, object2)
27   }
28
29   var x = minCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
30   if(compare(x, 8)){} else { throw ’Error at 1th assert statement. Value = ’ + JSON.stringify(x)
            }
31   var x = minCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
32   if(compare(x, 12)){} else { throw ’Error at 2th assert statement. Value = ’ + JSON.stringify(x
          ) }
33   var x = minCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
34   if(compare(x, 16)){} else { throw ’Error at 3th assert statement. Value = ’ + JSON.stringify(x
          ) }


     R.1.4   MBTSP: T YPE S CRIPT
 1 // ---------------------     MBTSP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2 /**
 3  * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
          cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 4    *
 5    * Examples:
 6    * >>> min_cost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 7    * >>> 8
 8    * >>> min_cost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 9    * >>> 12
10    * >>> min_cost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
11    * >>> 16
12    */
13   const min_cost = function (cost: Array<Array<number>>, m: number, n: number) : number   {
14   // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
15       const dp = [];
16       for (let i = 0; i <= m; i++) {
17           dp[i] = [];
18           for (let j = 0; j <= n; j++) {
19                dp[i][j] = Number.MAX_SAFE_INTEGER;
20           }
21       }
22       dp[0][0] = cost[0][0];
23       for (let i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
24           dp[i][0] = cost[i][0] + dp[i - 1][0];
25       }
26       for (let j = 1; j <= n; j++) {
27           dp[0][j] = cost[0][j] + dp[0][j - 1];
28       }
29       for (let i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
30           for (let j = 1; j <= n; j++) {
31                dp[i][j
32   // ---------------------              TEST            ---------------------
33   import * as assert from ’assert’
34
35   let actual_1 = min_cost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]],2,2);
36   let expected_1 = 8;
37   assert.deepEqual(actual_1, expected_1);
38
39   let actual_2 = min_cost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]],2,2);
40   let expected_2 = 12;
41   assert.deepEqual(actual_2, expected_2);
42
43   let actual_3 = min_cost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]],2,2);
44   let expected_3 = 16;
45   assert.deepEqual(actual_3, expected_3);


                                                    70
    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    R.1.5   MBGP: G O
1   // ---------------------      MBGP/1:   PROMPT        ---------------------
2   package main
3
4   // Code should be written in Go/Golang
5   // Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
         cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 6  // Examples:
 7  // >>> min_cost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 8  // >>> 8
 9  // >>> min_cost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
10  // >>> 12
11  // >>> min_cost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
12  // >>> 16
13  func min_cost (cost [][]int, m int, n int) int {
14  // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
15    R := 3
16    C := 3
17    tc := make([][]int, 0)
18    tc[0][0] := cost[0][0]
19    for i := 1, m {
20      tc[i][0] := tc[i-1][0] + cost[i][0]
21    }
22    for j := 1, n {
23      tc[0][j] := tc[0][j-1] + cost[0][j]
24    }
25    for i := 1, m {
26      for j := 1, n {
27        tc[i][j] := min(tc[i-1][j-1], tc[i-1][j], tc[i][j-1]) + cost[i][j]
28      }
29    }
30    return tc[m][n]
31  }
32  // ---------------------             TEST             ---------------------
33  func deepCompare(a interface{}, b interface{}) bool {
34    aJSON, err := json.Marshal(a)
35    if err != nil {
36      panic(err)
37    }
38    bJSON, err := json.Marshal(b)
39    if err != nil {
40      panic(err)
41    }
42    var a2 interface{}
43    var b2 interface{}
44    err = json.Unmarshal(aJSON, &a2)
45    if err != nil {
46      panic(err)
47    }
48    err = json.Unmarshal(bJSON, &b2)
49    if err != nil {
50      panic(err)
51    }
52    result := reflect.DeepEqual(a2, b2)
53    if result {
54      return true
55    } else {
56      panic(fmt.Sprintf("%v != %v", a, b))
57    }
58  }
59
60 func main() {
61   actual_1 := min_cost([][]int{[]int{1, 2, 3}, []int{4, 8, 2}, []int{1, 5, 3}},2,2)
62   expected_1 := 8
63   deepCompare(actual_1, expected_1)
64
65   actual_2 := min_cost([][]int{[]int{2, 3, 4}, []int{5, 9, 3}, []int{2, 6, 4}},2,2)
66   expected_2 := 12
67   deepCompare(actual_2, expected_2)
68
69   actual_3 := min_cost([][]int{[]int{3, 4, 5}, []int{6, 10, 4}, []int{3, 7, 5}},2,2)
70   expected_3 := 16
71   deepCompare(actual_3, expected_3)
72
73 }


    R.1.6   MBCSP: C#


                                                     71
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 1   // ---------------------     MBCSP/1:   PROMPT        ---------------------
 2   using System;
 3   using System.Collections.Generic;
 4   using System.Linq;
 5   using System.Text.RegularExpressions;
 6
 7   namespace Solution
 8   {
 9       public class Program
10       {
11           /// <summary>
12           /// Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the
           given cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
13           ///
14           /// Examples:
15           /// >>> MinCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
16           /// >>> 8
17           /// >>> MinCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
18           /// >>> 12
19           /// >>> MinCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
20           /// >>> 16
21           /// </summary>
22           public static int MinCost (List<List<int>> cost, int m, int n)
23           {
24   // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
25               // TODO: Write your code here
26               return 0;
27           }
28   // ---------------------             TEST             ---------------------
29           public static void Main(string[] args)
30           {
31               CompareLogic compareLogic = new CompareLogic();
32               var actual1 = MinCost(new List<List<int>> {new List<int> {1,2,3},new List<int>
          {4,8,2},new List<int> {1,5,3}},2,2);
33               var expected1 = 8;
34               var result1 = compareLogic.Compare(actual1, expected1);
35               if (!result1.AreEqual) {throw new Exception("assertion failed");}
36
37              var actual2 = MinCost(new List<List<int>> {new List<int> {2,3,4},new List<int>
         {5,9,3},new List<int> {2,6,4}},2,2);
38              var expected2 = 12;
39              var result2 = compareLogic.Compare(actual2, expected2);
40              if (!result2.AreEqual) {throw new Exception("assertion failed");}
41
42              var actual3 = MinCost(new List<List<int>> {new List<int> {3,4,5},new List<int>
         {6,10,4},new List<int> {3,7,5}},2,2);
43              var expected3 = 16;
44              var result3 = compareLogic.Compare(actual3, expected3);
45              if (!result3.AreEqual) {throw new Exception("assertion failed");}
46
47           }
48      }
49 }


     R.1.7   MBPHP: PHP
 1 // ---------------------     MBPHP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2 /**
 3  * You are an expert PHP programmer, and here is your task.
 4  * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
         cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 5  * php > minCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 6  * 8
 7  * php > minCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 8  * 12
 9  * php > minCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
10  * 16
11  */
12 function minCost($cost, $m, $n) {
13 // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
14 $min = $cost[$m][$n];
15     for ($i = $m + 1; $i < $m + $n; $i++) {
16         for ($j = $i + 1; $j < $m + $n; $j++) {
17             if ($cost[$i][$j] < $min) {
18                  $min = $cost[$i][$j];
19             }
20         }
21     }
22     return $min;



                                                      72
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


23   }
24   // ---------------------             TEST             ---------------------
25   function compare($x, $y) {
26       return $x == $y;
27   }
28
29   $x = minCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2);
30   if (!compare($x, 8)) {
31       throw new Exception("Error at 1th assert statement.");
32   }
33
34   $x = minCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2);
35   if (!compare($x, 12)) {
36       throw new Exception("Error at 2th assert statement.");
37   }
38
39   $x = minCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2);
40   if (!compare($x, 16)) {
41       throw new Exception("Error at 3th assert statement.");
42   }



     R.1.8   MBRBP: RUBY
 1   # ---------------------     MBRBP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2   ##
 3   # You are an expert Ruby programmer, and here is your task.
 4   # Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
          cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 5   # irb> min_cost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 6   # => 8
 7   # irb> min_cost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 8   # => 12
 9   # irb> min_cost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
10   # => 16
11
12   def min_cost(cost, m, n)
13   # --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
14       # Write your code here.
15       if cost[m][n] == 0:
16           return 0
17       if m == 0 and n == 0:
18           return cost[m][n]
19       if m == 0:
20           return cost[m][n] + min_cost(cost, m, n - 1)
21       if n == 0:
22           return cost[m][n] + min_cost(cost, m - 1, n)
23       return cost[m][n] + min(min_cost(cost, m - 1, n), min_cost(cost, m, n - 1))
24   end
25   # ---------------------             TEST              ---------------------
26   x = min_cost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
27   if x != 8
28       raise StandardError, "Error at test case 1"
29   end
30   x = min_cost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
31   if x != 12
32       raise StandardError, "Error at test case 2"
33   end
34   x = min_cost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
35   if x != 16
36       raise StandardError, "Error at test case 3"
37   end



     R.1.9   MBKP: KOTLIN
 1 // ---------------------     MBKP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2 /**
 3  * You are an expert Kotlin programmer, and here is your task.
 4  * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
         cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 5  * >>> minCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 6  * 8
 7  * >>> minCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 8  * 12
 9  * >>> minCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
10  * 16
11  */
12 fun minCost(cost : List<List<Int>>, m : Int, n : Int) : Int {


                                                    73
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


13   // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
14       var dp = Array(m + 1).fill(0).map { Array(n + 1).fill(0) }
15       dp[0][0] = cost[0][0]
16       for (i in 0 until m) {
17           for (j in 0 until n) {
18                if (i == 0 || j == 0) {
19                    dp[i + 1][j + 1] = cost[i][j]
20                } else {
21                    dp[i + 1][j + 1] = cost[i][j] + min(dp[i][j], dp[i][j + 1], dp[i + 1][j])
22                }
23           }
24       }
25       return dp[m][n]
26   }
27   // ---------------------              TEST             ---------------------
28   fun main() {
29       var arg00 : List<List<Int>> = mutableListOf(mutableListOf(1, 2, 3), mutableListOf(4, 8, 2)
          , mutableListOf(1, 5, 3))
30       var arg01 : Int = 2
31       var arg02 : Int = 2
32       var x0 : Int = minCost(arg00, arg01, arg02)
33       if (x0 != 8) {
34           throw Exception("Exception -- test case 0 did not pass. x0 = " + x0)
35       }
36
37      var arg10 : List<List<Int>> = mutableListOf(mutableListOf(2, 3, 4), mutableListOf(5, 9, 3)
         , mutableListOf(2, 6, 4))
38      var arg11 : Int = 2
39      var arg12 : Int = 2
40      var x1 : Int = minCost(arg10, arg11, arg12)
41      if (x1 != 12) {
42          throw Exception("Exception -- test case 1 did not pass. x1 = " + x1)
43      }
44
45      var arg20 : List<List<Int>> = mutableListOf(mutableListOf(3, 4, 5), mutableListOf(6, 10,
         4), mutableListOf(3, 7, 5))
46      var arg21 : Int = 2
47      var arg22 : Int = 2
48      var x2 : Int = minCost(arg20, arg21, arg22)
49      if (x2 != 16) {
50          throw Exception("Exception -- test case 2 did not pass. x2 = " + x2)
51      }
52
53 }


     R.1.10   MBCPP: C++
 1   // ---------------------     MBCPP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2   #include <bits/stdc++.h>
 3   using namespace std;
 4
 5
 6   /**
 7    * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
          cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 8    * > minCost(vector<vector<int>>{{1, 2, 3}, {4, 8, 2}, {1, 5, 3}}, 2, 2)
 9    * 8
10    * > minCost(vector<vector<int>>{{2, 3, 4}, {5, 9, 3}, {2, 6, 4}}, 2, 2)
11    * 12
12    * > minCost(vector<vector<int>>{{3, 4, 5}, {6, 10, 4}, {3, 7, 5}}, 2, 2)
13    * 16
14    */
15   int minCost(vector<vector<int>> cost, int m, int n) {
16
17 // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
18     vector<int> dp(m + 1, n + 1);
19     dp[0][0] = 0;
20     for (int i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
21         dp[i][0] = dp[i - 1][0] + cost[i - 1][0];
22     }
23     for (int j = 1; j <= n; j++) {
24         dp[0][j] = dp[0][j - 1] + cost[0][j - 1];
25     }
26     for (int i = 1; i <= m; i++) {
27         for (int j = 1; j <= n; j++) {
28             dp[i][j] = cost[i - 1][j - 1] + Math.min(dp[i - 1][j], dp[i][j - 1]);
29         }
30     }
31     return dp[m][n];



                                                    74
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


32   }
33
34   // ---------------------             TEST             ---------------------
35
36   template <typename T> bool compare(T a, T b){
37       return a == b;
38   }
39
40   int main(int argc, char* argv[]) {
41       int x0 = minCost(vector<vector<int>>{{1, 2, 3}, {4, 8, 2}, {1, 5, 3}}, 2, 2);
42       if (!(compare(x0, 8))) {
43           throw runtime_error("Exception -- test case 0 did not pass.");
44       }
45
46       int x1 = minCost(vector<vector<int>>{{2, 3, 4}, {5, 9, 3}, {2, 6, 4}}, 2, 2);
47       if (!(compare(x1, 12))) {
48           throw runtime_error("Exception -- test case 1 did not pass.");
49       }
50
51       int x2 = minCost(vector<vector<int>>{{3, 4, 5}, {6, 10, 4}, {3, 7, 5}}, 2, 2);
52       if (!(compare(x2, 16))) {
53           throw runtime_error("Exception -- test case 2 did not pass.");
54       }
55
56       return 0;
57   }



     R.1.11   MBPLP: P ERL
 1 # ---------------------      MBPLP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2 # You are an expert Perl programmer, and here is your task.
 3 # Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
          cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 4   # >>> min_cost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)
 5   # 8
 6   # >>> min_cost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 7   # 12
 8   # >>> min_cost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
 9   # 16
10   sub min_cost
11   {
12       my ($cost, $m, $n) = @_;
13
14   # --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
15     my $min = 0;
16     my $path = 0;
17     my $i = 0;
18     my $j = 0;
19     my $min_path = 0;
20     my $min_i = 0;
21     my $min_j = 0;
22     while ($i < $m and $j < $n) {
23       if ($cost[$i][$j] < $min) {
24         $min = $cost[$i][$j];
25         $min_i = $i;
26         $min_j = $j;
27       }
28       if ($i < $m - 1) {
29         $i += 1;
30       } else {
31         $i = 0;
32         $j += 1;
33       }
34     }
35     $path = $min_i + 1;
36     $path
37   # --------------------- CANONICAL SOLUTION ---------------------
38   use Data::Compare;
39   my $arg00 = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]];
40   my $arg01 = 2;
41   my $arg02 = 2;
42   my $x0 = min_cost($arg00, $arg01, $arg02);
43   my $v0 = 8;
44   unless(Compare($x0, $v0)) {
45       die "Exception -- test case 0 did not pass.";
46   }
47   my $arg10 = [[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]];
48   my $arg11 = 2;
49   my $arg12 = 2;



                                                     75
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


50   my $x1 = min_cost($arg10, $arg11, $arg12);
51   my $v1 = 12;
52   unless(Compare($x1, $v1)) {
53       die "Exception -- test case 1 did not pass.";
54   }
55   my $arg20 = [[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]];
56   my $arg21 = 2;
57   my $arg22 = 2;
58   my $x2 = min_cost($arg20, $arg21, $arg22);
59   my $v2 = 16;
60   unless(Compare($x2, $v2)) {
61       die "Exception -- test case 2 did not pass.";
62   }



     R.1.12   MBSCP: S CALA
 1 // ---------------------      MBSCP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2 object Main extends App {
 3     /**
 4      * You are an expert Scala programmer, and here is your task.
 5      * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the
          given cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 6        * >>> minCost(List(List(1, 2, 3), List(4, 8, 2), List(1, 5, 3)), 2, 2)
 7        * 8
 8        * >>> minCost(List(List(2, 3, 4), List(5, 9, 3), List(2, 6, 4)), 2, 2)
 9        * 12
10        * >>> minCost(List(List(3, 4, 5), List(6, 10, 4), List(3, 7, 5)), 2, 2)
11        * 16
12        */
13       def minCost(cost : List[List[Int]], m : Int, n : Int) : Int = {
14
15   // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
16           val dp = Array(m + 1, n + 1)
17           dp(0, 0) = 0
18           for (i <- 0 until m) {
19               for (j <- 0 until n) {
20                   if (i == 0 && j == 0) continue
21                   if (i == 0) dp(i, j) = cost(i, j)
22                   else if (j == 0) dp(i, j) = dp(i - 1, j) + cost(i, j)
23                   else dp(i, j) = min(dp(i - 1, j), dp(i, j - 1)) + cost(i, j)
24               }
25           }
26           println(dp(m, n))
27       }
28   // ---------------------             TEST             ---------------------
29
30   var arg00 : List[List[Int]] = List(List(1, 2, 3), List(4, 8, 2), List(1, 5, 3))
31   var arg01 : Int = 2
32   var arg02 : Int = 2
33   var x0 : Int = minCost(arg00, arg01, arg02)
34   var v0 : Int = 8
35   assert(x0 == v0, "Exception -- test case 0 did not pass. x0 = " + x0)
36
37   var arg10 : List[List[Int]] = List(List(2, 3, 4), List(5, 9, 3), List(2, 6, 4))
38   var arg11 : Int = 2
39   var arg12 : Int = 2
40   var x1 : Int = minCost(arg10, arg11, arg12)
41   var v1 : Int = 12
42   assert(x1 == v1, "Exception -- test case 1 did not pass. x1 = " + x1)
43
44   var arg20 : List[List[Int]] = List(List(3, 4, 5), List(6, 10, 4), List(3, 7, 5))
45   var arg21 : Int = 2
46   var arg22 : Int = 2
47   var x2 : Int = minCost(arg20, arg21, arg22)
48   var v2 : Int = 16
49   assert(x2 == v2, "Exception -- test case 2 did not pass. x2 = " + x2)
50
51   }



     R.1.13   MBSWP: S WIFT
 1 // ---------------------      MBSWP/1:   PROMPT       ---------------------
 2 /**
 3  * You are an expert Swift programmer, and here is your task.
 4  * Write a function to find the minimum cost path to reach (m, n) from (0, 0) for the given
         cost matrix cost[][] and a position (m, n) in cost[][].
 5   * >>> minCost([[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]], 2, 2)



                                                    76
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 6  * 8
 7  * >>> minCost([[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]], 2, 2)
 8  * 12
 9  * >>> minCost([[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]], 2, 2)
10  * 16
11  */
12 func minCost(cost : [[Int]], m : Int, n : Int) -> Int {
13 // --------------------- COMPLETION (model generated) ---------------------
14     if (m == 0 || n == 0) {
15         return 0;
16     }
17     if (m == 1 || n == 1) {
18         return cost[0][1];
19     }
20     if (cost[m][n] != -1) {
21         return cost[m][n];
22     }
23     cost[m][n] = min(minCost(cost, m - 1, n) + cost[m][n], minCost(cost, m, n - 1) + cost[m][n
            ]);
24         return cost[m][n];
25   }
26   // --------------------- CANONICAL SOLUTION ---------------------
27   var arg00 : [[Int]] = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 8, 2], [1, 5, 3]]
28   var arg01 : Int = 2
29   var arg02 : Int = 2
30   var x0 : Int = minCost(cost : arg00, m : arg01, n : arg02)
31   var v0 : Int = 8
32   assert(x0 == v0, "Exception -- test case 0 did not pass. x0 = ")
33
34   var arg10 : [[Int]] = [[2, 3, 4], [5, 9, 3], [2, 6, 4]]
35   var arg11 : Int = 2
36   var arg12 : Int = 2
37   var x1 : Int = minCost(cost : arg10, m : arg11, n : arg12)
38   var v1 : Int = 12
39   assert(x1 == v1, "Exception -- test case 1 did not pass. x1 = ")
40
41   var arg20 : [[Int]] = [[3, 4, 5], [6, 10, 4], [3, 7, 5]]
42   var arg21 : Int = 2
43   var arg22 : Int = 2
44   var x2 : Int = minCost(cost : arg20, m : arg21, n : arg22)
45   var v2 : Int = 16
46   assert(x2 == v2, "Exception -- test case 2 did not pass. x2 = ")



     R.2     M ULTI - LINGUAL H UMAN E VAL

     HumanEval contains 164 cases, most of which are compatible with our conversion framework. For
     some cases where the tests are not explicit, such as using Python for loop to iterate over many test
     cases, we expand them out explicitly to make it compatible with the conversion framework. For
     instance, the test statement below
 1 for x in range(2, 8):
 2     assert candidate(x, x+1) == str(x)


     is expanded to
 1   assert candidate(2, 3) == "2"
 2   assert candidate(3, 4) == "3"
 3   assert candidate(4, 5) == "4"
 4   assert candidate(5, 6) == "5"
 5   assert candidate(6, 7) == "6"
 6   assert candidate(7, 8) == "7"


     There are some cases that we filtered out such as cases that involve a user defined function. In total,
     we keep 161 out of 164 cases. We format of multi-lingual HumanEval are similar to that of MBXP
     in each language; therefore, we skip the display of examples in this section for brevity.

     R.3     M ULTI - LINGUAL M ATH QA

     By extending MathQA-python datasets Austin et al. (2021) for other programming languages, we
     obtained MathQA-Java and MathQA-JavaScript, for the purpose of evaluating the ability of the
     models to reason and synthesize code from more complex text, under multiple languages. The
     original MathQA-python problem contains a short text (which describes a mathematical question),


                                                       77
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     an answer (usually a real number) and a canonical solution in Python. Based on this, to build a
     version in a different language, we perform following two transformation steps:

           • Convert MathQA-Python problem into our canonical MBXP format (Section 3). Specif-
             ically, we construct a unified function signature, ie. def problem():, followed
             by a docstring, which is equivalent to the short text of the original MathQA-Python.
             Additionally, a single test case can be generated based on the given answer, ie.
             assert problem() == answer.
           • Obtain prompts and test cases in another language for execution-based evaluation using our
             proposed rule-based conversion framework.
           • For the conversion framework outlined in Section 3, we emphasize that we handle floating
             point comparing numbers to be within ϵ = 1e − 8 instead of exact comparison. This
             handling is suitable for floating points and helps avoid potential false negatives. It is also
             compatible with all conversions in other datasets since it is handled within the abstract
             compare function in each target language.

     Below, we show converted examples after the first step (including Python prompts, the canonical
     solution and a single test case) and its counterparts for Java and JavaScript generated from the
     second step.
 1
 2 --------------------- MathQA-Python ---------------------
 3 def problem():
 4     """
 5     a shopkeeper sold an article offering a discount of 5 % and earned a profit of 31.1 % .
          what would have been the percentage of profit earned if no discount had been offered ? n0
           = 5.0 n1 = 31.1
 6       """
 7       n0 = 5.0
 8       n1 = 31.1
 9       t0 = n1 + 100.0
10       t1 = 100.0 - n0
11       t2 = t0 * 100.0
12       t3 = t2 / t1
13       answer = t3 - 100.0
14       return answer
15
16   import math
17   def compare(x, y):
18       return math.fabs(x-y)<1e-8
19   candidate = problem
20   assert compare(candidate(), 38.0)
21
22
23   --------------------- MathQA-Java ---------------------
24   import java.io.*;
25   import java.lang.*;
26   import java.util.*;
27   import java.math.*;
28
29   class Problem {
30
31       /**
32         * a shopkeeper sold an article offering a discount of 5 % and earned a profit of 31.1 % .
            what would have been the percentage of profit earned if no discount had been offered ?
          n0 = 5.0 n1 = 31.1
33         */
34       public static double problem() {
35            ...... // the model output are inserted here.
36       }
37 }
38
39 class Main {
40     public static boolean compare(Object obj1, Object obj2) {
41         if (obj1 == null && obj2 == null){
42              return true;
43         } else if (obj1 == null || obj2 == null){
44              return false;
45         } else {
46              if ((obj1 instanceof Double || obj1 instanceof Float) &&
47                      (obj2 instanceof Double || obj2 instanceof Float)
48                  ){
49                  if (obj1 instanceof Float){
50                      obj1 = ((Float) obj1).doubleValue();



                                                      78
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


51                   }
52                   if (obj2 instanceof Float){
53                       obj2 = ((Float) obj2).doubleValue();
54                   }
55                   return Math.abs((double)obj1 - (double)obj2) < 1e-7;
56               }
57               else
58                   return obj1.equals(obj2);
59          }
60      }
61
62      //execution-based test case
63      public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception {
64          double x0 = Problem.problem();
65          if (!(compare(x0, 38.0))) {
66              throw new java.lang.Exception("Exception -- test case 0 did not pass. x0 = " + x0)
         ;
67          }
68
69     }
70 }
71
72
73 --------------------- MathQA-JavaScript ---------------------
74
75 /**
76  * a shopkeeper sold an article offering a discount of 5 % and earned a profit of 31.1 % .
         what would have been the percentage of profit earned if no discount had been offered ? n0
          = 5.0 n1 = 31.1
77    */
78   function problem() {
79      ... // the model output are inserted here.
80   }
81
82   // execution-based test case
83   const _ = require("lodash")
84
85   function compare(object1, object2){
86       if(typeof object1 == "number" && typeof object2 == "number") {
87           return Math.abs(object1 - object2) < 1e-7
88       }
89       else{
90           return _.isEqual(object1, object2)
91       }
92   }
93
94   var x = problem()
95   if(compare(x, 38.0)){} else { throw ’Error at 1th assert statement. Value = ’ + JSON.stringify
          (x) }


                                                     79
