Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


PARTA FFORD : PART- LEVEL A FFORDANCE D ISCOVERY
   Anonymous authors
   Paper under double-blind review



        Trained with per-shape sparse annotations                     Infer part decomposition and
                   (affordance label set)                            corresponding part affordances
shape


                                                                                     backrest sittable framework
                          sittable       sittable
label


            sittable                    backrest
                         backrest                           Input: 3D shape        Output: Discovered 3D parts
          framework                      armrest
                        framework                                                      w/ their affordances
                                       framework
Figure 1: The proposed PartAfford: discover 3D object part affordances by learning contrast in affordance
compositions. During training (left), given weak annotations (per-shape affordance label set), a learning
framework is devised to ground affordance (e.g., backrest) to 3D part (e.g., sofa back) through learning cross-
category, affordance-related shapes (e.g., chair, sofa) with various affordance compositions. At test time (right),
the learned model decomposes the 3D object into parts and infers the part-level affordances.


                                                    A BSTRACT

              Understanding what objects could furnish for humansÐlearning object affordanceÐ
              is the crux of bridging perception and action. In the vision community, prior work
              has primarily focused on learning object affordance with dense (e.g., at a per-pixel
              level) supervision. In stark contrast, we humans learn the object affordance without
              dense labels. As such, the fundamental question to devise a computational model
              is: What is the natural way to learn the object affordance from geometry with
              humanlike weak supervision? In this work, we present the new task of part-level
              affordance discovery (PartAfford): Given only the affordance labels for each object,
              the machine is tasked to (i) decompose 3D shapes into parts and (ii) discover how
              each part of the object corresponds to a certain affordance category. We propose a
              novel learning framework that discovers part-level representations by leveraging
              only the affordance set supervision and geometric primitive regularization without
              dense supervision. To learn and evaluate PartAfford, we construct a part-level, cross-
              category 3D object affordance dataset, annotated with 24 affordance categories
              shared among > 25, 000 objects. We demonstrate through extensive experiments
              that our method enables both the abstraction of 3D objects and part-level affordance
              discovery, with generalizability to difficult and cross-category examples. Further
              ablations reveal the contribution of each component.


1         I NTRODUCTION

The human vision system could swiftly locate the functional part upon using an object for specific
tasks (Land et al., 1999). Such a critical capability in object interaction requires fine-grained ob-
ject affordance understanding. Affordance, coined and originally theorized by Gibson (Gibson &
Carmichael, 1966; Gibson, 1979), characterizes how humans interact with human-made objects and
environments. As such, affordance understanding of objects and scenes has a significant influence on
bridging visual perception and holistic scene understanding (Huang et al., 2018b;a; Chen et al., 2019)
with actionable information (Soatto, 2013; Han et al., 2022).
Object affordances have two main characteristics. First, object affordances are not defined in terms of
conventional categorical labels in computer vision; instead, they are defined by the associated actions


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for various tasks and are naturally cross-category. For example, both chair and sofa can be sat on,
which indicates they share the sittable affordance. Similarly, desktop and bookshelf share the support
affordance. Second, object affordances are intrinsically part-based. We could easily associate sittable
affordance with the seats of chairs and sofas, and support with the boards of desktop and bookshelf.
As such, the ability to learn part-based, cross-category affordance is essential to demonstrate the
general object affordance understanding.
In passive affordance learning, prior literature follows the supervised learning paradigm, in which
dense affordance annotation on the objects is fed as supervised signals (Deng et al., 2021). However,
this line of thought depends heavily on the quality of dense annotation, which significantly deviates
from how we humans learn to understand affordance. Humanlike supervision would be: ªyou can sit
on this chair and rest your arm,º ªyou can open the lid and hold water with the cup.º In this paper, we
try to answer: How to distinguish each object part while recognizing corresponding affordances with
such weak and natural supervisions?
To tackle this problem, we present PartAfford, a new task of part-level affordance discovery, which
learns the object affordance with the natural supervision of the affordance set. As shown in Fig. 1, by
providing only the set of affordance labels for each object, the algorithm is tasked to decompose the
3D shapes into parts and discover how each part corresponds to a certain affordance category, which
is challenging and under-explored in the area of generalizable part-level object understanding and
affordance learning.
To address this, we propose a novel method that discovers part-level representations with self-
supervised 3D reconstruction, affordance set supervision, and primitive regularization. The proposed
approach consists of two main components. The first component is an encoder with slot attention for
unsupervised clustering and abstraction. Specifically, we encode the 3D object into visual features
and abstract the low-level features into a set of slot variables (Locatello et al., 2020). The second
component is a decoder built upon the learned slot features. It has three output branches that jointly
reconstruct the 3D parts and object, predict the affordance labels, and regularize the learned part-level
shapes with cuboidal primitives. Our method does not rely on dense supervision but instead learns
from the weak set supervision. It discovers the part-level affordance by learning the correspondence
between affordance labels and abstracted 3D object parts.
Learning and evaluating PartAfford demands collections of 3D objects and their affordance labels for
object parts. Prior work on visual affordance learning (Hassanin et al., 2021) either focuses on 2D
objects and scenes or lacks part-based annotation (Deng et al., 2021). Hence, we construct a part-level,
cross-category 3D object affordance dataset annotated with 24 affordance categories shared among
over 25, 000 3D objects. The 3D objects are collected from PartNet dataset (Mo et al., 2019b) and
the PartNet-Mobility dataset (Xiang et al., 2020). The 24 part affordance categories are defined in
terms of adjectives (e.g., ªsittableº) or nouns (e.g., ªarmrestº); they describe how object parts could
afford human daily actions and activities. We annotate the part-level object affordances by manually
mapping the fine-grained object part defined in PartNet to the part affordances defined in this work.
By experimenting on this newly constructed PartAfford dataset, we empirically demonstrate that
our method jointly enables the abstraction of 3D objects and part-level affordance discovery. Our
model also shows strong generalizability on hard and cross-category objects. Further experiments
and ablations analyze each component’s contribution and point out future directions.
In summary, our work makes four main contributions:


• We present a new PartAfford task for part-level affordance discovery. Compared to the prior densely-
  supervised learning paradigm, PartAfford learns the visual object affordance more naturally.
• We propose a novel learning framework for tackling PartAfford, which jointly abstracts 3D objects
  into part-level representations and discovers affordances by learning the affordance correspondence.
• We build the benchmark for learning and evaluating PartAfford by curating a dataset consisting of
  3D objects and annotating part-level affordances.
• We empirically demonstrate the efficacy and generalization capability of the proposed method
  and analyze each component’s significance via a suite of ablation studies. Code and data will be
  released for research purposes.



                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2    R ELATED W ORK

Affordance Learning Affordance learning is a multidisciplinary research field of vision, cognition,
and robotics. In general, ªaffordanceº is first perceived from images (Gupta et al., 2011; Kjellström
et al., 2011; Zhu et al., 2015; Myers et al., 2015; Roy & Todorovic, 2016) or videos (Xie et al.,
2013; Zhu et al., 2016; Fang et al., 2018; Nagarajan et al., 2020), followed by cognitive reasoning
(Zhu et al., 2015; 2020), and finally serves for task and motion planning in robotics (Nagarajan &
Grauman, 2020; Mo et al., 2022). Prior work tackles affordance at various scales and representations.
Although affordance has been studied at the scene level (Zhao & Zhu, 2013; Gupta et al., 2015;
Roy & Todorovic, 2016), object level (Nguyen et al., 2017; Mo et al., 2021; Gadre et al., 2021), and
associated with generated human poses (Zhu et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2017b), few attempts study
affordance as a 3D shape analysis task (Yu et al., 2015; Liang et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2016; Wang
et al., 2017a) since it would normally require large-scale, high-quality 3D data. A recent work (Deng
et al., 2021) benchmarks several affordance estimation tasks on PartNet (Mo et al., 2019b) with
dense affordance heatmap supervisions, annotated by densely selecting keypoints without considering
affordance compositionality. Prior work also tackles affordance learning through interaction-based
methods, either from human demonstration videos (Kjellström et al., 2011; Nagarajan et al., 2019;
2020) or simulation-based active learning (Wang et al., 2022; Mo et al., 2021). The first usually infers
high-level and coarse 2D affordance, and the second is often restricted to basic manipulations in
specific domains. In comparison, PartAfford studies affordance in a weakly supervised manner, such
that the affordance discovery will be guided by affordance set matching and geometry abstraction.
The new affordance dataset we construct provides fine-grained, part-level 3D affordance annotations,
tailored for the weak supervision setting and affordance compositionality study.
Object-centric Learning Object discovery has been studied in an iterative end-to-end fashion
(Greff et al., 2017; Van Steenkiste et al., 2018; Burgess et al., 2019; Engelcke et al., 2019; Greff
et al., 2019; Du et al., 2021). Recently, Locatello et al. (2020) presents the slot attention module, an
efficient and generic framework for object-centric representation extraction. It is capable of modeling
compositional nature in synthetic scenes with multiple simple geometry shapes (Kabra et al., 2019).
Subsequently, Stelzner et al. (2021) and Yu et al. (2021) apply slot attention on unsupervised 3D-
aware scene decomposition, integrating NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020) as object representations.
They demonstrate that slot-based bottleneck could perform reasonably on synthetic multi-view RGB
datasets with a textureless background. In the weakly-supervised regime, methods have been proposed
for 3D semantic segmentation with scene-level labels (Wei et al., 2020; Ren et al., 2021). However,
these methods rely on additional input (e.g., color, normal) and abstract object-level features in
different data domains. Our work takes one step further to tackle the challenge of part-level affordance
discovery of 3D objects; part discovery is more complex than object discovery, primarily due to the
ambiguity in the object part segmentation without applying additional constraints. Fortunately, for
man-made objects, affordances are attached to objects at the part level. This observation implies the
possibility of combining part discovery and affordance learning with minimal supervision. In this
work, we integrate part discovery with affordance estimation, hoping that affordance information
would help discover object parts sharing similar affordances.
Unsupervised Geometric Primitive Modeling Whereas supervised geometric primitive abstrac-
tion methods (Mo et al., 2019a; Yang et al., 2020) require dense hierarchical annotations, unsuper-
vised frameworks using cuboid-based (Tulsiani et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2019), superquadrics-based
(Paschalidou et al., 2019; 2020), or other genus-zero-shape (Deng et al., 2020; Paschalidou et al.,
2021) primitives discover structural information naturally embedded in the geometry. Recently, Yang
& Chen (2021) unsupervisedly learn the cuboid-based shape abstraction with shape co-segmentation.
Yet, it relies heavily on the ground-truth point normals for accurate abstraction and lacks seman-
tic representation for object understanding. In our affordance discovery framework, we leverage
the cuboidal regularization to refine the reconstructed affordance part, which distinguishes densely
connected 3D parts by providing geometric prior, thus improving the affordance part discovery.

3    TASK D EFINITION

We formulate the new task PartAfford as discovering the part-level object affordance with the
affordance set supervision. We define K = 24 common affordance categories S = {sk }K      k=1 , such
as ªsittableº and ªopenable,º for object understanding. Input is given as a collection of N objects


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Abstraction Encoder                                        T-iteration 3D Slot Attention                                                            3D Attention Mask Visualization
                                                                     (Slots Compete for Parts)                                                                  (Slots Attend to Parts)


                           3D CNN Encoder


                                                                                                                     LayerNorm
                                                                                          key        query


                                                                                  MLP


                                                                                                             MLP
                                                                      LayerNorm
                                                                                            SoftMax


                                                                                  MLP
                                                                                          value
                                                                                                                 𝑠𝑙𝑜𝑡𝑠!"#
        Input shape                            3D feat + pos_embed                                                                               𝑡 = 1                𝑡 = 2               𝑡 = 3
                                                                                                GRU
                                                                                                                 𝑠𝑙𝑜𝑡𝑠!          Slots

(b) 3D Part Reconstruction Decoder                          (c) Affordance Prediction Decoder                                            (d) Cuboidal Primitive Regularization Decoder
                                                                                                  Set Matching                                                          Part-Cuboid Consistency

                                                                                        sittable                  backrest
          3D CNN Decoder


                                                                                    armrest                        armrest


                                                                         MLP


                                                                                                                                                  MLP
                                                                                                                                                          rotation
                                                                                   backrest                        sittable

                                                                                  framework                      framework
                                             Recon.                                                                                                        scale
Slots     Recon. Parts                      3D Object       Slots     Pred. Affordances GT Affordances                                   Slots                     Pred. Cuboids          Recon. Parts

Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed method for PartAfford. Our model contains two main components:
abstraction encoder and affordance decoder. (a) Abstraction encoder takes a 3D object as input, extracts
features with 3D convolutional neural networks, and abstracts it into several slots. Affordance decoder with
three branches jointly (b) reconstructs the 3D parts, (c) predicts affordance labels, and (d) regularizes cuboidal
primitives. Each predicted cuboid in (d) wraps around the corresponding predicted object part in (b) tightly.
                                                                                j Ji     j
{oi }N                                                      N
     i=1 and their corresponding affordance set labels {Ai }i=1 , where Ai = {ai }j=1 . ai ∈ S, and
Ji represents the number of distinct assigned affordances for each object i. PartAfford requires an
algorithm to decompose each object into parts and discover the affordance corresponding to each
object part. Fig. 1 illustrates the PartAfford task.

4       M ETHOD
We propose a novel framework for affordance discovery from 3D objects. It integrates unsupervised
part discovery with affordance set prediction and geometric primitive abstraction; see Fig. 2. Given a
3D shape represented by voxel grids V of resolution 323 , our method first encodes the 3D shape into
visual features and abstracts it into M slots; each slot represents an abstracted high-level feature for
downstream tasks. Next, we utilize a decoder with three branches to jointly (i) decode the features
into parts, (ii) predict the affordance label, and (iii) regularize the parts with cuboidal primitives.
Below, we describe in detail how each module is constructed and the loss design.

4.1       A BSTRACTION E NCODER

The encoder takes a 3D shape as input and abstracts part-centric latent codes in an unsupervised
manner. It consists of a feature extraction module and a 3D slot attention module; see Fig. 2a.
Feature Extraction The feature embedding backbone encodes the input voxels and generates a
D = 64 dimensional feature for each voxel. Following (Mescheder et al., 2019), voxels are encoded
by five layers of 3D convolutional neural networks. The embedded feature is then augmented with
absolute positional embedding (Locatello et al., 2020).
3D Slot Attention The 3D slot attention architecture, adapted from Locatello et al. (2020), serves
as the part-centric representational bottleneck between the 3D feature embedding network and the
downstream decoders. The encoded feature of a 3D shape is fed into an iterative attention module,
where M randomly initialized slots are updated for T = 3 iterations through a GRU (Cho et al., 2014).
During each iteration, the attention coefficients are calculated by applying softmax normalization
over the slots on the dot-product similarity between queries (i.e., linearly-mapped 3D slot features)
and keys (i.e., linearly-mapped input features). The attention coefficients are then applied as weights
for aggregating the values (i.e., linearly-mapped input feature) and updating the slots.
Since the inputs-to-slots attention assignment is normalized over the 3D slots, those slots compete to
attend to a clustering of the input 3D shape. Such clusterings are similar to human-defined parts on
common objects. 3D slot attention masks naturally segment the object through iterations. An example
of the learned 3D attention masks is shown in Fig. 2a.


                                                                                                             4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   A FFORDANCE D ECODER

Shown in Fig. 2b-d, the affordance decoder takes part-centric slot features as input, followed by three
branches for 3D part reconstruction, affordance prediction, and primitive regularization. The decoder
parameter is shared across slots.
3D Part Reconstruction We design a 3-layer 3D transposed convolutional decoder followed by
a single MLP layer to reconstruct voxel values V̂ m and a voxel mask for each slot. The mask is
normalized across slots with softmax, which generates a normalized mask Λ̂m ∈ R32×32×32 . It is
then used to compute the weighted sum of voxel values across slots and combine the reconstructed
                                                PM
parts {V̂ m }M
             m=1 into a full 3D shape V̂ : V̂ =
                                                       m m
                                                 m=1 Λ̂ V̂ . The 3D part reconstruction branch is
self-supervised by the reconstruction loss between original voxels V and reconstructed voxels V̂; we
use the binary cross-entropy (BCE): Lrecon = BCE(V, V̂).
Affordance Prediction We predict a one-hot affordance label for each slot with a two-layer MLP
with sharing weights across slots for classification.
The affordance prediction branch is weakly-supervised as we do not provide affordance labels for
each voxel. Instead, only the affordance label set for the entire object is used as the supervision signal.
The model is tasked to learn the alignment between the abstracted parts and the affordance labels
from set supervision.
As defined in Sec. 3, the ground-truth set of affordance labels for an input 3D object is denoted as A.
We denote Â as the set of slot affordance predictions. Aˆσ is a permutation of elements in Â, where
σ ∈ G and G represent all M ! possible permutations. Lmatch is the pairwise matching cost between
two sets, which can be calculated by mean square error (MSE) or cross-entropy:
                                     Lpred = min Lmatch (A, Aˆσ ).                                  (1)
                                                  σ∈G

Due to the order-invariant nature of slot modules, we apply the Hungarian matching algorithm (Kuhn,
1955), with Huber loss as the pair-wise matching cost, to calculate the set-based (Carion et al., 2020)
affordance prediction loss in Eq. (1).
Cuboidal Primitive Regularization As a generalized soft k-means algorithm, the slot attention
mechanism heavily relies on visual cues, such as the clustering of pixel colors on the image. As such,
it cannot perform precisely in a crowded scene with overlapping objects even on a toy image dataset
(Locatello et al., 2020). In the 3D voxel regime, segmenting objects into parts is challenging since
every voxel is connected to neighboring voxels without distinguishable visual appearances.
Therefore, we introduce the cuboidal primitive regularization module, providing a geometric prior
for segmentation: Human-made objects usually have geometric regularity, and cuboid is a concise
structural representation for abstraction.
From each slot embedding, the cuboid abstraction module predicts a cuboid parametrized by two
vectors (Yang & Chen, 2021): a scale vector s ∈ R3 and a quaternion vector r ∈ R4 for 3D rotation.
Of note, we calculate the cuboid center from the weighted mean of voxel positions in the slot.
To evaluate how the predicted cuboid fits the reconstructed part in the m-th slot, we first compute
the Euclidean distance dm                          m
                           i from each voxel pi to its closest cuboid face. Next, we calculate the
weighted sum distance for all voxels, where the weight vim ∈ V̂ m is the reconstructed voxel value
within [0, 1]. Additionally, we designed a binary surface mask f (i) that masks out internal voxels in
the loss. We also regularize the cuboid loss by adding a cuboid scale penalty term, i.e., L1 norm for
the scale vector. Thus, the loss encourages a cuboid to wrap around a solid object part tightly. The
regularization loss for all the slots is defined as:
                                            "                                   #
                                        X                         X
                            Lcuboid =           λscale ∥sm ∥1 +       f (i)vim dm
                                                                                i .                    (2)
                                        m                         i

Total Loss Taking together, the total training loss is the sum of 3D reconstruction loss, affordance
prediction loss, and primitive regularization loss:
                           Ltotal = λrecon Lrecon + λpred Lpred + λcuboid Lcuboid ,              (3)


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 (a) Our affordance description for “openable”            (b) An example door from PartNet                       hanging             illumination       armrest       backrest
                                                                                                                 containment         framework          sittable      twistable
                                                                                                Affordance       liquidcontainment   step               rollable      cutting
    Openable:
                                                                                                Annotation       openable                               pourable      lever
     • Definition. Parts that could be moved via a                                                                                   lyable
    hinge-like mechanism on an articulated object.                                                               handle              headrest           support       display
                                                                 surface_board
     • Details. Usually, a handle is found attached to                                                                                                                pressable
    an openable part … (more in supp.)                                            fixed_part     openable
                                                                                                                                                                      pinchable
     • Multi-label. Openable is given priority over       door

    potential co-existing affordances like containment.                                           lever                                                               wrapgrasp
     • e.g., door/surface_board,                                                                                                                                      audible
             dishwasher/door/door_frame.                             handle
                                                                                                      geometry
                                                                                 movable_part          physics

 (c) A dishwasher augmented from SAPIEN                   openable      containment

                                                                                                 openable

                                                                                                containment
                                                                                                                  (d) 24 cross-category, fine-grained affordance labels

Figure 3: Part affordance dataset. (a) Description for the ªopenable" affordance to construct the mapping. (b)
Given the part hierarchy of a door from PartNet (Mo et al., 2019b), we annotate its affordance labels by manual
mapping and inspection. (c) Given a dishwasher from PartNet-Mobility (SAPIEN) (Xiang et al., 2020) and its
kinematics, we rotate the door frame to include 3D objects with different articulation states. (d) Some exemplar
3D object models with color-coded affordance visualization.

where λrecon , λcuboid , and λpred are balancing coefficients.
Of note, with the current architecture design, for the first time, we demonstrate the capability of
part-level affordance discovery from set labels. The exploration of more complex and practical
modules is left for future work.


5        PART A FFORDANCE DATASET

To benchmark PartAfford and facilitate the research in affordance understanding, we construct a
part-level 3D object affordance dataset. We focus on 24 cross-category, fine-grained affordance labels
as shown in Fig. 3. The dataset is annotated with over 25, 000 3D CAD models from the PartNet
dataset (Mo et al., 2019b) and 625 articulated objects among 9 categories from the PartNet-Mobility
dataset in SAPIEN (Xiang et al., 2020). Below, we describe how to define part affordances and
generate affordance annotation. See appendix for more details.
Part affordances in our dataset are defined in terms of adjectives (e.g., sittable) or nouns (e.g., armrest),
which describe how object parts could afford human daily actions and activities. We adopt certain
common affordance categories from a comprehensive survey of visual affordance (Hassanin et al.,
2021), e.g., containment, sittable, support, openable, rollable, display, and wrapgrasp. However, they
are coarse-grained±either at the object level or scene level. For example, ªopenableº only indicates
whether an object can be opened, not on which object part can afford the object to be opened.
To pursue a fine-grained understanding of object affordance, we manually construct a one-to-multiple
mapping from 479 kinds of object part labels defined at the finest granularity in Mo et al. (2019b) to
24 potential affordance labels, given the detailed affordance description. We provide expert-defined
descriptions for 24 affordances to guarantee the quality and consistency of the mapping construction.
An example is shown in Fig. 3a.
Given the part hierarchy of a 3D object, we can get the corresponding affordance annotation by
mapping. We also perform a manual inspection to correct the affordance labels, especially for some
fine-grained parts, according to their specific geometry and physics properties. For instance, different
door handles will be mapped to different affordance labels (twistable, lever, etc.) according to how
they should be operated (Fig. 3b).
The PartNet dataset does not contain articulation information, making affordances such as openable
not geometrically distinguishable. Therefore, we generate a set of shapes with openable affordance
from the PartNet-Mobility dataset by capturing 3D shapes with various opening angles (Fig. 3c).
As can be seen from Fig. 3d, each affordance type±due to its cross-category nature±may be found
on various object part instances. For example, openable is usually afforded by rotatable doors for
unobstructed access. Under such criteria, the door frame of a dishwasher and the surface board of
a door are both mapped to openable. Please refer to the appendix for a full list of all affordance
categories, descriptions, and mapping examples.


                                                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       openable        framework   handle     support       sittable      armrest       backrest

(a)
                                                                          (e)



(b)                                                                       (f)


                                                                          (g)
(c)



                                                                          (h)
(d)

      Input       GT      Recon.   Slot 1   Slot 2      Slot 3   Slot 4         Input        GT    Recon.   Slot 1   Slot 2   Slot 3   Slot 4

 Figure 4: Qualitative results on three curated subsets: ªopenableº (a-b), ªsupportº (c-e), and ªsittableº (f-h).

6      E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we design and conduct comprehensive experiments to evaluate the proposed method.
Fig. 4 visualizes our main results. We present both quantitative and qualitative comparisons of
baseline models and other variants. We also evaluate the model generalization on novel shapes,
analyze failure cases, and propose potential improvement directions. Please refer to the appendix for
additional experimental settings, results, and analyses.

6.1       E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Benchmarks To benchmark PartAfford, we curate different subsets of samples from our constructed
dataset. Specifically, we study the subsets related to the most representative affordance categories
ªsittable,º ªsupport,º and ªopenableº separately, where the subsets are created by collecting all cross-
category objects that have the corresponding affordance label in our dataset. They contain 7 kinds of
affordances from 8 object categories, covering 17, 842/25K ≈ 71% instances. For each subset, we
learn to distinguish all the affordance labels appear in the 3D objects. Note that although a part can
have multiple affordances as mentioned in Sec. 5, we only keep the most prioritized affordance for
each part to ease the ambiguities in learning.
Evaluation Metrics In PartAfford, we evaluate the performances of part discovery (clustering
similarity), 3D reconstruction, and affordance prediction.
• Part Discovery: We use the Intersection over Union (IoU) to evaluate the part similarity. Specifically,
  we employ Hungarian matching to find the best matches between the reconstructed parts and ground
  truth parts using voxel IoU as the matching score. Then we compute the mean IoU (mIoU) by
  averaging the IoU between best matches.
• 3D Reconstruction: We evaluate the shape reconstruction quality by Mean Squared Error (MSE).
• Affordance Prediction: Following Locatello et al. (2020), we use Average Precision (AP) to evaluate
  the prediction accuracy. A correct prediction means an exact match of the affordance label set.
Baselines and Ablations Since we are the first to propose and formulate PartAfford, we have no
previous work to make direct comparisons. Therefore, we compare our method with two designed
baseline models and three variants:
• Slot MLP: a simple MLP-based baseline where we replace Slot Attention with an MLP that maps
  from the learned feature maps (resized and flattened) to the (now ordered) slot representation.
• IODINE: a baseline where we replace the Slot Attention with an object-centric learning method
  IODINE (Greff et al., 2019) to abstract and cluster the encoded feature.
• Ours w/o Afford & Cuboid: our model variant that only keeps the 3D part reconstruction branch.
• Ours w/o Afford: our model variant without the affordance prediction branch.
• Ours w/o Cuboid: our model variant that discards the cuboidal primitive regularization branch.
• Ours Full: our full model with all branches.

6.2       I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Learning Strategy To stabilize the training, we split the training into two stages. In the first stage,
we train the decoder only with 3D part reconstruction and affordance prediction branches. In the


                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                recon. only/null    framework         backrest    sittable     armrest       support


 Slot MLP


                                                                                                     Slot MLP
 Ours (full)


                                                                                                     Ours (full)
               Input      GT        Recon.      Slot 1       Slot 2        Slot 3       Slot 4                        Input    GT       Recon.    Slot 1    Slot 2    Slot 3   Slot 4

                                                (a) Comparisons between the Slot MLP and our model.
  w/o Aff.


                                                                                                           w/o Cub.
                                                                                                           w/ Cub.
  w/ Aff.


                                                                                                           w/o Cub.
  w/o Aff.


                                                                                                           w/ Cub.
  w/ Aff.


               Input    GT         Recon.    Slot 1      Slot 2       Slot 3   Slot 4                                  Input   Recon.    Slot 1    Slot 2    Slot 3   Slot 4

(b) Comparisons between the models without and with (c) Comparisons between the models without and with
affordance prediction branch. The affordance predic- cuboidal primitive regularization branch. The cuboidal
tion facilitates the abstraction of 3D shape (rows 1-2) primitive regularization helps to guide and improve the
and elimination of spare slots (rows 3-4).                 segmentation.
                                     Figure 5: Qualitative comparison results.

second stage, the cuboidal primitive regularization branch is incorporated into joint training with a
lower learning rate.
Hyperparameter We set learning rate as 4 × 10−4 for the first stage, 2 × 10−4 for the second stage,
and apply Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) for optimization. It takes 5 + 9 hours on 4 RTX
A6000 GPUs for two-stage full-model training of ªsittableº-related objects. For slot attention, we
empirically set the number of GRU iterations T = 3. We set the number of slots to the maximal
number of affordance labels that appear in each training subset. For example, we learn the ªsittableº
with 4 slots, ªsupportº with 2 slots, and ªopenableº with 3 slots. Appendix C.1 further discusses
choices of the number of slots. For the joint loss weight, we set λrecon = 1.0, λpred = 0.5, λcuboid = 0.1.

6.3              R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Tabs. 1 and 2 tabulate the quantitative performances of all the models under different settings. Fig. 4
qualitatively shows the capability of our method and Fig. 5 compares different models. Below, we
summarize some key findings:
1. The proposed method achieves the best overall performance on the PartAfford task, especially
   in the part discovery (mean IoU) where it outperforms the baselines by a large margin. This
   demonstrates the outstanding abstraction capability of our approach given the weak supervision.
   From Fig. 4, we can see our method can discover the detailed part-level representation with their
   aligned affordances for the 3D objects.
2. The most challenging part of PartAfford lies in the part discovery; it is also where our model
   differentiates from other baselines. For example, Tab. 1 shows that Slot MLP achieves the best
   affordance prediction performance (AP) but fails in the part discovery (mean IoU) and 3D
   reconstruction (MSE). As also shown in Fig. 5a, the Slot MLP cannot segment the object input to
   parts due to the lack of abstraction capability.
3. Affordance prediction branch significantly escalates the part discovery performance since it helps
   to learn part-affordance correspondence from the affordance composition, which provides contrasts
   to distinguish different parts among the training objects. Our qualitative results also show that
   the affordance prediction facilitates the abstraction of 3D shape (e.g., rows 1-2 of Fig. 5b) and
   elimination of spare slots (e.g., rows 3-4 of Fig. 5b);
4. Cuboidal primitive regularization branch also boosts the part discovery, especially when affor-
   dance prediction is unavailable. This demonstrates that geometric priors play a crucial role in


                                                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    framework        backrest       sittable     armrest     support
 a. Novel Sittable                                                          framework    backrest   sittable   armrest       support


 b. Support     Openable



 c. Support     Sittable


 d. Sittable    Support


                                                                             Input      GT     Recon.     Slot 1    Slot 2        Slot 3   Slot 4
    Input      Recon.      Slot 1       Slot 2      Slot 3     Slot 4                        Figure 7: Failure cases.
                 Figure 6: Generalization results.

     segmentation when data are not diverse enough. From Fig. 5c, we can see the cuboidal primitive
     regularization helps to segment better primitives and avoid scattered voxels.

6.4         M ODEL G ENERALIZATION            Table 1: Quantitative results on “sittable.” We evaluate
                                              the mean IoU (mIoU), mean squared error (MSE), and
With the cross-category nature of affordance, average precision (AP) on included objects.
we qualitatively test how the learned model can              Model         mIoU (%) ↑ MSE ↓ AP (%)↑
be generalized to novel objects and unseen cate-           Slot MLP           21.5    0.0150    94.5
                                                            IODINE            49.2    0.0102    92.5
gories. We conduct model generalization exper- Ours w/o Afford & Cuboid       31.5    0.0112    N/A
iments by testing hard examples or objects from          Ours w/o Afford      39.4    0.0100    N/A
other categories. Examples from Fig. 6 demon-           Ours w/o Cuboid       55.3    0.0102    92.7
                                                           Ours (full)        57.3    0.0097    92.9
strate the learned model could be generalized to
objects with diverse shapes. We show the results of testing the learned model on a novel object shape
(bean bag) (a) from Fu et al. (2021) and unseen categories (b-d). For example, (b) shows the result of
learning with ªsupportº and testing on an ªopenableº object (i.e., a microwave). Despite the imperfect
reconstructions , partly due to the reconstruction bottleneck’s impact on disentanglement quality
(Engelcke et al., 2020), the learned model can identify the functional parts given novel objects.

6.5         FAILURE C ASES

We show some failure cases of our method in Fig. 7. For ªsittableº and ªsupport,º the failures are
commonly caused by (i) the difficulties in reconstructing the fine-grained details of 3D objects with
novel shapes; (ii) certain parts that violate the cuboid assumption, and thus hurt other components.
For objects in ªopenableº category, our model Table 2: Quantitative results on “support” and “open-
cannot discover and reconstruct ªhandle,º as able.”
shown in Fig. 4. This is because the objects with               Model       mIoU (%) ↑ MSE ↓ AP (%) ↑
related affordances come from various object                  Slot MLP         36.8    0.0099  91.6
categories with diverse shapes, making it chal- support OursOurs w/o Afford    34.8    0.0092  N/A
                                                                 w/o Cuboid    51.3    0.0087  95.2
lenging for the model to capture such complex                 Ours (full)      52.7    0.0085  95.1
mixtures of distributions and reconstruct fine-               Slot MLP         21.0    0.0130  70.8
                                                            Ours w/o Afford    19.9    0.0104  N/A
grained 3D shapes, especially tiny parts . This openable Ours w/o Cuboid       46.7    0.0097  55.8
points out future directions to better understand             Ours (full)      47.6    0.0093  60.4
object parts (e.g., segment, reconstruct), and po-
tentially an interactive learning framework to learn beyond geometry and appearance.

7      C ONCLUSION
We present PartAfford, a new task in visual affordance research that aims at discovering part-level
affordances from 3D shapes. We propose a novel learning framework that discovers part-level
affordances by leveraging only the affordance set supervision and geometric primitive regularization.
With comprehensive experiments and analyses, we point out potential directions for incorporating
visual appearance to facilitate better shape abstraction and combining it with an active learning
approach for efficient affordance learning.


                                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Christopher P Burgess, Loic Matthey, Nicholas Watters, Rishabh Kabra, Irina Higgins, Matt Botvinick,
  and Alexander Lerchner. Monet: Unsupervised scene decomposition and representation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1901.11390, 2019. 3

Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and Sergey
  Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), 2020. 5

Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li,
  Silvio Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d
  model repository. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015. 20

Yixin Chen, Siyuan Huang, Tao Yuan, Siyuan Qi, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Holistic++ scene
  understanding: Single-view 3d holistic scene parsing and human pose estimation with human-
  object interaction and physical commonsense. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2019. 1

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Caglar Gulcehre, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Fethi Bougares, Holger
  Schwenk, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning phrase representations using rnn encoder-decoder for
  statistical machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078, 2014. 4

Boyang Deng, Kyle Genova, Soroosh Yazdani, Sofien Bouaziz, Geoffrey Hinton, and Andrea
  Tagliasacchi. Cvxnet: Learnable convex decomposition. In Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020. 3

Shengheng Deng, Xun Xu, Chaozheng Wu, Ke Chen, and Kui Jia. 3d affordancenet: A benchmark for
  visual object affordance understanding. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), 2021. 2, 3, 19

Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Yash Sharma, Josh Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Unsupervised learning of
  compositional energy concepts. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2021. 3

Martin Engelcke, Adam R Kosiorek, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Genesis: Generative scene
 inference and sampling with object-centric latent representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.13052,
 2019. 3

Martin Engelcke, Oiwi Parker Jones, and Ingmar Posner. Reconstruction bottlenecks in object-centric
 generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.06245, 2020. 9

Kuan Fang, Te-Lin Wu, Daniel Yang, Silvio Savarese, and Joseph J Lim. Demo2vec: Reasoning
  object affordances from online videos. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), 2018. 3

Huan Fu, Rongfei Jia, Lin Gao, Mingming Gong, Binqiang Zhao, Steve Maybank, and Dacheng Tao.
  3d-future: 3d furniture shape with texture. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 129
  (12):3313±3337, 2021. 9

Samir Yitzhak Gadre, Kiana Ehsani, and Shuran Song. Act the part: Learning interaction strategies
  for articulated object part discovery. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp.
  15752±15761, 2021. 3

Caelan Reed Garrett, Tomás Lozano-Pérez, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Pddlstream: Integrating
  symbolic planners and blackbox samplers via optimistic adaptive planning. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, volume 30, pp. 440±448, 2020.
  19

Caelan Reed Garrett, Rohan Chitnis, Rachel Holladay, Beomjoon Kim, Tom Silver, Leslie Pack
  Kaelbling, and Tomás Lozano-Pérez. Integrated task and motion planning. Annual review of
  control, robotics, and autonomous systems, 4:265±293, 2021. 19


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


James Jerome Gibson. The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton, Mifflin and Company,
  1979. 1
James Jerome Gibson and Leonard Carmichael. The senses considered as perceptual systems,
  volume 2. Houghton Mifflin Boston, 1966. 1
Klaus Greff, Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Neural expectation maximization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.03498, 2017. 3
Klaus Greff, Raphaël Lopez Kaufman, Rishabh Kabra, Nick Watters, Christopher Burgess, Daniel
  Zoran, Loic Matthey, Matthew Botvinick, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object representation
  learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2019. 3, 7
Abhinav Gupta, Scott Satkin, Alexei A Efros, and Martial Hebert. From 3d scene geometry to human
  workspace. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2011. 3
Saurabh Gupta, Pablo Arbeláez, Ross Girshick, and Jitendra Malik. Indoor scene understanding with
  rgb-d images: Bottom-up segmentation, object detection and semantic segmentation. International
  Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 112(2):133±149, 2015. 3
Denis Hadjivelichkov, Sicelukwanda Zwane, Marc Deisenroth, Lourdes Agapito, and Dimitrios
  Kanoulas. One-shot transfer of affordance regions? affcorrs! arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07147,
  2022. 19
Muzhi Han, Zeyu Zhang, Ziyuan Jiao, Xu Xie, Yixin Zhu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Hangxin Liu. Scene
 reconstruction with functional objects for robot autonomy. International Journal of Computer
 Vision (IJCV), pp. 1±22, 2022. 1
Mohamed Hassan, Partha Ghosh, Joachim Tesch, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. Populating
 3d scenes by learning human-scene interaction. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition (CVPR), 2021. 20
Mohammed Hassanin, Salman Khan, and Murat Tahtali. Visual affordance and function understand-
 ing: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(3):1±35, 2021. 2, 6
Siyuan Huang, Siyuan Qi, Yinxue Xiao, Yixin Zhu, Ying Nian Wu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Cooperative
  holistic scene understanding: Unifying 3d object, layout, and camera pose estimation. In Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018a. 1
Siyuan Huang, Siyuan Qi, Yixin Zhu, Yinxue Xiao, Yuanlu Xu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Holistic 3d
  scene parsing and reconstruction from a single rgb image. In European Conference on Computer
  Vision (ECCV), 2018b. 1
Rishabh Kabra, Chris Burgess, Loic Matthey, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Klaus Greff, Malcolm
  Reynolds, and Alexander Lerchner. Multi-object datasets. https://github.com/deepmind/multi-
  object-datasets/, 2019. 3
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014. 8
Hedvig Kjellström, Javier Romero, and Danica KragiÂc. Visual object-action recognition: Inferring
  object affordances from human demonstration. Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 115
  (1):81±90, 2011. 3
Harold W Kuhn. The hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval research logistics
  quarterly, 2(1-2):83±97, 1955. 5
Michael Land, Neil Mennie, and Jennifer Rusted. The roles of vision and eye movements in the
 control of activities of daily living. Perception, 28(11):1311±1328, 1999. 1
Wei Liang, Yibiao Zhao, Yixin Zhu, and Song-Chun Zhu. What is where: Inferring containment
 relations from videos. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2016. 3


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, Aravindh Mahendran, Georg Heigold,
  Jakob Uszkoreit, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Kipf. Object-centric learning with slot attention.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 18, 21
Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Sebastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger.
  Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019. 4
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and
  Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020. 3
Kaichun Mo, Paul Guerrero, Li Yi, Hao Su, Peter Wonka, Niloy J Mitra, and Leonidas J Guibas.
  Structurenet: hierarchical graph networks for 3d shape generation. ACM Transactions on Graphics
 (TOG), 38(6):1±19, 2019a. 3
Kaichun Mo, Shilin Zhu, Angel X Chang, Li Yi, Subarna Tripathi, Leonidas J Guibas, and Hao
  Su. PartNet: A large-scale benchmark for fine-grained and hierarchical part-level 3D object
  understanding. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019b. 2, 3,
  6, 20, 24
Kaichun Mo, Leonidas J Guibas, Mustafa Mukadam, Abhinav Gupta, and Shubham Tulsiani.
 Where2act: From pixels to actions for articulated 3d objects. In International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 3
Kaichun Mo, Yuzhe Qin, Fanbo Xiang, Hao Su, and Leonidas Guibas. O2o-afford: Annotation-free
  large-scale object-object affordance learning. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1666±1677.
  PMLR, 2022. 3
Austin Myers, Ching L Teo, Cornelia Fermüller, and Yiannis Aloimonos. Affordance detection
  of tool parts from geometric features. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation
 (ICRA), pp. 1374±1381. IEEE, 2015. 3
Tushar Nagarajan and Kristen Grauman. Learning affordance landscapes for interaction exploration
  in 3d environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. 3
Tushar Nagarajan, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Kristen Grauman. Grounded human-object in-
  teraction hotspots from video. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
  3
Tushar Nagarajan, Yanghao Li, Christoph Feichtenhofer, and Kristen Grauman. Ego-topo: Envi-
  ronment affordances from egocentric video. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2020. 3
Anh Nguyen, Dimitrios Kanoulas, Darwin G Caldwell, and Nikos G Tsagarakis. Object-based
  affordances detection with convolutional neural networks and dense conditional random fields. In
 International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017. 3
Despoina Paschalidou, Ali Osman Ulusoy, and Andreas Geiger. Superquadrics revisited: Learning
  3d shape parsing beyond cuboids. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
 (CVPR), 2019. 3
Despoina Paschalidou, Luc Van Gool, and Andreas Geiger. Learning unsupervised hierarchical part
  decomposition of 3d objects from a single rgb image. In Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020. 3
Despoina Paschalidou, Angelos Katharopoulos, Andreas Geiger, and Sanja Fidler. Neural parts:
  Learning expressive 3d shape abstractions with invertible neural networks. In Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021. 3
Zhongzheng Ren, Ishan Misra, Alexander G Schwing, and Rohit Girdhar. 3d spatial recognition
  without spatially labeled 3d. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  pp. 13204±13213, 2021. 3


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Anirban Roy and Sinisa Todorovic. A multi-scale cnn for affordance segmentation in rgb images. In
  European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2016. 3
Stefano Soatto. Actionable information in vision. In Machine Learning for Computer Vision, pp.
  17±48. Springer, 2013. 1
Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph of
  general knowledge. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2017. 21
Karl Stelzner, Kristian Kersting, and Adam R Kosiorek. Decomposing 3d scenes into objects via
  unsupervised volume segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01148, 2021. 3
Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J Engel,
  Raul Mur-Artal, Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, et al. The replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor
  spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019. 15, 20
Chun-Yu Sun, Qian-Fang Zou, Xin Tong, and Yang Liu. Learning adaptive hierarchical cuboid
  abstractions of 3d shape collections. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38(6):1±13, 2019. 3
Marc Toussaint, Kelsey R Allen, Kevin A Smith, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Differentiable physics and
 stable modes for tool-use and manipulation planning-extended abtract. In IJCAI, pp. 6231±6235,
 2019. 19
Shubham Tulsiani, Hao Su, Leonidas J Guibas, Alexei A Efros, and Jitendra Malik. Learning shape
  abstractions by assembling volumetric primitives. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2017. 3
Sjoerd Van Steenkiste, Michael Chang, Klaus Greff, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Relational neural
  expectation maximization: Unsupervised discovery of objects and their interactions. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1802.10353, 2018. 3
Hanqing Wang, Wei Liang, and Lap-Fai Yu. Transferring objects: Joint inference of container and
  human pose. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2017a. 3
Xiaolong Wang, Rohit Girdhar, and Abhinav Gupta. Binge watching: Scaling affordance learning
  from sitcoms. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017b. 3
Yian Wang, Ruihai Wu, Kaichun Mo, Jiaqi Ke, Qingnan Fan, Leonidas J Guibas, and Hao Dong.
  Adaafford: Learning to adapt manipulation affordance for 3d articulated objects via few-shot
  interactions. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 90±107. Springer, 2022. 3
Jiacheng Wei, Guosheng Lin, Kim-Hui Yap, Tzu-Yi Hung, and Lihua Xie. Multi-path region mining
   for weakly supervised 3d semantic segmentation on point clouds. In Conference on Computer
   Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4384±4393, 2020. 3
Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanxiao
  Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, et al. SAPIEN: A simulated part-based interactive environment. In
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020. 2, 6, 24
Dan Xie, Sinisa Todorovic, and Song-Chun Zhu. Inferring" dark matter" and" dark energy" from
  videos. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2013. 3
Jie Yang, Kaichun Mo, Yu-Kun Lai, Leonidas J Guibas, and Lin Gao. Dsg-net: Disentangled
   structured mesh net for controllable generation of fine geometry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.05440,
   2020. 3
Kaizhi Yang and Xuejin Chen. Unsupervised learning for cuboid shape abstraction via joint segmen-
  tation from point clouds. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2021. 3, 5
Hong-Xing Yu, Leonidas J Guibas, and Jiajun Wu. Unsupervised discovery of object radiance fields.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07905, 2021. 3
Lap-Fai Yu, Noah Duncan, and Sai-Kit Yeung. Fill and transfer: A simple physics-based approach
  for containability reasoning. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2015. 3


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yibiao Zhao and Song-Chun Zhu. Scene parsing by integrating function, geometry and appearance
  models. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2013. 3
Yixin Zhu, Yibiao Zhao, and Song-Chun Zhu. Understanding tools: Task-oriented object modeling,
  learning and recognition. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2015. 3
Yixin Zhu, Chenfanfu Jiang, Yibiao Zhao, Demetri Terzopoulos, and Song-Chun Zhu. Inferring
  forces and learning human utilities from videos. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2016. 3
Yixin Zhu, Tao Gao, Lifeng Fan, Siyuan Huang, Mark Edmonds, Hangxin Liu, Feng Gao, Chi
  Zhang, Siyuan Qi, Ying Nian Wu, et al. Dark, beyond deep: A paradigm shift to cognitive ai with
  humanlike common sense. Engineering, 6(3):310±345, 2020. 3


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              sittable     framework    backrest    armrest


         Real-world Mesh       Input          Reconstructed        Slot 1     Slot 2    Slot 3            Slot 4


   Figure 8: Qualitative results on real-world objects (chairs and sofas) from Replica (Straub et al., 2019).

                            support      framework


         Real-world Mesh       Input                    Reconstructed          Slot 1            Slot 2


 Figure 9: Qualitative results on real-world objects (tables and cabinets) from Replica (Straub et al., 2019).


                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  display       wrapgrasp     pressable


     Input             Ground Truth       Reconstructed         Slot 1             Slot 2                Slot 3

             Figure 10: Qualitative results on objects (laptops and displays) in our ªdisplay" subset.


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         cutting    handle


           Input             Ground Truth        Reconstructed           Slot 1              Slot 2


           Figure 11: Qualitative results on objects (knives and scissors) in our ªcutting" subset.
                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                   framework
                                                                       support
                                                                      backrest
                                                                        sittable
                                                                         handle
                                                                       armrest
                                                                     openable
                                                                containment
                                                                        display
                                                                 illumination
                                                                           lever
                                                                      pourable
                                                                   wrapgrasp
                                                          liquidcontainment
                                                                     pressable
                                                                        rollable
                                                                    pinchable
                                                                        cutting
                                                                        audible
                                                                      headrest
                                                                          lyable
                                                                     twistable
                                                                            step
                                                                       hanging
                                                                                   0   2500 5000 7500 10000 12500 15000 17500 20000
(a) Number of object categories covered by each affor- (b) Number of object instances covered by each affor-
dance category.                                          dance category.
                             Figure 12: Statistics of our part affordance dataset.

A     E XPERIMENTS ON M ORE A FFORDANCES
We conduct further experiments and report per- Table 3: Quantitative results on the “display” subset
formance on more affordance categories on the and the “cutting” subset.
long tail of the dataset distribution. More specifi-                  Model           mIoU (%) ↑ MSE ↓ AP (%) ↑
cally, we include the subsets ªdisplayº and ªcut-                    Slot MLP            17.2    0.0163  97.2
                                                             Ours w/o Afford & Cuboid    14.8    0.0146  N/A
tingº. The ªdisplayº set includes part-level af-     display
                                                                 Ours w/o Cuboid         47.0    0.0140  80.6
fordances {display, wrapgrasp, pressable} from                      Ours (full)          47.6    0.0135  82.0
                                                                     Slot MLP            21.6    0.0030  97.7
1,441 object instances, most of which are lap- cutting Ours w/o Afford & Cuboid          27.8    0.0028  N/A
                                                                 Ours w/o Cuboid         28.1    0.0027  96.9
tops and displays. The ªcuttingº set includes                       Ours (full)          29.8    0.0026  97.7
affordances {cutting, handle} from 641 object
instances, most of which are knives and scissors on the long tail of the dataset distribution. Quantita-
tive results are shown in Tab. 3 and qualitative results are shown in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. Our method
still shows a significant advantage over the baseline methods on two core metrics: mIoU for part
affordance discovery and MSE for 3D reconstruction.

B     ATTENTION V ISUALIZATION
Following the settings in Locatello et al. (2020), we train the models using T = 3 attention iterations
in the slot attention module. In Fig. 13, we observe that each slot gradually attends to the correct part
of the object as the number of attention iterations increases. The attention mask at t = 3 depicts the
silhouette of the reconstructed shape and parts.

C     F URTHER A NALYSIS & D ISCUSSION
C.1    N UMBER OF S LOTS

We set the number of slots as the maximal number of affordance labels that appear in one subset,
which is different from previous object-centric learning algorithm (Locatello et al., 2020), where the
number of slots could be arbitrary. This is because when we increase the number of slots, we also
increase the ambiguities of the affordance composition and set matching at the same time. It prevents
the model from learning accurate correspondence between affordance labels and parts. As shown in
Fig. 14, the model learns the ªsittableº in a ªnullº slot.

C.2    S ELECTION OF S TUDIED A FFORDANCES

Although we annotate objects with 24 affordance categories, we benchmark PartAfford only on three
subsets with 7 kinds of affordances in this work. The main reason is that we find it much more
challenging to discover part-level affordance for some other affordance categories. For example,
ªrollableº and ªcuttingº usually connect to tiny object parts that are challenging to be segmented
from objects, ªilluminationº and ªdisplayº cannot be distinguished from the objects without a deeper
understanding of the visual appearance and reflections, ªpressableº and ªpinchableº require richer
interactions to be discovered. In summary, it is either especially challenging to segment or requires
more than geometric information (e.g., active interactions) to discover the other affordance categories.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   sittable        framework        backrest          armrest


      Input              GT                Recon.               Attn. t=1            Attn. t=2     Attn. t=3
Figure 13: Example affordance discovery model trained with T = 3 attention iterations. Attention is visualized
in various colors and point radius. The point is colored according to the predicted affordance label of the slot
which attends the most to the point. Point radius positively depends on the maximal attention value across the
slots. We use trilinear upsampling to rescale the attention mask to the input resolution (32 × 32 × 32).


       null    framework        backrest       sittable


   Input      GT         Recon.      Slot 1       Slot 2        Slot 3      Slot 4        Slot 5    Slot 6
Figure 14: Model performance when the number of slots increases. The model learns the ªsittableº part in a
ªnullº slot.

We believe that future solutions to our task could involve those interaction cues to take the best of
both worlds, further improving the performance and extending the scope. Our solution could also
provide an intuitive prior for active learning methods, which could boost learning efficiency compared
to learning from scratch. We hope to further explore the learning of these affordances in the future.


C.3     A MBIGUITIES IN A FFORDANCE L EARNING

Affordance is naturally ambiguous since the functions of object parts are rich. This work provides a
well-defined benchmark to study how to learn affordance from accurate affordance definition and
sparse set supervision. In another work, (Deng et al., 2021) models the multiple affordances with
a mixture of distributions. Our dataset has supported learning multiple affordances per part; we
annotate a single part with multiple affordances (see details in Sec. 5). Yet, as the first step towards
affordance discovery, our current method focuses on learning the most important affordance. We
believe our current learning framework could also be extended to learn multiple affordances by
switching the one-hot affordance label to multi-hot labels. We also suggest further fine-tuning the
multi-hot affordance prediction based on the one-hot version, since the affordance prediction of
single-hot labels appears significant to guide the slot competition from our ablation study.


C.4     P OTENTIAL I MPACTS FOR V ISION & ROBOTICS C OMMUNITY

By learning to discover the part-level affordance, our model could facilitate the understanding of
human-object interaction and object manipulation. As shown in Fig. 15, the learned affordance
could be applied to synthesize potential human actions and interactions with various 3D objects.
Additionally, our work could provide priors for robotic cross-category object manipulation and task
planning (Toussaint et al., 2019; Garrett et al., 2020; 2021). For example, Hadjivelichkov et al. (2022)
demonstrates a single reference image of an object with annotated affordance regions can help the
robot to use the affordance skill in the real-world setting, where our method can provide generalizable
affordance information on the 3D shapes without the need for manual annotation.


                                                          19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            sittable     support      frame.     contain.    liquid.    openable       display    cutting
 Orig.      72.44        82.92        74.74      54.01       20.34      58.62          87.26      83.29
 Scaled     74.95        83.68        77.87      75.01       69.42      66.26          90.03      79.67
            backrest     armrest      press.     handle      illum.     wrapgrasp      lyable     headrest
 Orig.      80.51        73.19        78.70      38.09       24.57      63.07          46.24      34.73
 Scaled     81.36        73.63        83.57      49.31       24.59      71.48          45.32      32.76
            rollable     pourable     twist.     lever       pinch.     audible
 Orig.      53.33        68.15        40.24      60.34       62.07      56.67
 Scaled     58.43        73.89        53.97      64.24       66.84      46.11
Table 4: Supervised affordance segmentation results (category mIoU %). ªOrig." refers to the original PartNet
dataset with 3D shapes scaled to a unit bounding sphere. ªScaled" refers to rescaling 3D shapes to real-world
dimensions. ªavg" refers to shape average Intersection-over-Union (IoU).


     Figure 15: 3D Human synthesis conditioned on inferred part affordance using (Hassan et al., 2021).

D    S UPERVISED A FFORDANCE E STIMATION

Apart from the PartAfford task, we also benchmark the state-of-the-art 3D auto-encoder for the super-
vised affordance segmentation task in a cross-category fashion on our proposed dataset. Evaluation
is reported on the Intersection-over-Union (IoU) metric following Mo et al. (2019b), as shown in
Table 4.
Note that the baseline is trained and tested on all object and affordance categories. In contrast,
semantic segmentation in PartNet (Chang et al., 2015; Mo et al., 2019b) is trained on each object
category separately. Results show that the algorithm could still achieve high performance, which
demonstrates that our affordance annotation is reasonable and consistent.
PartNet normalizes every object shape into a unit bounding sphere. This is not realistic since objects
in different categories may have very different dimensions. For example, a mug is much smaller than
a bed. If normalized in the same way, cross-category training performance may be hurt to some extent.
Thus, we calculate the average real-world 3D dimensions of each object category from metadata of
ShapeNet (Chang et al., 2015) and scale the point cloud in our part affordance dataset according to
its object category.


E    M ODEL G ENERALIZATION TO U NSEEN O BJECTS

To further demonstrate the generalizability of our methods qualitatively, we additionally provide
examples for real scanned and more diverse objects from the Replica (Straub et al., 2019) dataset,
results shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. Although the scan quality is not perfect, our learned model
generalizes well and can reconstruct and identify the functional parts given novel objects.


F    D ETAILS ON E XPERIMENTS

Benchmarks Below, we describe the statistics of objects and the related affordances for these
subsets; we discuss detailed reasons about why we choose these three subsets in Appendix C.2.
• ªSittableº: We collect all object instances that have affordance ªsittableº; most of them are chairs and
  sofas. Their part-level affordances belong to the set {sittable, backrest, armrest, f ramework}.
  We split the training, validation, and test set in the ratio of 7 : 1 : 2. In total, we have 5, 093 instances
  for training and 1, 457 for test.


                                                     20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• ªSupportº: We collect objects with affordance ªsupport", mainly from categories table and cabinet.
  Their affordances belong to {support, f ramework}. There are 7, 974 instances for training and
  2, 279 instances for test.
• ªOpenableº: This subset contains objects from frige, dishwasher, washing machine, and microwave.
  Their affordances belong to {openable, f ramework, handle}. There are 807 instances for training
  and 232 instances for test.
Data Augmentation To enrich affordance compositions, we augment the training data by randomly
removing certain object parts with corresponding affordance labels.

G     M ORE M ODULE A BLATION
G.1    S OFT K - MEANS

Slot attention, as a generalized soft k-means algorithm, could be reduced to the soft k-means algorithm
according to Locatello et al. (2020). It turns out that the reduced model can achieve 23.0% Mean
IoU on "sittable" objects, which is slightly better than the Slot MLP baseline but significantly worse
than our full model using slot attention (57.3%). It reconstructs the whole shape with a quality (MSE:
0.0096) on par with the full model (MSE: 0.0097). Its affordance set prediction accuracy is the lowest
among all models (AP: 0.87). Overall, the soft k-means algorithm cannot effectively segment the
shape or discover affordance parts.

H     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
We show additional qualitative results for our full model’s affordance discovery results on ªsittable"
(Fig. 16), ªsupport" (Fig. 17), ªopenable" (Fig. 18) objects, respectively.

I     PART A FFORDANCE DATASET
Here we report more statistics and details on how we define and annotate the affordance labels in our
dataset. As shown in Fig. 12, most of the affordance categories are annotated on more than 2 kinds of
objects. Our curated subsets cover the most common affordance categories (top 7), as well as some
rare affordance categories (e.g., ªcuttingº) on the long tail.

I.1   P RINCIPLES FOR A FFORDANCE A NNOTATION

To keep annotations consistent across object categories, we design a guideline for affordance annota-
tion. Below are some general principles to annotate a leaf part of an object instance with affordances.
Multiple affordances. A part can afford multiple kinds of human actions. For example, the seat of
chair could afford sittable for resting of human body or support if one wants to place some books on
it. We refer to ConceptNet (Speer et al., 2017), a giant knowledge database, for annotating common
usage of object parts.
Prioritized fine-grained affordances. When there are multiple affordances labels for a part, we give
the more fine-grained affordance label higher priority. For the chair seat in the example above, sittable
is prioritized compared with support as it is a fine-grained support affordance for body resting.
Articulation-related affordances. The PartNet dataset does not contain articulation information, which
makes affordances such as openable not geometrically distinguishable. Thus, we also generate a
set of shapes with openable affordance from the PartNet-Mobility dataset by capturing 3D shapes
with various opening angles. More geometric variation helps models to learn articulation-related
affordances.

I.2   A FFORDANCE D ESCRIPTIONS

Our description for each affordance contains a brief definition, some supplemental clarification and
priority statements if needed, and some example leaf nodes in the part hierarchy of various reasonable
objects (full path from root to leaf).


                                                   21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


sittable: Indicates whether the object can be used for sitting. Anything sittable of course affords
support, and the requirement for a supporting object to be sittable is that it must be both comfortable
and safe for human seating. For example, a table is not sittable despite affording support because it is
not comfortable. Sittable is given priority over potential co-existing affordances like support.
E.g., chair/chair_seat/seat_surface.
support: A trait of objects which can safely keep other objects on top of themselves. Common
characteristics of support-affording objects are that they are flat and can support multiple objects
at once. A key distinction between support-affording objects and non-supporting objects is that
support-affording objects will remain stable when other objects are placed on them. For example, a
table is a supporting object because it is just as stable with objects on it as it is without. However, a
stack of plates is not supporting because they become more unstable as you add more plates.
E.g., table/regular_table/tabletop,
      storage_furniture/cabinet/shelf,
      bed/bed_unit/bed_sleep_area.
openable: Parts which may be moved with a hinge-like mechanism on an articulated object.
Openable objects do not need to afford handles, but usually handles can be found attached to the
openable part. Openable parts are distinct from other moving parts in that they need to swing to
some degree to be moved. Openable is given priority over potential co-existing affordances like
containment.
E.g., door/door_body/surface_board,
      dish_washer/body/door/door_frame,
      microwave/body/door.
backrest: Objects which are reasonably designed for providing support to a person’s back. By
reasonably designed, we mean either specifically (as in the back of a chair) or can afford back support
if a person wanted to sit upright (like a headboard).
E.g., chair/chair_back/back_support.
armrest: Objects which are specifically designed to support an arm. For example, a table can
support a variety of things and is thus not an armrest. A chair’s arm is the perfect size for a human
arm, so it must be an armrest.
E.g., chair/chair_arm.
handle: An object extension which affords the ability to open an attached ‘openable’ part. Handles
are mostly grabbed with hand-wrapping, so it’s important to only afford ‘handle’ to parts which are
specifically involved in an opening mechanism, like a door handle.
E.g., storage_furniture/cabinet/cabinet_door/handle,
      table/regular_table/table_base/drawer_base/
      cabinet_door/handle,
      mug/handle,
      dish_washer/body/door/handle,
      bag/bag_handle.
framework: Any object segment which either: a) helps to define the shape of the object as a whole
or b) is an unaffording extension of the object or connector for other segments. For example, a
hinge affords framework because it is integral to connects the door to the door frame. Overall, this
affordance is the most general of all, so it should only be used when it clearly applies to either case of
the definition. For example, most handles do not afford framework because it is both a small part
of an object’s shape and already affords handle. It has the least priority among potential co-existing
affordances.
E.g., chair/chair_base.
containment: An affordance of object which can store physical items. The size of the physical
items does not matter, so long as they are not too small. For example, anything that can only contain
objects smaller than say a marble do not afford containment. Also, items that afford containment
must afford security to the items they contain, such that they will not fall out.


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.g., table/regular_table/table_base/drawer_base/drawer,
      storage_furniture/cabinet/drawer,
      mug/container,
      trash_can/container,
      refrigerator/body,
      bowl/container, bag/bag_body,
      bottle/normal_bottle/body.
liquidcontainment: A more specific version of the containment affordance. Objects that afford
liquid-containment must be able to safely contain liquid. Examples of these are bottles, bath tubs, etc.
E.g., mug/body,
      bottle/normal_bottle/body.
display: Something which visualizes information for a useful purpose. Examples of these would be
monitor screens or a clock surface.
E.g., display/display_screen/screen,
      laptop/screen_side/screen,
      clock/table_clock/clock_body/surface.
cutting: The quality of being able to slice through other objects. Certain things that can cut are
not considered to have cutting affordance if it was used against its intended purpose, like smashing
a glass vase. Cutting is only afforded to objects which are specifically designed for cutting, like a
blade-edge.
E.g., cutting_instrument/knife/blade_side,
      scissors/blade_handle_set/blade.
pressable: A mechanical feature of objects which either have buttons or can interact with a finger.
Good examples of these are keyboard keys.
E.g., keyboard/key.
hanging: A part which can be hung on another object. These parts almost always only serve the
purpose of hanging the rest of the entire object. An example of this would be a shoulder strap for a
handbag.
E.g., bag/shoulder_strap.
wrapgrasp: The ‘wrap-grasp’ trait is afforded by parts which are explicitly meant to be grabbed in
a hand-wrapping motion. Just because a hand can wrap around an object part does not mean it affords
wrap-grasp. It must be useful to grip the part in this way. An example of this would be a ladder rung,
which a person is meant to wrap their hand around to climb the ladder.
E.g., cup,
      bed/ladder/rung.
illumination: The affordance of light emission. This only applies to object parts which are meant
to light up a broad area. For example, a monitor screen does not afford illumination despite emitting
light because it is not supposed to be used to light up the area around it.
E.g., lamp/table_or_floor_lamp/lamp_unit
      /lamp_head/light_bulb.
lyable: Indicates that a human can comfortably rest his/her entire body on the object. These objects
are usually flat with a soft surface. Lyable is given priority over potential co-existing affordances such
as sittable and support.
E.g., bed/bed_unit/bed_sleep_area/mattress.
headrest: An extension of an object which is oriented so a human head can rest comfortably on it.
Examples of these are chair headrests or bedframe headrests.
E.g., bed/bed_unit/bed_sleep_area_pillow,
      bed/bed_unit/bed_frame/headboard.



                                                   23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


step: A part which affords the human foot climbing or resting functionality. For example, a ladder
rung is a step because it affords climbing with both hands and feet. A foot pedestal is also a step
because it can be stood on or feet can be rested on it.
E.g., bed/ladder/rung.
pourable: Meant for parts which liquid can flow out of. Things that are pourable may also be
dependent on a mechanism for controlling flow, like a bottle cap or a knob.
E.g., bottle/normal_bottle/mouth,
      bottle/jug/body.
twistable: These objects can either be detached or provide special functionality by twisting them in
a clockwise or counterclockwise motion. Examples include bottle caps and knobs.
E.g., bottle/normal_bottle/lid,
      bottle/normal_bottle/mouth.
rollable: A part which can roll to move around. Exceptions to this affordance are objects which roll
but stay fixed in place, like a rocking chair.
E.g., wheel.
lever: Any handle which can rotate up to a point. For example, knobs rotate but are not levers
because they do not provide handles. Levers must be treated differently from twistable objects or
handles because if they are twisted too much they will break.
E.g., lever.
pinchable: An object which is small enough such that it can be manipulated by pinching with two
or more fingers. Things that are pinchable must not be heavy, and they usually fit inside the palm of a
hand.
E.g., earbud.
audible: Anything which emits sound. This does not include sound emitted indirectly, such as a
door creaking when opened, which makes sound as a side-effect.
E.g., headphone/padding.

I.3   L ICENSE

Our dataset is annotated based on PartNet (v0) (Mo et al., 2019b) and PartNet-Mobility (v2.0) (Xiang
et al., 2020), both of which are licensed under the terms of the MIT License.

J     C ODE AND DATA
Code, data, and instructions needed to reproduce the main experimental results are available in the
supplementary materials.


                                                  24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  sittable     framework          backrest         armrest


     Input        GT             Recon.          Slot 1          Slot 2          Slot 3         Slot 4
               Figure 16: Additional qualitative results on objects in our ªsittable" subset.


                                                    25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 support        framework


                Input           GT             Recon.          Slot 1            Slot 2
              Figure 17: Additional qualitative results on objects in our "support" subset.


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        openable           framework           handle


         Input           GT             Recon.           Slot 1            Slot 2          Slot 3
              Figure 18: Additional qualitative results on objects in our ªopenable" subset.


                                                   27
