Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E XPLAINING T EMPORAL G RAPH M ODELS THROUGH
AN E XPLORER -NAVIGATOR F RAMEWORK

 Wenwen Xia1,⇤, Mincai Lai2 , Caihua Shan3,†, Yao Zhang4 , Xinnan Dai2 , Xiang Li5 , Dongsheng Li3
 1
   Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 ShanghaiTech University, 3 Microsoft Research Asia
 4
   Fudan University, 5 East China Normal University
 xiawenwen@sjtu.edu.cn, {laimc, daixn}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
 yaozhang@fudan.edu.cn, xiangli@dase.ecnu.edu.cn
 {caihuashan, dongsheng.li}@microsoft.com


                                               A BSTRACT
            While Graph Neural Network (GNN) explanation has recently received signifi-
            cant attention, existing works are generally designed for static graphs. Due to the
            prevalence of temporal graphs, many temporal graph models have been proposed,
            but explaining their predictions still remains to be explored. To bridge the gap,
            in this paper, we propose a Temporal GNN Explainer (T-GNNExplainer) method.
            Specifically, we regard a temporal graph as a sequence of temporal events be-
            tween nodes. Given a temporal prediction of a model, our task is to find a subset
            of historical events that lead to the prediction. To handle this combinatorial opti-
            mization problem, T-GNNExplainer includes an explorer to find the event subsets
            with Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), and a navigator that learns the correlations
            between events and helps reduce the search space. In particular, the navigator is
            trained in advance and then integrated with the explorer to speed up searching and
            achieve better results. To the best of our knowledge, T-GNNExplainer is the first
            explainer tailored for temporal graph models. We conduct extensive experiments
            to evaluate the performance of T-GNNExplainer. Experimental results demon-
            strate that T-GNNExplainer can achieve superior performance with up to ⇠50%
            improvement in Area under Fidelity-Sparsity Curve.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Temporal graphs are highly dynamic networks where new nodes and edges can appear at any time.
The input is usually regarded as a sequence of events (node i, node j, timestamp t), which means
there is an interaction (edge) between node i and j at timestamp t. It is ubiquitous in many real-
world applications, such as friendship in social networks (Pereira et al., 2018; Barrat et al., 2021),
and user-item interactions in e-commence (Li et al., 2021c). Many applicable temporal graph models
(e.g., Jodie (Kumar et al., 2019), TGAT (Xu et al., 2020), TGN (Rossi et al., 2020)) are proposed
considering both time dynamics and graph topology. Compared with static GNNs, temporal graph
models learn the representation of each node as a function of time and then predict future evolutions,
e.g., which interaction will occur and what time node attributes change.
Despite the success, all these models are black boxes and lack transparency. It is opaque how
information aggregates and propagates over a graph and how a prediction is affected by historical
events. Human-intelligent explanations are critical for understanding the rationale of predictions
and providing insights into model characteristics. Explainers could increase the trust and reliability
of temporal graph models when they are applied to high-stakes situations, like fraud detection in
financial systems (Wang et al., 2021b) and disease progression prediction in healthcare (Li et al.,
2021a). Besides, explainers also help check and mitigate the privacy, fairness and safety issues in
real-world applications (Doshi-Velez & Kim, 2017).
While currently there are no methods for explaining temporal graph models, some recent expla-
nation methods (e.g., GNNExplainer (Ying et al., 2019), PGExplainer (Luo et al., 2020) and Sub-
graphX (Yuan et al., 2021)) for static GNNs are the most related. They identify the important nodes,
    ⇤
        This work was done during Wenwen Xia’s internship at MSRA.
    †
        Corresponding author.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


edges and subgraphs for predictions by perturbing the input of GNN models. Obviously, these
models cannot be used to explain a well-trained temporal graph model, as they cannot capture the
temporal dependency mixed with the graph topology.
Here we propose T-GNNExplainer, an instance-level model-agnostic explainer for temporal graph
models. For any prediction of a target event, we aim to find out important events from candidate
events, which lead to the model’s prediction of occurrence (or absence) of it. The candidate events
are previously occurred events satisfying spatial and temporal conditions: they are in the k-hop
neighborhood based on the message passing mechanism, and their timestamps should be close to
that of the target event.
Specifically, T-GNNExplainer takes the advantages of search-based and learning-based GNN ex-
plainers together. Generally speaking, a learning-based explainer is inductive to all the target events,
and explaining a target event is very quick once trained. A search-based explainer searches for the
best result for each target event, which is more specific but time-consuming. While in this work,
T-GNNExplainer is designed as a MCTS process with a learned navigator. We pretrain a navigator
in advance to learn the inductive relationship between a target event and its candidate events. Then
we utilize MCTS to explore the best combination of candidate events given any new target event.
The navigator helps to bias the search process, significantly reducing the search time and improving
the performance.
We evaluate T-GNNExplainer on both synthetic and real-world datasets for two typical temporal
graph models (TGAT and TGN). On synthetic datasets, we simulate temporal events by the mul-
tivariate Hawkes process and pre-defined event relation rules. The highly accurate explanations
demonstrate that T-GNNExplainer can find an exact influential event set. Since we do not know the
ground truth for real-world datasets, the fidelity-sparsity curve is adopted to evaluate the superiority
of T-GNNExplainer compared with baselines. We further provide a case study on synthetic datasets
to illustrate the practical events found by T-GNNExplainer and navigation information.

2     R ELATED WORK

2.1   T EMPORAL G RAPH AND T EMPORAL G RAPH M ODELS

Graphs can be divided into four types by temporal granularity: static graph, graph with time-
weighted edges, discrete-time dynamic graph (DTDG) and continuous-time dynamic graph (CTDG)
(Kazemi et al., 2020). The typical graph neural networks (e.g., GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017),
GAT (Veličković et al., 2018), GIN (Xu et al., 2018)) can be used for the former two types to learn
the static node embeddings. DTDGs are sequences of static graph snapshots taken at intervals in
time. CTDGs are more general and are represented as a sequence of timestamped events, including
edge/node addition, deletion, and feature transformations. In this work, we consider temporal graphs
as CTDGs and take a sequence of timestamped events as model input since CTDGs are mainstream
dynamic graphs with the finest time granularity.
Instead of static node embeddings, temporal graph models are required to learn dynamic node em-
beddings. DeepCoevelve (Dai et al., 2016) used RNNs to update node embeddings when some
nodes are involved in new events. Jodie (Kumar et al., 2019) added the time projection module to
make node embeddings evolve over time. However, they lack a GNN-like aggregation from node
neighbors, which leads to the staleness problem (i.e., some node embeddings are out of date (Rossi
et al., 2020; Kazemi et al., 2020)). Thus, CoPE (Zhang et al., 2021) and TGAT (Xu et al., 2020) are
proposed to utilize the message passing mechanism to update node embeddings by its own events
and its neighbors’ events. It has been demonstrated to improve expressive power. TGN (Rossi et al.,
2020) is an up-to-date framework and claims that most previous models are its specific cases. We
choose the state-of-the-art TGAT and TGN as target models to be explained in the paper.

2.2   G RAPH E XPLAINERS

One popular way of explaining static graphs is to study the output variations of well-trained GNN
models with respect to different input perturbations (Yuan et al., 2020b). Intuitively, the output
changes vastly when critical nodes, edges, or subgraphs are perturbed. There are mainly two ap-
proaches assigning importance scores to graph entities by perturbations: learning-based and search-


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


based. Learning-based methods (Luo et al., 2020; Shan et al., 2021; Vu & Thai, 2020) leverage
node representations generated by the trained GNN and adopt a neural network to learn crucial
nodes/edges. They are trained with multiple instances, i.e., learning inductive explanation charac-
teristics for multiple ones. Besides, search-based methods (Yuan et al. (2021); Wang et al. (2021a))
utilize heuristic search algorithms with a score function (e.g., defined by Shapley value or causality)
to find an important input subset. Their inference time is longer because the search space of each
instance is different, and they need to explore feasible solutions one by one. There are also some
works possessing intrinsically interpretable architectures (Han et al. (2020); Li et al. (2021b); Xiao
et al. (2022)) or generating model-level explanations (Yuan et al. (2020a); Shin et al. (2022)). Most
of the self-interpretable models seek to a sparse subgraph during forward computation supported
by the attention mechanism (Han et al. (2020)) or other internal scores (Li et al. (2021b); Cui et al.
(2021)). There is a concurrent work that also explains temporal graph models He et al. (2022). How-
ever, they use discrete snapshots of a temporal graph while we focus on continuous event streams.
In this work, we mainly focus on instance-level post-hoc explanation methods since most of the
temporal graph models in the literature are not designed with specific consideration of explanations.

3     P RELIMINARY
3.1   T EMPORAL GRAPH MODEL

Assume that the input of temporal graph models is a sequence of events S = {e1 , e2 , · · · }. Each
ei = {nui , nvi , ti , atti } means that the node nui and nvi have an interaction (edge) at timestamp
ti with edge attribute atti . The atti could be the interaction feature, or an indicator to represent ei
is edge addition/deletion. Further, ei could involve only one node, {nui , null, ti , atti }, to represent
a node-wise event (node addition/deletion, or node attribute change). These events S constitute
a temporal graph G = (N , S) where S can be regarded as timestamped edges and N are nodes
involved in S. Since G and S are mutually defined, we regard G as both a temporal graph and a set
of events in the following.
We utilize the setting defined in (Kazemi et al., 2020) to unify different temporal graph models as
an encoder-decoder framework. The encoder is to learn the dynamic embedding for each node over
time, and the decoder utilizes the node embeddings for downstream prediction tasks, such as future
edge prediction. Specifically, let G i denote the graph constructed just before the timestamp ti , i.e.,
containing the events {e1 , · · · , ei 1 } but excluding ei . The encoder takes G i as the input and obtains
Z i where Zni ⇤ is the current embedding of the node n⇤ at timestamp ti . The decoder constructs the
loss by predicting whether an interaction between a pair of nodes happen at this timestamp (the
positive sample is ei = {nui , nvi } while negative samples are the remaining pairs). Thus, the
decoder uses Z i to predict the logit/probability of a new event between any pair of nodes, computes
the loss to backpropagate the gradients, and updates the model parameters.
            Encoder(G i ) ! Z i          Decoder(Z i ) ! Logit/Probablity of Events ! Loss
Let f (·) denote a well-trained temporal graph model including the encoder and the decoder to sim-
plify the notation. f (G i )[ej ] means that we use the encoder to compute Z i by G i at timestamp ti
and computes the logit/probability of event ej by leveraging Zni u and Zni v .
                                                                      j          j



3.2   P ROBLEM FORMULATION

Given the sequence of events and a well-trained temporal graph model f (·), the temporal explainer
explains why the model predicts an event ek would occur or not. Specifically, we aim to find
out a subset of events Rk from all the previous events G k to maximize the mutual information
M I(Yk , Rk ). Yk is the original prediction decided by f (G k )[ek ], which is 0 or 1. Rk determines
the distribution of the new prediction by f (Rk )[ek ]. When they are strongly dependent, Rk is
regarded as a good explanation for the prediction of occurrence/absence of event ek .
According to (Ying et al., 2019), maximizing the mutual information M I(Yk , Rk ) is equivalent to
minimizing conditional entropy H(Yk |Rk ) because H(Yk ) is a constant. Then we can transform
H(Yk |Rk ) into a cross entropy loss based on (Farnia & Tse, 2016):
                                    X
                            min          1(Yk = c) log P (Ynew = c|Rk )                        (1)
                               Rk
                                     c=0,1


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                           T-GNNExplainer

 Temporal graph                                        Temporal graph model                                                 Explorer              Root
                                                                                                                                                                                 Navigator
                          e9, e10                                                                           Reward                Selection e3           e12

         e1    e4                              Input                                                       simulation
                             e8
                                                                                                                                                   ...
                                                           Encoder                    Decoder
                                                                                                             Reward
               e5                   e11, e12                                                    Output                          e4     e5          e12
     e2, e3         e7                                                                                   backpropagation
              e6            e13
                         to predict                                  Representation
                                                                                                                                                 ...

                                                                                                                                                               e4 expansion


Figure 1: The framework of T-GNNExplainer. We first pre-train the navigator to learn the inductive
relationship between events. Then we invoke the explorer to search out a specific combination of
important events based on MCTS, including node selection, node expansion, reward simulation and
backpropagation. When expanding a node, the navigator infers to decide which event is removed.


P (Ynew |Rk ) is calculated by f (Rk )[ek ] and c is the label indicating whether the event occurs or not.

Objective. Given a target event ek on which a prediction is made by f (·), T-GNNExplainer is
a mapping g to infer the important events Rk = g(ek , G k , f (·)) by current temporal graph G k . T-
GNNExplainer g can also minimize the cross entropy loss for K target events. Formally, the optimal
explainer g ⇤ is defined as
                                               K
     ⇤                                  1 X⇥                                                                                                                                                    ⇤
    g = arg min                              1(Yk = 1) log (f (Rk )[ek ]) + 1(Yk = 0) log(1                                                                                   (f (Rk )[ek ]))
                    g                   K
                                               k=1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (2)
                                                       k                              k                              k        k                   k
                    subject to R = g(ek , G , f (·)) and R ✓ G and |R |  Nr
Here we assume f (Rk )[ek ] is a single-dimensional logit value produced by the model f (·), and (·)
indicates the sigmoid function. Rk should be concise so we use Nr as a hyper-parameter to control
the size of Rk .

4        M ETHODOLOGY
4.1       OVERVIEW

Here we introduce how to identify an important subset of events Rk for the target event ek . It is
a combinatorial optimization problem where any subset of G k whose size is equal to or smaller
than Nr could be the explanation. Besides, the search space of a temporal graph explainer is more
significant than that of static graph explainers because of duplicate timestamped edges and node-
wise events. Therefore, we design an explorer-navigator framework to effectively and efficiently
obtain Rk , shown in Fig. 1. The navigator is trained from multiple target events to capture the
inductive correlation between events. The explorer is guided by the navigator and finds a more
specific result based on Monte Carlo Tree Search. We will present them in the following.

4.2       NAVIGATOR

Inspired by previous parameterized explainers (Luo et al., 2020), we pretrain a navigator to provide
a global understanding of the relationship among events. Concretely, the navigator is a feed-forward
neural network h✓ (ej , ek ), which infers the importance score of an event ej w.r.t a target event
ek . The scores will be leveraged in the node expansion of the explorer (Sec. 4.3) to facilitate the
searching. The input features and the training/inference process are described as follows.
Navigator features. To capture the correlation between the target event ek = {nuk , nvk , tk , attk }
and each candidate event ej = {nuj , nvj , tj , attj }, we construct navigator input features as:

                         Zek ,ej = [Xnuk ||Xnvk || Time(tk ) || attk ||Xnuj ||Xnvj || Time(tj ) || attj ]T                                                                                          (3)

X represents the node feature matrix. Time(·) is a function converting a real-valued timestamp to a
vector that could be learnable (Xu et al., 2020; Rossi et al., 2020) or not (Vaswani et al., 2017). In


                                                                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


this paper, we adopt the harmonic encoder (Xu et al., 2020) as the time function. We input all the
candidate events w.r.t a target event as a batch into h✓ .
Training Process. We use the same objective function described in Eq. 2. The output of h✓ is
regarded as a soft-mask assigning weights to corresponding temporal edges of G k . If the model f (·)
is differentiable w.r.t edge weights, we add the soft-mask as edge aggregation weights in the model,
and then obtain the new prediction. Otherwise, the reparameterization trick is used in f (·). More de-
tails about reparameterization can be found in (Luo et al., 2020). Note that h✓ is trained inductively,
i.e., events in the training set are different from those to be explained by T-GNNExplainer.
Inference Process. Provided with a candidate event ej and a target event ek , we construct the input
Zek ,ej , put it into the trained navigator h✓ and infer the score, which will be utilized by the explorer.

4.3     E XPLORER

We adopt Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) in the explorer. First of all, we initialize the root node
as a set of candidate events. Then multiple rounds (a.k.a., rollouts) are conducted to expand nodes in
the search tree, where each node represents a feasible subset of events in the search space. There are
four aspects in each round: (1) select a path from the root to a leaf node; (2) expand new children by
removing unimportant events according to the navigator in the path selecting procedure; (3) simulate
reward of new nodes by temporal graph model; (4) backpropagate the leaf node’s reward to update
information in path nodes. At last, a node achieving the best reward and satisfying the sparsity
threshold is our final explanation result. We present the pseudo-code in Appendix.

4.3.1    I NITIALIZATION
The root node includes all the candidate events, which are previously occurred events satisfying
spatial and temporal conditions. Take the temporal graph in Fig. 1 as an example where we explain
e13 . Assume that the encoder uses the 2-hop GNN-based aggregation, the set of seen events by
encoder is {e2 , · · · , e12 }. A temporal threshold is used to remove old events. If the threshold is set
as 10, we preserve 10 recently occurred events. Finally, the root is initialized as {e3 , · · · , e12 }.

4.3.2    N ODE S ELECTION
We use N i to represent a node in the search tree and use ej to indicate one action, i.e., discard the
event ej from N i . We follow the UCT (Upper Confidence bound applied to Trees) formula proposed
in (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006) to balance the exploitation and the exploration in the node selection.
Assume we are on node N i , the action criteria is
                                       0                qP                         1
                                                                           i
                                            i                       i ) n(N , el )
                                         c(N , ej )        e l 2C(N
                     e⇤ = arg max @                   +                            A               (4)
                           ej 2C(N i )   n(N i , ej )      1 + n(N i , ej )


C(N i ) indicates the events already expanded in N i , n(N i , ej ) is the count for selecting ej on node
N i in previous rollouts, and c(N i , ej ) denotes the cumulative reward of selecting ej on node N i .
The first component is exploitation: we select the node with a high average reward. The second
component corresponds to exploration: we select the node with few simulations. We select and
move to N i ’s child node by removing the event e⇤ from N i .

4.3.3    N ODE E XPANSION
The strategy of node expansion significantly influences the performance because it affects the search
space and hence the best node’s quality. Previous works expand all possible children for any selected
node (Yuan et al., 2021). Instead, we only expand the best potential node to refine the search space.
Assuming the selected node N i is expandable (i.e., the number of children is less than the number
of events contained in the node), the explorer invokes the navigator (Sec. 4.2) to obtain potential
scores:
                                    e⇤ = arg min h✓ (ej , ek )                                    (5)
                                            ej 2N i /C(N i )


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N i /C(N i ) means possible events which are not expanded in the previous rollouts. We remove the
most unimportant event e⇤ to expand a new node. Since the navigator is learned in advance and infers
the score quickly, the additional cost is negligible. We could also expand the top-k candidates or
induce randomness to trade off the exploitation and exploration in the expansion step. For example,
we select e⇤ to expand with probability 1 ✏ and select a random unexplored ej with probability ✏.
The node selection and expansion are done alternatively. We start from the root node. We expand
new child node(s) for the root according to Eq. 5. Then we choose the node with the highest value
based on Eq. 4 from the root’s original and new child nodes and move to it. Next we repeat the
expansion and selection from the new node. The process ends when the current node is identified as
a leaf node, e.g., the node has less than five events.

4.3.4     R EWARD S IMULATION AND BACKPROPAGATION
The reward is simulated by the temporal graph model. In detail, we compute the reward of a leaf
node r(N leaf ) by computing the negative cross entropy loss 1 using Eq. 1, where Rk = N leaf . In
backpropagation, all the nodes N i from root to the leaf will update n(·, ·) and c(·, ·) by adding
the leaf node’s reward and one respectively, i.e., c(N i , el ) = c(N i , el ) + r(N leaf ), n(N i , el ) =
n(N i , el ) + 1. el is the action selected at N i .

5       E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of T-GNNExplainer with several baseline explain-
ers. We first describe synthetic datasets, real-world datasets and target models in Sec. 5.1. Then
we present the detailed experimental setup, including baselines and evaluation metrics in Sec. 5.2.
Sec. 5.3 is a quantitative evaluation to demonstrate that T-GNNExplainer could surpass the baselines
up to ⇠50% improvement in the Area Under the Fidelity-Sparsity Curve (AUFSC). Furthermore, we
investigate the navigator’s effect in Sec. 5.4. Finally, a case study in Sec. 5.5 is constructed to show
the explanations provided by T-GNNExplainer and navigation weights. The dataset statistics, target
models’ performance, and running time of all the methods are presented in Appendix. The code and
datasets are attached in the supplementary.

5.1     DATASETS AND TARGET MODELS

Real-world datasets: We adopt two typical real-world temporal graphs: Wikipedia2 and Reddit3 .
The Wikipedia dataset consists of ⇠9300 active users and top edited pages and ⇠160,000 temporal
edges. A 172-dimensional user editing feature accompanies each temporal edge. The Reddit dataset
is analogous to Wikipedia with ⇠11,000 active users and subreddits and ⇠700,000 temporal edges.
The 172-dimensional temporal edge features come from user post contents.
Synthetic datasets: We utilize the Hawkes process (Hawkes, 1971) and tick library (Bacry et al.,
2017) to generate synthetic datasets. In Fig. 2, we define four types of events (E1 ⇠ E4 ) in a graph.
According to the multivariate Hawkes process, the intensity of an event is divided into two parts:
endogenous and exogenous. For example, E0 has endogenous intensity 0.5 to happen because of
itself, and E3 has exogenous intensity 2 influenced by the happening of E2 . Given a pre-defined
event relation including endogenous/exogenous intensities, we adopt the tick library to simulate a
sequence of events with timestamps. We generate two synthetic datasets with ⇠ 10000 timestamps
based on event relation v1 and v2 in Fig. 2. More details are described in Appendix.
Target models: We adopt two recent state-of-the-art temporal graph models TGAT (Xu et al., 2020)
and TGN (Rossi et al., 2020). TGAT presents a temporal attention layer to aggregate a node’s pre-
vious neighbours in chronological order and a time encoder to encode temporal information. TGN
further proposes a memory store and update module to persist each node’s temporal state. A point
process model Transformer Hawkes Process (THP) is also compared in Sec. A.8 in Appendix. These
models are trained in a self-supervised manner for real-world datasets, i.e., events seen on the graph
are positive samples and randomly chosen unseen events are negative ones. For synthetic datasets,
    1
      A larger reward indicates a better solution, hence negative CR is consistent with the objective in Eq. 2.
    2
      http://snap.stanford.edu/jodie/wikipedia.csv
    3
      http://snap.stanford.edu/jodie/reddit.csv


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Temporal graph structure              Event relation v1                  Event relation v2

                   1             3       0.5                                0.5
                                                                                                               -2
                                               1                 2                1                  2

                                               -1           0           0         -1           0           0
                   2             4       0.5                                0.5

                       Predict


Figure 2: Synthetic temporal graph and pre-defined event relations. Values on nodes indicate en-
dogenous intensities. Values on edges define exogenous intensities. Green edges are positive influ-
ences while red edges are negative influences. Grey edges reflect no influence.

happened E3 timestamps are positive samples, and we uniformly sample random timestamps as
negative samples.

5.2      BASELINES AND SETUPS

Baselines: We compare the performance of T-GNNExplainer with several baseline methods. (1)
We implement PGExplainer (PG) in (Luo et al., 2020) and adapt it for the temporal graph scenario.
The adapted PG computes a weight to each event instead of each edge. The input information for
event ej is the same as the Zei ,ej in Eq. 3. We add the output score of PG to the attention weights
in the target model for all layers and use the same training objectives as T-GNNExplainer. (2) For
the attention-based explainer (ATTN), we extract the attention weights in TGAT/TGN and average
the values over all layers. The averaged weights are regarded as importance scores. (3) Besides, we
implement a straightforward explainer by perturbing one candidate event (PBONE), i.e., we compute
the importance of each event ej 2 G k by feeding G k /{ej } into the target model. Moreover, we also
compare with the self-interpretable THP-based THPExplainer in Sec. A.8 in Appendix.
Evaluation metrics: We adopt the fidelity F id(f (G k )[ek ], f (Rk )[ek ]) and the sparsity Sp(Rk , G k )
to evaluate the performance. Instead of using the difference between the original and new pre-
diction probabilities to define the fidelity in the previous work (Yuan et al., 2020b), we use the
difference between logits because logits could exhibit explainers’ performance more clearly. The
fidelity is defined as F id(f (G k )[ek ], f (Rk )[ek ]) = 1(Yk = 1)(f (Rk )[ek ] f (G k )[ek ]) + 1(Yk =
0)(f (G k )[ek ] f (Rk )[ek ]). Besides, sparsity is defined as Sp = |Rk |/|G k |. The higher fidelity and
higher sparsity mean a better result. We draw the fidelity-sparsity curve and compute area under the
curve AUFSC to evaluate the performance. A larger AUFSC indicates a better performance. Note
that AUFSC may be negative because fidelity could be negative.
Furthermore, we also use the metric Best Fid, indicating the best fidelity ever found by the explainer
without sparsity limitations. For T-GNNExplainer, we traverse all tree nodes to find a node with the
best fidelity. For baseline explainers, we rank all the candidate events in ascending order by their
importance scores produced by the explainer and successively preserve top events to find the subset
with the best fidelity.
Experimental setup: We use a two-layer MLP with 128 hidden units to instantiate the navigator h✓ .
We set the exploration parameter to 5 and the rollout number to 500 in the explorer. Following the
same setting in TGAT and TGN, we adopt a two-layer attention architecture and harmonic encoding
for timestamps. We train both TGAT and TGN with a 70%, 15%, and 15% splitting scheme of
datasets based on timestamps. For all methods, we limit the number of candidate events to 25 and
randomly sample 500 events in the test dataset as target events for the explanation. We use a machine
with an RTX 2080 GPU and a 48-core Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU@2.2GHz. More hyper-parameters
are listed in Appendix.

5.3      P ERFORMANCE COMPARISON WITH BASELINES
In this section, we report the quantitative results in Table 1 and Table 2 for real-world and synthetic
datasets respectively4 . We find that T-GNNExplainer outperforms baseline explainers significantly
and consistently for two metrics on all the datasets. On the real-world datasets, the gains of AUFSC
(Best Fid) are up to 53%(26%), 86%(45%), 134%(47%), and 74%(50%) w.r.t to the leading baseline

   4
       Best results are in bold and the second best are underlined.


                                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Table 1: Best fidelity (") and AUFSC (") achieved by each explainer on real-world datasets.
                                       Wikipedia                                 Reddit
                              TGAT                  TGN                  TGAT                TGN
                        Best Fid AUFSC       Best Fid AUFSC        Best Fid AUFSC      Best Fid AUFSC
           ATTN          0.891      0.564     0.479        0.073    0.658   -0.654        0.575    0.289
          PBONE          0.027      -2.227    0.296       -0.601    0.167   -2.492        0.340   -0.256
            PG           1.354       0.692    0.464       -0.231    0.804   -0.369        0.679    0.020
       T-GNNExplainer    1.836       1.477    0.866        0.590    1.518    1.076        1.362    1.113



      Table 2: Best fidelity (") and AUFSC (") achieved by each explainer on synthetic datasets.
                                      Synthetic v1                             Synthetic v2
                              TGAT                  TGN                  TGAT                TGN
                        Best Fid AUFSC       Best Fid AUFSC        Best Fid AUFSC      Best Fid AUFSC
           ATTN          0.555       0.390    2.178        1.624    0.605    0.291        0.988   -0.634
          PBONE          0.044      -2.882    0.000       -3.311    0.096   -4.771        0.320   -5.413
            PG           0.476      -0.081    2.006        0.626    1.329   -0.926        1.012   -1.338
       T-GNNExplainer    0.780       0.666    2.708        2.281    1.630    1.331        4.356    3.224



in four scenarios. ATTN and PG obtain comparable performance while PBONE performs the worst.
The results of synthetic datasets are analogous to those of real-world datasets.
Besides, we illustrate the fidelity-sparsity curve on the real-world datasets intuitively, shown in
Fig. 3. T-GNNExplainer achieves the highest final fidelity than other baselines and is also the highest
one under a given sparsity threshold. Moreover, with a relatively small sparsity threshold, e.g., 0.2,
T-GNNExplainer can already find a solution with a high fidelity compared to its final best value,
which indicates that T-GNNExplainer explores the low-sparsity event subsets efficiently. Without
the searching procedure, the fidelity of PG and ATTN increase slowly. PBONE performs the worst
in all scenarios because it treats each event independently. More performance investigations of the
navigator are illustrated in Sec. A.5 and Sec. A.6 in Appendix.
                            F


                                                      F


                                                                                  F
  F


      (a) TGAT, Wikipedia        (b) TGN, Wikipedia         (c) TGAT, Reddit          (d) TGN, Reddit

  Figure 3: Fidelity-sparsity comparison of explainers on real-world datasets with target models.


5.4     E FFICIENCY INFLUENCE OF THE NAVIGATOR

In this section, we investigate the efficiency enhancement of the navigator. We set the rollout number
to 500 for with navigator and without navigator. Here, we compare the time exhausted to achieve
a fidelity threshold. Let the best fidelity denote the larger final fidelity between with navigator and
without navigator. We set the fidelity threshold to 0.8⇥best fidelity to compare the time exhausted.
Results for all the datasets and both models are shown in Fig. 4. The results are averaged over
all target events. We can find that the running time of with navigator is always less than that of
without navigator under all settings. The efficiency improvement of with navigator is about 70.1%,
60.1%, 48.2%, and 28.1%. On the synthetic datasets, we can observe similar results as those on
real-world datasets. The speedup of the navigator is about 83.85%, 96.43%, 78.48%, and 43.66%
respectively under four synthetic settings. Overall, the navigator effectively speeds up the searching
procedure of the explorer to achieve reasonable solutions. More runtime comparisons with baselines
and complexity analysis of T-GNNExplainer are illustrated in Sec. A.4 in Appendix.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       (a) TGAT                                         (b) TGN
            Figure 4: Efficiency of the navigator on all the datasets with target models.

5.5   C ASE STUDY

In this section, we visualize explanations for target events with TGAT on the synthetic dataset.
Specifically, we show the scores given by T-GNNExplainer, the navigator, and the target models’
intrinsic attention module. The values are normalized in [0, 1]. Since T-GNNExplainer returns a
subset, we assign 1 to the selected events and 0 to others. The bar colours are consistent with type
colours in Fig. 2. The light green and green colours represent positive events to trigger the event E3 ,
while the red colour indicate negative events to inhibit the event E3 . The grey are irrelevant events.
Because we explain the happened target event E3 , a good explainer should assign relatively high
scores to green bars and low scores to gray and red events.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 present the cases on synthetic v1 and v2. ATTN finds a dense event subset including
irrelevant or negative events (Fig. 5(c)), or overlooks some previous positive events (Fig. 6(c)).
The navigator obtains a better result than ATTN. It assigns high scores to green bars and almost
eliminates the gray and red ones. Assisted by the navigator, T-GNNExplainer utilizes the explorer
to further filter the events and make sure the final result is concise. Overall, our final event set is
sparse while it remains the most important events leading to the occurrence of the target event E3 .


               (a) OURS                    (b) NAVIGATOR                      (c) ATTN
                           Figure 5: Synthetic v1, target event index 7380.


               (a) OURS                    (b) NAVIGATOR                      (c) ATTN
                           Figure 6: Synthetic v2, target event index 2013.

6     C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose the T-GNNExplainer for temporal graph model explanation. We design
a novel explorer-navigator framework to search for explanations effectively and efficiently. Experi-
mental results illustrate the superiority of T-GNNExplainer on both synthetic and real-world datasets
with two typical temporal graph models. Since instance-level explanations can be local and sensitive
to the input, exploring model-level explanations for temporal graph models could be future work.
Besides, how to generate simulated datasets to mimic real-world dynamic graphs more accurately
also deserves further investigation.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Prof. Shenghong Li and our anonymous reviewers for delightful discussions and for pro-
viding feedback on our manuscript. This work is funded by the National Nature Science Foundation
of China under Grant 61971283, Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project under
Grant 2021SHZDZX0102, and Shanghai Pujiang Talent Program No. 21PJ1402900.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Bacry, Martin Bompaire, Stéphane Gaı̈ffas, and Soren Poulsen. Tick: a python library
  for statistical learning, with a particular emphasis on time-dependent modelling. arXiv, 2017.
Alain Barrat, Valeria Gelardi, Didier Le Bail, and Nicolas Claidiere. From temporal network data to
  the dynamics of social relationships. Proc. Royal Soc. B, 288(20211164), 2021.
Hejie Cui, Wei Dai, Yanqiao Zhu, Xiaoxiao Li, Lifang He, and Carl Yang. Brainnnexplainer: An
  interpretable graph neural network framework for brain network based disease analysis. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2107.05097, 2021.
Hanjun Dai, Yichen Wang, Rakshit Trivedi, and Le Song. Deep coevolutionary network: Embedding
  user and item features for recommendation. arXiv, 2016.
Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.
  arXiv, 2017.
Farzan Farnia and David Tse. A minimax approach to supervised learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 29, 2016.
Zhen Han, Peng Chen, Yunpu Ma, and Volker Tresp. Explainable subgraph reasoning for forecasting
  on temporal knowledge graphs. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Alan G Hawkes. Spectra of some self-exciting and mutually exciting point processes. Biometrika,
  58(1):83–90, 1971.
Wenchong He, Minh N Vu, Zhe Jiang, and My T Thai. An explainer for temporal graph neural
 networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.00807, 2022.
Seyed Mehran Kazemi, Rishab Goel, Kshitij Jain, Ivan Kobyzev, Akshay Sethi, Peter Forsyth, and
  Pascal Poupart. Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A survey. JMLR, 21(70):1–73,
  2020.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. In ICLR, 2017.
Levente Kocsis and Csaba Szepesvári. Bandit based monte-carlo planning. In ECML, pp. 282–293.
  Springer, 2006.
Srijan Kumar, Xikun Zhang, and Jure Leskovec. Predicting dynamic embedding trajectory in tem-
  poral interaction networks. In KDD, pp. 1269–1278, 2019.
Shuang Li, Mingquan Feng, Lu Wang, Abdelmajid Essofi, Yufeng Cao, Junchi Yan, and Le Song.
  Explaining point processes by learning interpretable temporal logic rules. In ICLR, 2021a.
Xiaoxiao Li, Yuan Zhou, Nicha Dvornek, Muhan Zhang, Siyuan Gao, Juntang Zhuang, Dustin
  Scheinost, Lawrence H Staib, Pamela Ventola, and James S Duncan. Braingnn: Interpretable
  brain graph neural network for fmri analysis. Medical Image Analysis, 74:102233, 2021b.
Zhao Li, Pengrui Hui, Peng Zhang, Jiaming Huang, Biao Wang, Ling Tian, Ji Zhang, Jianliang
  Gao, and Xing Tang. What happens behind the scene? towards fraud community detection in
  e-commerce from online to offline. In WWW, 2021c.
Dongsheng Luo, Wei Cheng, Dongkuan Xu, Wenchao Yu, Bo Zong, Haifeng Chen, and Xiang
  Zhang. Parameterized explainer for graph neural network. In NeurIPS, volume 33, pp. 19620–
  19631, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fabı́ola SF Pereira, João Gama, Sandra de Amo, and Gina Oliveira. On analyzing user preference
  dynamics with temporal social networks. Machine Learning, 107(11):1745–1773, 2018.
Emanuele Rossi, Ben Chamberlain, Fabrizio Frasca, Davide Eynard, Federico Monti, and Michael
  Bronstein. Temporal graph networks for deep learning on dynamic graphs. In ICML, 2020.
Caihua Shan, Yifei Shen, Yao Zhang, Xiang Li, and Dongsheng Li. Reinforcement learning en-
  hanced explainer for graph neural networks. In NeurIPS, volume 34, 2021.
Yong-Min Shin, Sun-Woo Kim, Eun-Bi Yoon, and Won-Yong Shin. Prototype-based explanations
  for graph neural networks (student abstract). 2022.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS, volume 30, 2017.
Petar Veličković, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In ICLR, 2018.
Minh N Vu and My T Thai. Pgm-explainer: Probabilistic graphical model explanations for graph
 neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Xiang Wang, Yingxin Wu, An Zhang, Xiangnan He, and Tat seng Chua. Causal screening to
  interpret graph neural networks, 2021a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  nzKv5vxZfge.
Xuhong Wang, Ding Lyu, Mengjian Li, Yang Xia, Qi Yang, Xinwen Wang, Xinguang Wang, Ping
  Cui, Yupu Yang, Bowen Sun, et al. Apan: Asynchronous propagation attention network for real-
  time temporal graph embedding. In SIGMOD, pp. 2628–2638, 2021b.
Tingsong Xiao, Lu Zeng, Xiaoshuang Shi, Xiaofeng Zhu, and Guorong Wu. Dual-graph learning
  convolutional networks for interpretable alzheimer’s disease diagnosis. In International Confer-
  ence on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 406–415. Springer,
  2022.
Da Xu, Chuanwei Ruan, Evren Korpeoglu, Sushant Kumar, and Kannan Achan. Inductive represen-
  tation learning on temporal graphs. In ICLR, 2020.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In ICLR, 2018.
Rex Ying, Dylan Bourgeois, Jiaxuan You, Marinka Zitnik, and Jure Leskovec. Gnnexplainer: Gen-
  erating explanations for graph neural networks. In NeurIPS, pp. 9240–9251, 2019.
Hao Yuan, Jiliang Tang, Xia Hu, and Shuiwang Ji. Xgnn: Towards model-level explanations of
  graph neural networks. In KDD, pp. 430–438, 2020a.
Hao Yuan, Haiyang Yu, Shurui Gui, and Shuiwang Ji. Explainability in graph neural networks: A
  taxonomic survey. arXiv, 2020b.
Hao Yuan, Haiyang Yu, Jie Wang, Kang Li, and Shuiwang Ji. On explainability of graph neural
  networks via subgraph explorations. ICML, 2021.
Yao Zhang, Yun Xiong, Dongsheng Li, Caihua Shan, Kan Ren, and Yangyong Zhu. Cope: Modeling
  continuous propagation and evolution on interaction graph. In CIKM, pp. 2627–2636, 2021.
Simiao Zuo, Haoming Jiang, Zichong Li, Tuo Zhao, and Hongyuan Zha. Transformer hawkes
  process. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’20.
  JMLR.org, 2020.


                                               11
