Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S UB -TASK D ECOMPOSITION E NABLES L EARNING
IN S EQUENCE TO S EQUENCE TASKS

 Noam Wies, Yoav Levine & Amnon Shashua
 The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
 {noam.wies,yoav.levine,shashua}@cs.huji.ac.il



                                            A BSTRACT

         The field of Natural Language Processing (NLP) has experienced a dramatic leap
         in capabilities with the recent introduction of huge Language Models (LMs). De-
         spite this success, natural language problems that involve several compounded
         steps are still practically unlearnable, even by the largest LMs. This complies
         with experimental failures for end-to-end learning of composite problems that
         were demonstrated in a variety of domains. An effective mitigation is to intro-
         duce intermediate supervision for solving sub-tasks of the compounded problem.
         Recently, several works have demonstrated high gains by taking a straightforward
         approach for incorporating intermediate supervision in compounded natural lan-
         guage problems: the sequence-to-sequence LM is fed with an augmented input,
         in which the decomposed tasks’ labels are simply concatenated to the original
         input (see figure 1). In this paper, we prove a positive learning result that moti-
         vates these recent efforts. We show that when concatenating intermediate super-
         vision to the input and training a sequence-to-sequence model on this modified
         input, unlearnable composite problems can become learnable. We show that this
         is true for any family of tasks which on the one hand, are unlearnable, and on the
         other hand, can be decomposed into a polynomial number of simple sub-tasks,
         each of which depends only on O(1) previous sub-task results. Beyond motivat-
         ing contemporary empirical efforts for incorporating intermediate supervision in
         sequence-to-sequence language models, our positive theoretical result is the first
         of its kind in the landscape of results on the benefits of intermediate supervision
         for neural-network learning: Until now, all theoretical results on the subject are
         negative, i.e., show cases where learning is impossible without intermediate su-
         pervision, while our result is positive, showing that learning is facilitated in the
         presence of intermediate supervision.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Large-scale language models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), and GPT-
3 (Brown et al., 2020) have recently pushed the envelope in many NLP tasks. Nevertheless, there
are some problem-families that even the largest models do not seem to be capable of solving. One
such family is that of “multi-hop" reasoning problems (see, e.g., Geva et al. (2021); Kalyan et al.
(2021); Press et al. (2022)) that require compounding operations in order to produce an answer. For
example, Gopher (Rae et al., 2021), one of the largest available language models, achieves 61%
accuracy in the StrategyQA benchmark (Geva et al., 2021) that requires implicit decomposition into
reasoning steps, while human level performance is around 87% accuracy.
The limitations of learning compounded tasks with neural networks in an end-to-end manner have
been observed in a variety of non-linguistic domains. A leading experimental approach for ad-
dressing these is to first explicitly break the compounded operations into more basic “single-hop”
operations and then combine the results. Gülçehre & Bengio (2016), one of the earliest works on
this subject, propose that supervision for the single-hop intermediate steps is crucial for avoiding bad
local minima in the optimization of neural networks. Afterward, Glasmachers (2017) demonstrated
that gradient-based end-to-end multi-hop learning is inefficient for solving complex problems that
are easily solved by a divide-and-conquer strategy. Beyond position papers, specific examples were


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: An illustrative example of the prominent method for introducing sub-task decomposi-
tion and intermediate supervision for math word problems (Ling et al., 2017; Cobbe et al., 2021).
Intermediate sub-tasks and their labels are concatenated to the original task’s input to form a new
input sequence. At training time, the likelihood of the entire sequence following the original input
is maximized conditioned on the input, and at test time only the original input is given to the model.


shown, e.g., Chang et al. (2020) showed that SATNet (Wang et al., 2019) could not solve visual
Sudoku without using intermediate labels to identify individual Sudoku digit images.
Similar limitations were observed in language related compounded tasks, including commonsense
reasoning (Liu et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022), math word problems (Pi˛ekos
et al., 2021; Wei et al., 2022), and programs execution (Nye et al., 2022). The go-to architectures in
this domain are powerful language models, which are trained as sequence-to-sequence models over
text. In this setting, a particular form of introducing intermediate supervision for compounded tasks
has emerged: intermediate sub-tasks and their labels are concatenated to the original task’s input to
form a new input sequence, on which the sequence-to-sequence LM is trained. This approach has
recently been widely adopted, e.g., by Rajani et al. (2019); Cobbe et al. (2021); Pi˛ekos et al. (2021);
Recchia (2021); Nye et al. (2022); Wei et al. (2022); Zelikman et al. (2022). Figure 1 illustrates this
approach for math problems, as done in Ling et al. (2017); Cobbe et al. (2021). These works show
that training sequence-to-sequence models with concatenated sub-task decomposition supervision
significantly improves the results when compared to training the same model without the interme-
diate supervision. For example, Nye et al. (2022) show > 99% accuracy for 8 digits addition when
concatenating intermediate calculations to the input, while the vanilla accuracy without intermediate
supervision is around ∼ 35%.
While such decomposition based approaches are intuitive, we are not aware of theoretical results
that motivate and formulate their benefits for learning composite problems with neural-networks.
In this paper, we provide positive theoretical results in this domain, which are in fact the first of
their kind (see related work in section 2). We show our results for sequential models, integrating the
intermediate supervision in a manner that mimics the above cited successful empirical approaches
in the language domain. In this formulation, a learner learns to predict a sequence composed of the
task inputs x, followed by the single-hop reasoning steps referred to as the evidence, and finally, the
final answer y. We extend provable guarantees for the convergence of overparameterized recurrent
neural networks (Wang et al., 2021) and prove that with intermediate sub-task supervision, even a
simple sequence-to-sequence model provably learns any task that obeys an efficient decomposition
into simpler subtasks that depend only on a small fraction of the input. Importantly, both the sample
complexity and the required number of gradient updates are polynomial. In contrast, we rely on
existing works (Valiant, 1984; Goldreich et al., 1986; Daniely & Shalev-Shwartz, 2016) to show
that in the absence of intermediate supervision, there exist efficiently decomposable tasks that are
unlearnable with polynomial time learning algorithms.
Our results apply to a broad family of tasks. As a first exemplifying step, we show a positive result
for learning bit subset parity, a setting that is notoriously not amenable to gradient-based algorithms
in an efficient way without intermediate supervision (Kearns, 1998; Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2017;
Abbe & Sandon, 2020; Abbe et al., 2021). In this setting, the family of target functions consists of
parities over subsets of unknown input bits. Specifically, the input is d bits and the task is to predict
whether the number of 1’s in certain unknown subset of d/2 bits is odd or even. The corresponding
sub-tasks we consider are the parities of subsets of the unknown input subset. We prove a theorem
guaranteeing that, when intermediate supervision is available, efficient neural network learning is


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


made possible. As a result, we show an exponential gap between the end-to-end and decomposition-
based neural network learnability of the bit subset parity problem.
Next, we generalize the above result, and show that when sufficient intermediate supervision is
available, any family of functions with a polynomial time complexity, i.e., functions that belong to
the P time complexity class, are efficiently learnable by neural networks. Accordingly, based on
either standard cryptographic assumptions (Valiant, 1984; Goldreich et al., 1986) or computational
complexity hardness assumptions (Daniely & Shalev-Shwartz, 2016) we prove that there exist tasks
that, on the one hand, cannot be learned by any polynomial time algorithm and, on the other hand,
can be efficiently learned by neural networks when intermediate supervision is present.
Our main result can be stated as follows:
Theorem 1. (Informal) There exists a binary classification problem parameterized by size d, such
that the following holds:

       • On one hand, when equipped with sub-task decomposition supervision, a simple sequence-
         to-sequence model can get arbitrarily low ϵ > 0 zero-one loss with number of gradient
         updates that is polynomial in d, ϵ−1 .
       • On the other hand, when supervision regarding sub-task is missing, then for any polynomial
         time learning algorithm and (constant) ϵ > 0, the zero-one loss will be higher than 1/2 − ϵ.

To summarize, the main contributions of this paper are:

      1. We show the first positive result that guarantees neural networks learnability in the presence
         of intermediate supervision for a problem that is unlearnable without it.
      2. We do so in the sequence-to-sequence setting that is currently used for applying state-of-
         the-art language models on complex multi-hop tasks in NLP.
      3. We show that with sufficient intermediate supervision this sequence-to-sequence setting
         allows learning any function in the P time complexity class.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 3 presents the sequence to sequence
model we analyzed. Section 4 presents a hypothesis class and proves that it can be learned with
our sequence to sequence model. Section 5 presents a concrete example, and demonstrates that the
task of learning bit-subset parity with sequence-to-sequence models can be learned with sub-task
decomposition and the corresponding intermediate supervision. Finally, in section 6 we generalize
the positive results to any function in the P time complexity class, thus establishing our main result.

2   R ELATED W ORK
The concept of how learning can be enhanced by guiding a learner through intermediate tasks is
an old one, dating back to animal training by shaping (Skinner, 1958; Peterson, 2004; Krueger &
Dayan, 2009). Since then, a large body of work has shown its practical benefits for various machine
learning tasks. For example, there exists a rich line of work on the importance of shaping rewards
and adding sub-goals in reinforcement learning tasks. Karlsson (1994) introduced the methodology
of using knowledge in the reward function, in order to decompose a holistic task into several sub-
tasks. Ng et al. (1999) established necessary and sufficient conditions for reward shaping to reserved
optimal policies. Marthi (2007) investigate the problem of automatically learning a decomposition of
the reward function. All these work intuitively rely on benefits of adding intermediate supervision.
Recently, Zhai et al. (2022) showed that adding sub-goal rewards provably reduces the complexity
of the synchronous value iteration algorithm. However, this reduction is linear in the number of the
sub-goals, unlike our work that proves exponential gap in the supervised learning setting. Moreover,
several of the notions in their analysis are unique to the reinforcement leaning setup and cannot be
easily translated into the supervised learning setting (e.g., One-Way Intermediate States).
Negative theoretical results exist, showing that end-to-end learning of multi-hop problems is un-
feasible without decomposition. Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017) explored the theoretical limitations
of end-to-end gradients based learning, studying learnability of tasks that are composed of classi-
fication and parity tasks, proving that the end-to-end approach does not converge in a polynomial


                                                  3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


number of gradient updates. They do show that when intermediate supervision is provided, the gra-
dients have a much higher signal-to-noise ratio. However, they provide no guarantees that in this
case learning is possible in a polynomial number of gradient updates. In addition, Shalev-Shwartz
& Shashua (2016) proved an exponential gap between end-to-end-based verification sample com-
plexity and the decomposition-based verification sample complexity. However, again, an explicit
setting in which providing intermediate supervision for training actually improves the situation to a
point that learning is feasible, is lacking. We provide the first theoretical result proving that neural
networks also benefit from sub-task decomposition, while earlier theoretical works in this space only
prove that end-to-end learning is unfeasible in some compounded cases.

3   T HE ANALYZED SEQUENCE - TO - SEQUENCE LEARNING ALGORITHM
A recent successful empirical approach for solving compounded natural language problems (Ling
et al., 2017; Rajani et al., 2019; Pi˛ekos et al., 2021; Recchia, 2021; Cobbe et al., 2021; Nye et al.,
2022; Wei et al., 2022; Zelikman et al., 2022) is to concatenate intermediate supervision labels to
the input. This way, the language model receives a sequence composed of the input followed by the
labels of the intermediate tasks, before emitting the final compounded answer. For a compounded
binary classification task which consists of a d-bit input string x, with S denoting the string of
intermediate step results, we denote the combined input sequence as z = Concat{x; S}, and the
combined output sequence as y, defined in a standard autoregressive fashion by1 yt = zt+1 (see
figure 2 for a d = 8 example). Training and testing follow conventional sequence-to-sequence
model protocol: At training time, zt for t > d will be the ground-truth sub-task result yt−1 (a
practice sometimes referred to as “teacher forcing" (Williams & Zipser, 1989)), and at test time, zt
for t > d will be the model’s prediction at time t − 1.
We analyze the classical Elman recurrent neural networks (Elman, 1990) with ReLU activations as
our sequence-to-sequence model. Given an input sequence z of length T = d + len (S) as defined
above, the architecture f RNN computes:
                            ∀t ∈ [T ]     ht (z) = ReLU (W ht−1 + Aezt )                            (1)
                            ∀t ∈ [T ]     ftRNN (z) = B T ht (z)                                    (2)
                            h0 (z) = ReLU (M0 )                                                     (3)
where e0 , e1 ∈ R2 are one-hot vectors, A ∈ Rm×2 translates the input to the hidden dimension
m, W ∈ Rm×m is the learned hidden weights matrix, B ∈ Rm is the output weights vector and
M0 ∈ Rm is the initialization of the hidden state.
We will use the binary cross-entropy loss over output locations for t ≥ d, i.e., our loss ignores the
architecture’s prediction of x and depends on its prediction of intermediate labels and final outcome:
                                                      T
                                                      X
                                                1
                                                           log 1 + e−yt ·st

                             l (y, s) =                                                             (4)
                                              T −d
                                                     t=d

Algorithm 1 below describes the analyzed training procedure of our sequence-to-sequence model.
This algorithm describes a straightforward SGD training procedure where, for simplicity, we analyze
a variant that updates only the hidden W weights while keeping A, B, M0 frozen at initialization.
This amounts to keeping the input, output and the t = 0 hidden state untrained, and training only
the core recurrence operation to perform the task while complying with these frozen components.

4   C OMPOUNDED S EQUENCE TO S EQUENCE L EARNABILITY
In this section, we present a hypothesis class and prove for it that the above described “teacher
forcing" (Williams & Zipser, 1989) of intermediate supervision at training time with algorithm 1
provably leads to generalization in polynomial sample complexity and gradient updates. This guar-
antee will allow us to prove our positive results in the following sections, as we will show that
interesting function families belong to this hypothesis class.
   1
     For clarity, we wrote yt = zt+1 although the inputs domain in our model was {0, 1} while the output
domain was {−1, 1} and hence yt = 2 · (zt+1 − 1/2)


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: Training f RNN with SGD
Data: Data set D, learning rate η.
                                                                             2
Initialization: The entries of W (0) , A, M0 are i.i.d. generated from N (0, m ). The entries of B
                                 1
 are i.i.d. generated from N (0, m ).
for i = 1, 2, 3...n do
    Randomly sample (xi , yi ) from the data set D.
                                                 (i−1)
    W (i) = W (i−1) − η∇W (i−1) ℓ(yi , f RNN,W         (zi )).
end



In order to analyze the teacher forcing technique, we begin with an important observation. Essen-
tially, we show that when the zero-one loss of all the single-hop sub-tasks is low, then it implies that
also at test time, when the model does not have the ground truth results of the previous sub-tasks
and the errors might accumulate, the zero-one loss on the final answer is still low:
Lemma 1. Denote by zttrain := yt−1 the ground truth input at training time, and by zttest :=
 RNN,W
ft−1   (ztest ) the iteratively predicted input at test time. Then, for any W the following holds:
                                                        " T                                #
                    h                          i          X
                                RNN,W    test                            RNN,W    train
                Ex l0−1 y, fT          (z ) ≤ Ex              l0−1 yt , ft      z                  (5)
                                                          t=d


Proof. Clearly, for any x when f RNN,W ztrain solves all of the sub-tasks correctly we have that
ztest = ztrain and therefore they have
                                      the same zero zero-one loss. So it is enough to upper bound
the probability that f RNN,W ztrain is erroneous in any sub-task. Now by definition, for any t the
zero-one loss at the t’th location is equal to the probability of wrong prediction at this location.
Therefore, by the union bound, we get that the  sum of the zero-one loss over all the locations is
upper bounding the probability of f RNN,W ztrain make an error in any sub-task. See full details in
section A at the appendix.

As expected, due to a union bound, when the model does not have the ground truth results of the
previous sub-task the error can increase by a factor of T − d but this increase is relatively modest as
long as T is polynomial in d.
Lemma 1 above assures us that it is enough to find an hypothesis class for which algorithm 1 con-
verges and generalizes when we do have the ground truth results of the previous sub-tasks, in order
to prove that the teacher forcing technique works. As a candidate for such a hypothesis class, we
consider tasks for which the output at each location d ≤ t ≤ T can be written as sign of composition
of linear functions (represented by w below) of at most N < T input locations j1 , . . . , jN ≤ t, with
                                   Pdeg(ψ )
polynomials activations ψt (x) = i=0 t at,i xi :
                                                                        
                                                       *            ezj1    +
                                                            (t)
                                                 w               ..  
                  ∀d ≤ t ≤ T ht (z) = sign ψt                 ,  .                            (6)
                                                          w(t)
                                                                    ezjN

In order to prove convergence and generalization results, we will measure the complexity of func-
tions in the above hypothesis class by a function ϕ (T, ψ, N ), described formally in appendix A.
Importantly, ϕ (T, ψ, N ) is polynomial in both T and maxt,i |at,i |, while exponential in both
maxt deg (ψt ) and N . We will denote by Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) the hypothesis class described in eq 6.
Now, with this hypothesis class, we can combine lemma 1 with theorem 2 in Wang et al. (2021).
They study the learnability of RNNs for binary classification tasks2 without intermediate supervi-
sion, and prove that algorithm 1 is capable of learning function where the final answer y have low
complexity ϕ (T, ψ, N ).
    2
      They also discussed the case where y is a sequence, however, in their case it was considered part of the
task, unlike our case where we add intermediate steps as a method of supervision.


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed input and output for learning the d = 8 bit-subset parity
problem with sequence-to-sequence models.

                                    RNN,W
Theorem 2. Denote by zttest := ft−1        (ztest ) the iteratively predicted ! input at test time, and let
                                                                              2
                                                          ϕ(T,ψ,N )+log( δ )
                                                                         1
ϵ, δ > 0. Assume we run Algorithm 1 for n > Õ                    ϵ               iterations with learning
            1
                , then there exists m⋆ = poly n, δ −1 , T such that if m > m⋆ then for any h ∈

rate η = m√   n
Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) with probability at least 1 − δ over the randomness in Algorithm 1, the following holds:
                                 n
                              1X      h                (i)         i
                                    Ex l0−1 y, fTRNN,W     ztest     <ϵ                                  (7)
                              n i=1

where W (i) denotes the output of Algorithm 1 at the i’th iteration and l0−1 is the zero-one loss.

Note that sections C,D of the appendix extends theorem 2 for both SGD and GD with finite precision.
In the next sections, we will prove our positive results by showing the intermediate single-hop sub-
tasks of the analyzed tasks belong to Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) with low complexity ϕ (T, ψ, N ).

5    L EARNING B IT-S UBSET PARITY W ITH S EQUENCE TO S EQUENCE M ODELS
As a concrete demonstration, in this section we show that unlike the end-to-end case, bit-subset
parity can be learned with neural networks when intermediate supervision is provided. We begin by
defining the challenging task of learning parities over unknown subsets of input bits. Specifically,
for a d-bit string with a subset of d/2 randomly predefined unique indices i1 , . . . , id/2 , our goal is to
                                                          Pd/2
                                         d                       x
train a predictor mapping x ∈ {0, 1} to y = (−1) j=1 ij where x is uniformly distributed. In
words, y indicates whether the number of 1’s in the given subset of coordinates of x is odd or even.
We analyze this task as a “multi-hop" task by decomposing it into natural intermediate sub-tasks:
parities of subsets of the predefined input subset xi1 , ..., xid/2 . Concretely, assuming for simplic-
ity that d/2 is a power of 2, and beginning with only two adjacently indexed input bits at a time,
we recursively treat the parity of every two adjacently indexed subgroups as an intermediate task.
Figure 2(a) illustrates this binary tree sub-task decomposition of our parity problem. The leaves
                                                                xi     +xi
of the tree of intermediate labels T are −1xi1 +xi2 , . . . , −1 d/2−1 d/2 and each node in the tree
represents the sub-task of calculating the parity function over its descendants.
In order to fit into the sequence-to-sequence setting of section 3, we translate our imaginary tree of
intermediate labels T into a sequence of intermediate labels S by inverse-BFS like tree traversal,
and then concatenate the sequence S after the input x. An exact formulation of the mapping from
tree T to sequence of intermediate labels S is given in appendix B.

                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.1   L EARNABILITY OF B IT-S UBSET PARITY W ITH AND W ITHOUT I NTERMEDIATE
      S UPERVISION

In this section we show that the sub-tasks of learning bit-subset parity are simple enough to be
covered by the result in theorem 2, i.e., we prove that our sequence-to-sequence formulation of
the bit-subset parity target function, which includes the intermediate labels sequence S defined
above, can be written as a multivariate function where each of its outputs is a simple low degree
polynomial of at most O (1) inputs bits. We show that this is indeed the case, i.e., that all the parity
target functions comprising the intermediate supervision to our problem belong to Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) (see
section 4) with N , maxt deg (ψt ) , maxt,i |at,i | that do not grow with d. Importantly, when defining
the input sequence to be only the original input, without the concatenated sub-task decomposition
labels, then the function hT (x) clearly depends on d/ 2 bits, and therefore will require N = d/2, that
leads to exponential complexity ϕ (T, ψ, N ) = Ω ed . Thus, no efficient learning is guaranteed for
the original compounded task.
We begin by showing that our single-hop tasks of parities over two bits (see illustration in figure 2(a))
are simple degree-2 polynomials:
Lemma 2. There exists degree two polynomial ψ (x) = a2 x2 + a1 x + a0 with bounded coefficients
∀i |ai | < 10 as well as w ∈ R4 such that:

                                           w     ez1            1    z1 = z2
                 ∀z1 , z2 ∈ {0, 1} ψ         ,             =                                (8)
                                         ∥w∥     ez2            −1 z1 ̸= z2

Proof. We will use w to sum the first coordinates of ez1 , ez2 , and use polynomial interpolation to
find a degree two polynomial ψ that interpolates the z1 = z2 = 0 , z1 ̸= z2 , z1 = z2 = 1 points,
see full details in appendix B.

The above lemma implies that all of the target functions in our defined intermediate supervision
belong to Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) for ϕ (T, ψ, N ) = O (d). Therefore, together with theorem 2, it assures us that
when intermediate supervision is available, Algorithm 1 can learn bit-subset parities with polyno-
mial network size, sample complexity and number of gradient updates.
Now, after we showed that when incorporating intermediate supervision bit-subset parities can be
learned by a neural network, we will use the results of Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017) to establish an
exponential gap between the end-to-end and decomposition-based neural network learnability3 :
Corollary 1. When learning bit-subset parities using neural networks, the following holds:

       • On one hand, when equipped with sub-task decomposition supervision, a simple sequence-
         to-sequence model can get arbitrarily low ϵ > 0 zero-one loss with number of gradient
         updates that is polynomial in d, ϵ−1 .
       • On the other hand, when supervision regarding sub-task is missing, then for any (constant)
         ϵ > 0 with high probability over the target parity, the zero-one loss will be higher than
         1/2 − ϵ unless the number of gradient updates is exponential in d.



Proof. Follows directly by combining theorem 2 and lemma 2 with the the negative results in
Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017). See full details in section F at the appendix.

5.2   B IT-S UBSET PARITY E XPERIMENTS

In section 5.1 we proved an exponential gap when using Elman RNNs (Elman, 1990) to learn bit-
subset parity with and without sub-task decomposition. This section empirically demonstrates that
the same gap exists with the commonly used Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture. We
trained a series of models while varying the input sizes from 8 bits to 256 bits. For each input size,
   3
     Note that the negative result holds only for full gradient descent and does not hold for stochastic gradient
descent, for which Abbe & Sandon (2020); Abbe et al. (2021) show that parities are efficiently learnable when
using complex non-random initialization.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we trained a BERT-base sized Transformer model for 100k iterations4 with and without intermedi-
ate supervision. The intermediate supervision was introduced exactly as described in the previous
subsection, see Figure 2 for an illustration. See full technical details of the training apparatus in
appendix G.
Figure 3 clearly shows that in a practical setting, using common Transformer networks, a very large
gap quickly opens between the settings with and without intermediate supervision. The employed
BERT base sized Transformer architecture is a strong network that pushed the envelope on very
challenging NLP tasks, and is much stronger than the theoretically analyzed RNN. Still, learning
even the 32 bit subset parity task without supervision proved to be too challenging even for this
network (no learning after over 2M steps), while it easily learned the task in the presence of inter-
mediate supervision. Overall this experiment, performed on the same task on which we prove our
theoretical results, reinforces their relevance to common Transformer architectures.

6    U NIVERSALITY OF D ECOMPOSITION BASED S EQUENCE -T O -S EQUENCE
     L EARNING
In this section, we prove our main result (outlined in the introductory theorem 1). On the one hand,
we generalize the positive results of section 5.1 by showing that when sufficient intermediate su-
pervision is available, a neural network can efficiently learn any function in the P time complexity
class. On the other hand, we rely on existing works (Valiant, 1984; Goldreich et al., 1986; Daniely
& Shalev-Shwartz, 2016) to show that under either standard cryptographic assumptions or compu-
tational complexity hardness assumptions, there exist functions in the P time complexity class that
cannot be learned by any polynomial time learning algorithm without intermediate supervision.
We begin by defining the decomposition of any function f in the P time complexity class into
sub tasks. For that, we will use the fact that any such f has polynomial circuit complexity (see
for example theorem 9.30 in Sipser (2013)), and therefore can be computed by a boolean circuit
with polynomial size. We will denote by G = (V, E) the directed acyclic graph associated with
such a circuit, and by lv the logic gates of each vertex v. Furthermore, since both the“AND" and
“OR" logical gates can be decomposed into a boolean circuit with binary-tree like structure, we may
assume that the input degree of each vertex is O (1).
Now, in order to fit into the sequence-to-
sequence setting of section 3, we define the in-
                                                                                  1m
termediate labels sequence S for any f . Basi-
cally, each non-leaf vertex v ∈ V will represent
                                                          Steps Until Learning


                                                                                 100k
an intermediate task with its ground-truth label
determined by lv , and we will use a topologi-
                                                                                 10k
cal sorting of G in order to translate G into a
sequence of intermediate labels S with length
T := |V | (see figure 2 for a concrete exam-                                      1k                       With Intermediate Supervision
                                                                                                           Without Intermediate Supervision
ple of this abstract construction strategy). Im-                                                           ±2 Std
portantly, as in the bit-subsets parity task, T is                                100                      ±2 Std
polynomial in d.                                                                        8   32   64      128                            256
                                                                                                      Number Of Bits
In order to show our generalized positive re-
sult, theorem 2 motivates us to prove that our Figure 3: The number of steps until a BERT-
sequence-to-sequence formulation of any func- base sized Transformer learns bit-subset parities
tion f in the P time complexity class, which with and without intermediate supervision. By
includes the intermediate labels sequence S de- learning we mean validation accuracy higher than
fined above, can be written as a multivariate 60%. While this definition is somehow arbi-
function where each of its outputs is a simple trary, in practice we observed a grokking phe-
low degree polynomial of at most O (1) input nomenon (Power et al., 2021) where very soon af-
bits. Lemma 3 below shows that this is in- ter the accuracy became higher than random level
deed the case, i.e., that all the target functions it also became almost perfect (accuracy > 95%).
comprising the intermediate supervision to our
problem belong to Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) (see section 3) with N , maxt deg (ψt ) , maxt,i |at,i | that do not grow
with d.
   4
     With the exception of the 16 and 18 bits tasks without intermediate supervision, for which we increase the
number of iterations to 300K and 2M respectably in order to try and successfully learn the task.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  N
Lemma 3. For any logical gate lv : {0, 1} → {0, 1} with N = O (1), there exists O (1) degree
                      Pdeg(ψ)
polynomial ψ (x) = i=0 ai xi with bounded coefficients maxi |ai | = O (1) as well as w ∈ R2N
such that:                                              
                                           *         ez1  +
                                          w  ..  
             ∀z1 , . . . , zN ∈ {0, 1} ψ        ,  .   = lv (z1 , . . . , zN )        (9)
                                             ∥w∥
                                                     ezN
Proof. We will use w to uniquely represent each possible combination of z0 , . . . , zN as an N bit real
value number, and use polynomial interpolation to find a 2N -degree polynomial ψ that interpolates
the z1 = · · · = zN = 0 , . . . , z1 = · · · = zN = 1 points. Finally the O (1) coefficients boundedness
follow from taking maximum5 over all possible lv logical gates. see full details in appendix B.

The above lemma implies that all of the target functions in our defined intermediate supervision
belong to Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) for ϕ (T, ψ, N ) = O (d). Therefore, together with theorem 2, it assures us
that when intermediate supervision is available, Algorithm 1 can learn any function in the P time
complexity class with polynomial network size, sample complexity and number of gradient updates.
Now, after we showed that when incorporating intermediate supervision any function in the P time
complexity class can be learned by a neural network, our main results is a simple corollary of the
above results:
Corollary 2. Under either standard cryptographic assumptions or computational complexity hard-
ness assumptions, there exists a binary classification problem parameterized by size d, such that the
following holds:
          • On one hand, when equipped with sub-task decomposition supervision, a simple sequence-
            to-sequence model can get arbitrarily low ϵ > 0 zero-one loss with number of gradient
            updates that is polynomial in d, ϵ−1 .
          • On the other hand, when supervision regarding sub-task is missing, then for any polynomial
            time learning algorithm and (constant) ϵ > 0, the zero-one loss will be higher than 1/2 − ϵ.

Proof. Follows directly by combining theorem 2 and lemma 3 with either the negative results in
Valiant (1984); Goldreich et al. (1986) or in Daniely & Shalev-Shwartz (2016).
7 D ISCUSSION
In this paper, we show for a broad family of functions an exponential gap between learning algo-
rithms that rely on intermediate supervision and algorithms that do not rely on intermediate super-
vision. Across domains and architectures, there has been a wide range of proposed methods for
introducing intermediate supervision. Some design specialized architectures, some add relevant loss
terms, etc. The method that is taking over in the NLP domain is straightforward, and is particularly
natural for this domain in which the core architectures are strong sequence-to-sequence Language
Models: Concatenate the intermediate supervision to the input, and thus jointly train the model to
maximize the likelihood of all the intermediate labels as well as the overall output. Our analysis
is framed in this space, and motivates this intuitive incorporation of intermediate supervision in the
framework of sequence-to-sequence models. We show that even with a simple sequence-to-sequence
architecture it is feasible to expect such simultaneous compounded learning to be useful. In this re-
gard, we view our work as providing timely theoretical feedback to the rapid empirical advances in
this field.
Limitations: We proved universal learnability results when sufficient intermediate supervision was
provided. A fundamental question is what happens when we limit the amount of sub-task supervi-
sion. For the task of bit-subset parity, we demonstrated that supervision regarding O (d) sub-tasks
can yield an exponential advantage. An interesting question that we leave open for future work is
whether there exists a similar advantage with only O (1) sub-tasks.
In addition, while our results show an exponential gain, it is still unclear which sub-tasks are solvable
by end-to-end methods, and which tasks require decomposition? Interestingly, a recent study (Abbe
et al., 2022) addressed exactly this question for one-layer hidden networks in the mean-field regime.
However, our understanding of this question for practical architectures is still very limited.
   5
       This maximum exists since there is a finite number of possible functions from {0, 1}N into {0, 1}.


                                                        9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
A complete proof of all the theoretical claims was included in the appendix. We also
provide the source code for the bit-subset parity experiment in https://github.com/HUJI-
Deep/sub_task_decomposition.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND D ISCLOSURE OF F UNDING
We thank Eran Malach and Shai Shalev-Shwartz for a helpful discussion on our stronger negative
results, as well as Lifu Wang for clarifying Wang et al. (2021). This research was supported by
the ERC (European Research Council) and the ISF (Israel Science Foundation). Yoav Levine was
supported by the Israel Academy of Sciences Adams fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Emmanuel Abbe and Colin Sandon.          On the universality of deep learning.    In
  H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 20061–20072. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  e7e8f8e5982b3298c8addedf6811d500-Paper.pdf.
Emmanuel Abbe, Pritish Kamath, eran malach, Colin Sandon, and Nathan Srebro. On the power
  of differentiable learning versus PAC and SQ learning. In A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang,
  and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=TZPidZS3r_z.
Emmanuel Abbe, Enric Boix Adsera, and Theodor Misiakiewicz. The merged-staircase property: a
  necessary and nearly sufficient condition for sgd learning of sparse functions on two-layer neural
  networks. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4782–4887. PMLR, 2022.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. On the convergence rate of training recurrent
  neural networks. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  0ee8b85a85a49346fdff9665312a5cc4-Paper.pdf.
Afonso S Bandeira and Ramon Van Handel. Sharp nonasymptotic bounds on the norm of random
  matrices with independent entries. The Annals of Probability, 44(4):2479–2506, 2016.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
  Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
  teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCan-
  dlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot
  learners. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1876–1900. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf.
Oscar Chang, Lampros Flokas, Hod Lipson, and Michael Spranger. Assessing satnet's ability to
  solve the symbol grounding problem. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. F. Bal-
  can, and H. Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp.
  1428–1439. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
  paper/2020/file/0ff8033cf9437c213ee13937b1c4c455-Paper.pdf.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
  Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John
  Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
  2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Amit Daniely and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Complexity theoretic limitations on learning dnf’s. In Vi-
 taly Feldman, Alexander Rakhlin, and Ohad Shamir (eds.), 29th Annual Conference on Learning
 Theory, volume 49 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 815–830, Columbia Uni-
 versity, New York, New York, USA, 23–26 Jun 2016. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.
 mlr.press/v49/daniely16.html.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and
  Thamar Solorio (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT
  2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pp. 4171–
  4186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019. doi: 10.18653/v1/n19-1423. URL
  https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1423.
Jeffrey L Elman. Finding structure in time. Cognitive science, 14(2):179–211, 1990.
Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did Aristotle
 Use a Laptop? A Question Answering Benchmark with Implicit Reasoning Strategies. Transac-
 tions of the Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL), 2021.
Tobias Glasmachers. Limits of end-to-end learning. In Asian Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  17–32. PMLR, 2017.
Oded Goldreich, Shafi Goldwasser, and Silvio Micali. How to construct random functions. Journal
  of the ACM (JACM), 33(4):792–807, 1986.
Çağlar Gülçehre and Yoshua Bengio. Knowledge matters: Importance of prior information for
  optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(8):1–32, 2016. URL http://jmlr.
  org/papers/v17/gulchere16a.html.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Polylogarithmic width suffices for gradient descent to achieve ar-
  bitrarily small test error with shallow relu networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=HygegyrYwH.
Ashwin Kalyan, Abhinav Kumar, Arjun Chandrasekaran, Ashish Sabharwal, and Peter Clark. How
  much coffee was consumed during EMNLP 2019? fermi problems: A new reasoning chal-
  lenge for AI. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
  guage Processing, pp. 7318–7328, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.582. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.582.
Jonas Karlsson. Task decomposition in reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Spring
  Symposium on Goal-Driven Learning, Stanford, CA, 1994.
Michael Kearns. Efficient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. Journal of the ACM
 (JACM), 45(6):983–1006, 1998.
Kai A Krueger and Peter Dayan. Flexible shaping: How learning in small steps helps. Cognition,
  110(3):380–394, 2009.
Wang Ling, Dani Yogatama, Chris Dyer, and Phil Blunsom. Program induction by rationale gen-
 eration: Learning to solve and explain algebraic word problems. In Proceedings of the 55th
 Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
 pp. 158–167, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
 10.18653/v1/P17-1015. URL https://aclanthology.org/P17-1015.
Jiacheng Liu, Alisa Liu, Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Yejin Choi, and
   Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Generated knowledge prompting for commonsense reasoning. In Proceed-
   ings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
   Long Papers), pp. 3154–3169, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.225. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
   acl-long.225.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Bhaskara Marthi. Automatic shaping and decomposition of reward functions. In Proceedings of the
  24th International Conference on Machine learning, pp. 601–608, 2007.

Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transformations:
  Theory and application to reward shaping. In Icml, volume 99, pp. 278–287, 1999.

Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, David
 Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, Charles Sutton, and Au-
 gustus Odena. Show your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models.
 In Deep Learning for Code Workshop, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
 id=HBlx2idbkbq.

Gail B Peterson. A day of great illumination: Bf skinner’s discovery of shaping. Journal of the
  experimental analysis of behavior, 82(3):317–328, 2004.

Piotr Pi˛ekos, Mateusz Malinowski, and Henryk Michalewski. Measuring and improving BERT’s
  mathematical abilities by predicting the order of reasoning. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Con-
  ference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 383–394, Online, August
  2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-short.49. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-short.49.

Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harri Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking: Gener-
  alization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. In ICLR MATH-AI Workshop, 2021.

Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A. Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring
  and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2210.03350.

Jack Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron
  Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu,
  Erich Elsen, Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen
  Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kun-
  coro, Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Men-
  sch, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux,
  Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume,
  Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy, James
  Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Laura Weidinger, Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Ed Lockhart, Si-
  mon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne
  Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training Gopher. arXiv submission, 2021.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-
  text transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020. URL http:
  //jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html.

Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Explain yourself!
  leveraging language models for commonsense reasoning. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4932–4942, Florence, Italy, July
  2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P19-1487. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/P19-1487.

Gabriel Recchia. Teaching autoregressive language models complex tasks by demonstration. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.02102, 2021.

Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Shai Ben-David. Understanding machine learning: From theory to algo-
  rithms. Cambridge university press, 2014.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Amnon Shashua. On the sample complexity of end-to-end training vs.
  semantic abstraction training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.06915, 2016.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Ohad Shamir, and Shaked Shammah. Failures of gradient-based deep learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3067–3075. PMLR, 2017.
Ohad Shamir. Distribution-specific hardness of learning neural networks. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 19(1):1135–1163, 2018.
M Sipser. Introduction to the theory of computation. 3th. Cengage Learning, 2013.
Burrhus F Skinner. Reinforcement today. American Psychologist, 13(3):94, 1958.
Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.
Lifu Wang, Bo Shen, Bo Hu, and Xing Cao. On the provable generalization of recurrent neural net-
  works. In M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P.S. Liang, and J. Wortman Vaughan (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp. 20258–20269. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2021. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/
  a928731e103dfc64c0027fa84709689e-Paper.pdf.
Po-Wei Wang, Priya Donti, Bryan Wilder, and Zico Kolter. Satnet: Bridging deep learning and log-
  ical reasoning using a differentiable satisfiability solver. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 6545–6554. PMLR, 2019.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
  Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
  models. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho (eds.), Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J.
Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, Daniel Jannai, and Amnon Shashua. Which transformer architecture
  fits my data? a vocabulary bottleneck in self-attention. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang
  (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 11170–11181. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v139/wies21a.html.
Ronald J Williams and David Zipser. A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent
  neural networks. Neural computation, 1(2):270–280, 1989.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick
  von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gug-
  ger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art
  natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations, pp. 38–45, Online, October 2020. As-
  sociation for Computational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
  2020.emnlp-demos.6.
Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, and Noah D. Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.14465.
Yuexiang Zhai, Christina Baek, Zhengyuan Zhou, Jiantao Jiao, and Yi Ma. Computational bene-
  fits of intermediate rewards for goal-reaching policy learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
  Research, 73:847–896, 2022.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    C OMPOUNDED S EQUENCE TO S EQUENCE L EARNABILITY D ETAILS
We start by formally defining our sequence-to-sequence functions complexity measure as:

                                                                       3N          2
           ϕ (T, ψ, N ) := Õ T 16+3N +maxt deg(ψt ) C 2N max deg (ψt ) max |at,i |               (10)
                                                              t                t,i

Where C > 0 is some constant.
Now we prove lemma 1 from the main text. Essentially this lemma applies the union bound to show
that when the zero-one loss of all the single-hop sub-tasks is low, then also at test time — when the
model does not have the ground truth results of the previous sub-task and errors may accumulate —
the zero-one loss on the final answer is still low.

Proof. Denote by ϵ the  zero-one loss for ztrain , i.e., the right hand side in eq 5. Clearly, for any
         RNN,W
x when
      f           ztrain   solves all the sub-tasks correctly we have that ztest = ztrain and therefore
l0−1 y, fTRNN,W (ztest ) = 0. So it is enough to upper bound the probability that f RNN,W ztrain


makes an error in any sub-task by ϵ. But by the zero-one loss definition, for any t we have that:
                                                       h                           i
                  Px ftRNN,W ztrain ̸= yt = Ex l0−1 yt , ftRNN,W ztrain

                                                                                                   (11)
              PT
And therefore t=d Px ftRNN,W ztrain ̸= yt = ϵ. Finally, by the union bound we got that


                                                   XT
                             ftRNN,W ztrain =         Px ftRNN,W ztrain ̸= yt = ϵ

         Px ∃d ≤ t ≤ T                       ̸ yt ≤                                               (12)
                                                        t=d


B    S UB TASKS L EARNABILITY P ROOFS
In this section we prove lemmas 2,3 from the main text, i.e., we prove that our intermediate steps
are simple enough to be covered by theorem 2.
We begin by formally describing the details of learning parities with sequence-to-sequence models.
Since sequence-to-sequence models expect their inputs to be sequences, we will translate the tree
described in section 5 into a sequence by inverse BFS like tree traversal, and concatenate the result
sequence after x. Therefore, our inputs sequence includes all the d variables in x, together with all
the sub-tasks decomposition nodes in the binary tree except the root (that represent y). So we will
have an input sequence length T that is equal to:
                                                           d              3
                  T := d + nodes in full binary tree with    leaves − 1 = d − 2                   (13)
                                                           4              2
And the ground-truth sub-task results are recursively defined by:
                                            x        +x
                                    (
                                      (−1) i2(t−d)+1 i2(t−d)+2         t < 54 d
                    ∀t ≥ d yt =             y         +y                                          (14)
                                      (−1) 2(t− 4 )+d 2(t− 4 )+d+1 else
                                                 5d           5d


For t > d, at training time, zt will be the ground-truth sub-task result yt−1 . At test time zt will be
the model prediction at time t − 1:
                                                                          t≤d
                           
                           x t
         ∀t ∈ [T ] zt = 12 + 12 sign ft−1   RNN

                                                  z1 , · · · , zt−1       t > d ∧ test            (15)
                            1+yt−1
                                 2                                        t > d ∧ training
Note that f RNN is causal model, i.e. ftRNN
                                        1
                                            does not depend on zt2 for any t2 > t1 , and therefore
eq 15 is well defined.
Now, we prove lemma 2 from the main text. Essentially this lemma shows that the intermediate
steps of length 2 parities belong to the hypothesis class define in eq 6.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         1
                            
                        0 
Proof. Define w := √12  , then
                         1
                         0
                                                               √
                                                                2
                                                                          z1 = 0 ∧ z2 = 0
                                    w          ez1              √1
                                       ,                   =               z1 ̸= z2                             (16)
                                   ∥w∥         ez2              2
                                                               0          z1 = 1 ∧ z2 = 1

Therefore, it is enough to find ψ such that
                                              √
                                                         1

                                   ψ (0) = ψ   2 =1 ∧ ψ √     = −1                                              (17)
                                                          2
Finally, we will use Lagrange basis functions to find the required polynomial and get:
                               √ !                           √ !
              z − √12                                                              z − √1 !
                       !                           !
                           z− 2             z−0          z− 2             z−0               2
   ψ (z) =                     √      −                       √     + √             √
              0 − √12      0− 2            √1 − 0
                                             2
                                                        √1 −    2          2 − 0       2 − √1
                                                          2                                   2
                                                                                                (18)
                                 √   z            √

                       1                                             1
          =1· z− √          z− 2 +            z − 2 + 3z z − √                                  (19)
                        2                 2                           2
                                2
                     3              z       1                 3z
          = z2 − √ z + 1 +             − √ z + 3z 2 − √                                         (20)
                      2              2       2                  2
            9        7
          = z2 − √ z + 1                                                                        (21)
            2         2



Now we prove lemma 3 from the main text. Essentially this lemma shows that also our intermediate
steps for any functions in the P time complexity class belongs to the hypothesis class define in eq 6.

                                        PN −1
Proof. Denote α (z1 , . . . , zN ) := i=0 2i · 1zi =0 the function that converts N bits to their binary
                                            20
                                               
                                      0 
                                      21 
                                               
                         q
string, and define w := 4N3−1 
                                           0  , then w is a unit vector that represents z1 , . . . , zN as N
                                            .. 
                                     
                                             . 
                                                
                                      2N −1 
                                          0
              *           ez1      +
bit numbers ∥w∥      ,  ...  = α (z1 , . . . , zN ). Now, we can use the Lagrange basis functions
                   w           
                         ezN
to find the required polynomial:
                                                                                                                   
                 1
                                                                            x − α (z̃1 , . . . , z̃N )
               X                                    Y
 ψ (x) =               fv (z1 , . . . , zN )                                                                       
           z ,...,z =0
                                                                   α (z 1 , . . . , zN ) − α (z̃1 , . . . , z̃N )
              1     N                           (z̃1 ,...,z̃N )̸=(z1 ,...,zN )
                                                                                                                (22)

Finally the O (1) coefficients boundedness follows from taking the maximum6 over all possible fv
functions.
   6
       This maximum is exists since there is a finite number of possible function from {0, 1}N into {0, 1}.


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C       E XTENSION FOR SGD WITH FINITE PRECISION
In this section, we prove theorem 2 from the main text holds also for algorithm 2 which is a finite-
precision variant of SGD7 . . We will follow the proof in Wang et al. (2021) while taking into account
the finite precision gradients.

Algorithm 2: Training f RNN with finite precision SGD (an finite precisio variant of algorithm 1)
Data: Data set D, learning rate η, finite precision σ.
                                                                             2
Initialization: The entries of W (0) , A, M0 are generated i.i.d. from N (0, m ). The entries of B
                                 1
 are generated i.i.d. from N (0, m ).
for i = 1, 2, 3...n do
    Randomly sample (xi , yi ) from the data set D.
    Get arbitrary σ-approximation of the gradient:
                                           (i−1)
    G(i) ∈ B∞ 8 ∇W (i−1) ℓ(yi , f RNN,W          (zi )) , σ .
    Update weights:
    W (i) = W (i−1) − ηG(i) .
end


We begin by stating theorem 29 in Wang et al. (2021) with our notations:
                                                                                             1
Theorem 3. Let δ > 0, and assume we run algorithm 1 for n iterations with learning rate η = m√ n
                                                                                                 .
                                     −1
                     ⋆
                                                                ⋆
Then there exists m = poly n, δ , T such that if m > m then for any h ∈ Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) with
probability at least 1 − δ over the randomness in algorithm 1, the following hold:
     "                  T X n
                                                         #
                                                                                     log 1
                      X
              1
                                          RNN,W (i)
                                                                 ϕ (T, ψ, N )
  Ex                           l0−1 yt , ft         (z) < Õ         √          +O √ δ       (23)
         n (T − d)         i=1
                                                                       n                n
                          t=d
          [i]
where W         denote the output of algorithm 1 at the i’th iteration and l0−1 is the zero-one loss.

Clearly when using infinite precision SGD theorem 2 follows from theorem 3 and lemma 1 by
simple algebraic manipulations. Therefore, for proving theorem 2 with finite precision gradient
based optimization, it is enough to modify theorem’s 3 proof to analyze algorithm 2 that uses finite
precision gradients, instead of algorithm 1 that uses full precision gradients.
While complicated, Wang et al. (2021)’s proof for theorem 3 can be divided into two high-level ar-
guments. The first argument measure the complexity of the learned hypothesis class with respect to
random initialization of f RNN (lemma 6). And the second argument is a generalization bound for al-
gorithm 1 with networks that are overparameterized enough. Since the first argument is independent
of the gradients, the proof of the first argument still holds and we only need to prove a generalization
bound for algorithm 2. More specifically we only need to prove a lemma that is equivalent to lemma
14 in Wang et al. (2021) and the rest of the second argument (lemma 7 in Wang et al. (2021)) remain
unchanged.

Lemma 4. Let n ∈ N, and denote by Li (W ) := l y(i) , f RNN,W z(i) the training loss. Suppose
                                                                                                      2
there exists W ⋆ ∈ B 10 W (0) , √Rm such that R = O (poly (T )) = Ω T 16 and Li (W ⋆ ) ≤ 1+R

                                                                                                    n .
Then for any δ > 0 there exists m⋆ = poly n, R, T, δ −1 such that if m >
                                                                                 ⋆
                                          1                                1
                                                                               m then with probability
at least 1 − δ algorithm 2 with η = m√n and finite precision σ = O m will output:
                "                   T X  n
                                                                       #
                                                                              R + log 1δ
                                 X                                            2
                         1
                                                        RNN,W (i)

             Ex                             l0−1 yt , ft          (z) < O         √                 (24)
                     n (T − d)          i=1
                                                                                    n
                                    t=d
    7
      See section D for the extension of the proof to algorithm 3 that is based on GD.
    8
      The ball is with respect to the distance that defined by the max matrix norm, i.e. the elementwise distances
are at most σ.
    9
      Combined with Remark H.1 in Wang et al. (2021)’s supplementary materials. In addition, for simplicity,
we state a 1/√n convergence rate as opposite to the linear convergence rate in Wang et al. (2021).
   10
      The ball is with respect to the distance that defined by the Frobenius matrix norm.


                                                       16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. We begin by showing that with high probability over the initialization of f RNN , at any it-
eration i ≤ n of algorithm 2, the distance of the learned hidden weights matrix W (i) from its
initialization point W (0) is not too large. As a results we will get that the assumption of lemma 8
uphold, and therefore its upper bound of the deviation from linearization is valid.
By the triangle inequality for any 0 ≤ i < n we have that:
                                                                i
                                                                X
                                W (i+1) − W (0)             ≤          W (k+1) − W (k)                               (25)
                                                        F                                      F
                                                                k=0

Substituting algorithm 2 update rule for W (k+1) , we get that there exist ∥σ i ∥∞ < σ such that:
                                                                   (k)

                   W (k+1) − W (k) = −η ∇W (k) ℓ(yk , f RNN,W (zk )) + σ k                        (26)
                                                         (k)
Now, explicitly writing ∇W (k) ℓ(yk , f RNN,W           (zk )) with the chain rule we have that:
                                                                     (k) RNN,W
                                                     T
                                                                                     !                            !
                                                            (k)
                        (k)                1        X   −yt · e−yt ft          (zk )
                                                                                                 RNN,W (k)

∇W (k) ℓ(yk , f RNN,W         (zk )) =                                                 · ∇W (k) ft         (zk )
                                         T −d                      (k) RNN,W
                                                          1 + e−yt ft        (zk )
                                                    t=d
                                                                                                           (27)
               x
and since 0 ≤ 1+x ≤ 1 for any x ≥ 0, we conclude that:
                                            (k)                                                    (k)
                ∇W (k) ℓ(yk , f RNN,W             (zk ))        ≤ max          ∇W (k) ftRNN,W            (zk )       (28)
                                                            F        d≤t≤T                                       F
                                                                                            8

Now we will use an induction over i, to show that W (i+1) − W (0) F = O (i+1)T           √
                                                                                      m· n
                                                                                                for any
0 ≤ i < n.    By the induction hypothesis,
                              √ 8             lemma  10  assure   us that for  wide  enough   networks
m⋆ = Ω max T 6 log3 n·T  δ   , nT        , with probability of at least 1 − δ over the initialization of
                          RNN,W (k)
f RNN
      , maxd≤t≤T ∇W (k) ft          (zk ) = O T 8 . Therefore, in this case
                                                    F

                                                           T8

                    (k+1)           (k)        1            8     1
              W       −W        = ηO T +           =O        √ +  √                                                  (29)
                              F                m          m · n m2 n
                                       8

and hence W (i+1) − W (0) F = O (i+1)T
                                    √
                                  m· n
                                           as required.

Now after we showed the assumptions of lemma 8 upholds, we can use it to obtain first order Taylor
approximation of the training loss:
                          D                         (i)
                                                                          E
Li W (i) − Li (W ⋆ ) ≤ ∇W (i) ℓ(yi , f RNN,W (zi )), W (i) − W ⋆                               (30)
                                               RNN,W                    1             !
                                   yt · e−yt f       (zi )
                                                                   R 3 10 √

                       + max                   RNN,W         ·O   √        T m (log m)   W (i) − W ⋆
                          d≤t≤T 1 + e−yt f           (zi )          m                                F
                                 |          {z             }
                                                    ≤1
                                                                                                                     (31)

Where we assumed that m⋆ > n and therefore W (i) − W (0) F < O                                 √R        .
                                                                                                m

Using algorithm 2 update rule for W (i+1) again (see eq 26), we can use an inequality from in Shalev-
Shwartz & Ben-David (2014)’s lemma 14.1 to get that:
                                   n D                                                                           E
                                   X                                    (i)
                                          ∇W (i) ℓ(yi , f RNN,W               (zi )) + σ i , W (i) − W ⋆             (32)
                                   i=1
                              2      n
                  W (1) − W ⋆ F   ηX                         (i)           2
                ≤               +       ∇W (i) ℓ(yi , f RNN,W (zi )) + σ i                                           (33)
                        2η        2 i=1                                    F


                                                                17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now combing with Cauchy–Schwarz inequality we have that:
  n                                           2       n
 X                             W (1) − W ⋆ F       ηX                         (k)           2
      Li W (i) − Li (W ⋆ ) ≤                    +        ∇W (k) ℓ(yk , f RNN,W (zk )) + σ k
 i=1
                                     2η            2 i=1                                    F

                                                                                       (34)
                                          13                ! n                     !
                                                 √

                                     R                          X
                            +O      √        T 10 m (log m)           W (i) − W ⋆      (35)
                                      m                          i=1
                                                                                  F
                                         n D
                                         X                    E
                                     −      σ i , W (i) − W ⋆                                                  (36)
                                         i=1

Substituting the upper bounds from eqs 28, 29 and using the assumption that R = Ω T 16 we get
that:
                     n                          O R2 + T 16   η · n
                   X
                               (i)          ⋆
                                                                                   2
                         Li W        − Li (W ) ≤                  +      O T8 + 1        (37)
                   i=1
                                                       2ηm             2
                             1               !
                          R 3 10                                     3
                                T n (log m) R + nT 8 + O m− 2 n2 T 8 + nR

                +O      √                                                                (38)
                          m
                                        1             !
                     √

                                     R 3 10                                   3

                   2
                                           T n (log m) R + nT 8 + O m− 2 n2 R

           ≤O R n +O               √                                                     (39)
                                     m
                                                              √
To ensure the left hand side is upper bounded by O R2 n we will chose m⋆ such that
   m⋆          9

(log3 m⋆ )
           > n 2 , note that, as required, m⋆ is polynomial in n, T . Then for m > m⋆ we have
     Pn                         √
that i=1 Li W (i) ≤ O R2 n . Therefore,
                                       n                  2
                                    1 X   (i)              R
                                          Li W       ≤O √                                (40)
                                    n i=1                    n

Now, to prove generalization bound we will follow lemma 4.3 in Ji & Telgarsky (2020) and use a
martingale Bernstein bound argument. We begin by showing that during the whole training process,
our binary cross entropy loss is bounded. Indeed lemma 9 assure us that :
                                                          r
                                  RNN,W (i)           14     n
                                                                + T ≤ O T 14

                  max max ft                (z) = O T ·                                     (41)
                 x∈{0,1} d d<t≤T                             m
Therefore,
            their exist
                        a constant C > 0 such that the binary cross entropy loss is bounded by
               14
log 1 + eO(T ) ≤ C · T 14 .

Now, we will define a bounded martingle. For any i ≥ 0, let si denote (xi , yi ) and s0,i denote
(s0 , . . . , si ). Importantly, the quantity
                                                                                          !
                        1      X  h
                                               RNN,W (t)
                                                             i
                                                                        RNN,W (t)

                                     Ex l y, f           (z) − l yt , f           (zt )     (42)
                     C · T 14 t<i
is a martingal w.r.t the filration σ (s0,i−1 ). This martingal difference sequence is given by
                     1       h
                                          RNN,W (t)
                                                         i
                                                                          RNN,W (t)

                             E x  l  y, f           (z)    −  l   y t , f           (z t )     ≤1              (43)
                C · T 14
Moreover, we  have
                   1        h                           i                                   2
                                         RNN,W (t)                       RNN,W (t)
       Es0,t                Ex l y, f               (z) − l yt , f                  (zt )      |σ (s0,i−1 )    (44)
               C 2 · T 28
                                                    2                                                   i2
          1                         RNN,W (t)
                                                                             h
                                                                                       RNN,W (t)
   = 2 28 Es0,t l yt , f                      (zt ) |σ (s0,i−1 ) − Ex l y, f                       (z)         (45)
      C ·T

                                                           1
                                                                            RNN,W (t)

                                             ≤ Es0,t             l yt , f              (zt ) |σ (s0,i−1 )      (46)
                                                        C · T 14
                                                                   1            h
                                                                                            RNN,W (t)
                                                                                                           i
                                                            =              · Ex   l   y,  f           (z)      (47)
                                                                C · T 14


                                                        18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, by lemma C.2 in Ji & Telgarsky (2020) we have that with probability 1 − δ
                          n
                   1     X        h
                                           RNN,W (i)
                                                          i
                                                                         RNN,W (i)

                              E x  l y, f            (z)    − l   yi , f           (z i )                    (48)
                C · T 14 i=1
                                            n
                           1               X       h
                                                            RNN,W (i)
                                                                            i            1
                     ≤           (e − 2) ·     Ex l y, f                (z) + ln                             (49)
                        C · T 14           i=1
                                                                                         δ
And hence
   n                                               n
  X      h           (t)
                          i                 1     X
                                                               RNN,W (i)

                                                                                        14       1
      Ex l y, f RNN,W (z) ≤

                                                      l yi , f           (zi ) + O T         ln           (50)
    i=1
                                         (3 −  e) i=1
                                                                                                 δ
                                                 √

                                               2                     1
                                      = O R n + O R ln                                                    (51)
                                                                     δ
                                                                   RNN,W

Finally, for yt · ftRNN,W (z) < 0 we have that log 1 + e−yt ·ft          (z)
                                                                               > log 2. In addition, clearly

                  RNN,W                                                    T                RNN,W (i)
log 1 + e−yt ·ft         (z)                                        1
                                                                       P
                               > 0. Therefore, we conclude that T −d           l
                                                                           t=d o−1   y  ,
                                                                                       t tf           (z)   <
                     (i)

  1          RNN,W
log 2 l y, f             (z) and thus eq 24 uphold.

D        E XTENSION FOR GD WITH FINITE PRECISION
In this section, we prove theorem 2 from the main text still holds when using the gradient descent
based algorithm 3, instead of the stochastic gradient descent based algorithm 2. . Establishing our
positive results that the parities task is efficiently learnable with sub-task decomposition supervision
in the exact same setting of the negative results that show that learning is impossible without inter-
mediate supervision, presented in section F. We will follow the proof in section C while taking into
account the full non-stochastic gradients.

Algorithm 3: Training f RNN with finite precision GD
Data: Data set D, learning rate η, finite precision σ.
                                                                             2
Initialization: The entries of W (0) , A, M0 are generated i.i.d. from N (0, m ). The entries of B
                                 1
 are generated i.i.d. from N (0, m ).
for i = 1, 2, 3...n do
    Get arbitrary σ-approximation
                     h              of the gradient:     i
                                               (i−1)
    G(i) ∈ B∞ 11 Ex ∇W (i−1) ℓ(y , f RNN,W           (z)) , σ .
    Update weights:
    W (i) = W (i−1) − ηG(i) .
end


We begin by sampling a fake training set denoted by x(1) , . . . , x(n) , y(1) , . . . , y(n) . Essentially, we
will apply the same reasoning as in section C with this fake training points. As in the finite precision
SGD case it is enough to prove a lemma that is equivalent to lemma 4 in section C.

Lemma 5. Let n ∈ N, and denote by Li (W ) := l y(i) , f RNN,W z(i) the training loss. Suppose
                                                                                                              2
there exists W ⋆ ∈ B 12 W (0) , √Rm such that R = O (poly (T )) = Ω T 16 and Li (W ⋆ ) ≤ 1+R

                                                                                                           n .
Then for any δ > 0 there exists m⋆ = poly n, R, T, δ −1 such that if m >
                                                                                      ⋆
                                       1                                    1
                                                                                m then with probability
at least 1 − δ algorithm 3 with η = m√n and finite precision σ = O m will output:
                "                 T X n
                                                                     #
                                                                                R + log 1δ
                               X                                               2
                        1
                                                    RNN,W (i)

             Ex                          l0−1 yt , ft         (z) < O                  √                   (52)
                    n (T − d)        i=1
                                                                                          n
                                    t=d
    11
      The ball is with respect to the distance that defined by the max matrix norm, i.e. the elementwise distances
are at most σ.
   12
      The ball is with respect to the distance that defined by the Frobenius matrix norm.


                                                       19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                              8

Proof. We begin by showing that there exists W̃ ∈ B W (0) , √Tm such that:
                                                             2
                                     h                  i   R
                                   Ex l y, f RNN,W̃ (z) ≤ O √                                               (53)
                                                              n
Indeed, since the minimum can not be larger than the mean,
                                                           eq‘50 in  the proof of lemma 4 assure
us that under the assumptions of lemma 5, for m > max n2 , ln4 1δ , with probability of at least
1 − δ algorithm 2 will reach such W̃ during the first max n, ln2 1δ SGD iteration.


Now we shows that that with high probability over the initialization of f RNN , at any iteration i ≤ n
of algorithm 3, the distance of the learned hidden weights matrix W (i) from its initialization point
W (0) is not too large. As a results we will get that the assumption of lemma 8 uphold, and therefore
its upper bound of the deviation from linearization is valid.
By the triangle inequality for any 0 ≤ i < n we have that:
                                                               i
                                                               X
                                W (i+1) − W (0)            ≤         W (k+1) − W (k)                        (54)
                                                      F                                   F
                                                               k=0

Substituting algorithm 3 update rule for W (k+1) , we get that there exist ∥σ i ∥∞ < σ such that:
                                           h                         (k)
                                                                            i
                 W (k+1) − W (k) = −η Ex ∇W (k) ℓ(y , f RNN,W (z)) + σ k                          (55)
                                                     (k)
Now, explicitly writing ∇W (k) ℓ(y , f RNN,W           (z)) with the chain rule we have that:
                                                    T                RNN,W
                                                                               !                          !
                         (k)              1        X    −yt · e−yt ft      (z)
                                                                                           RNN,W (k)

  ∇W (k) ℓ(y , f RNN,W         (z)) =                              RNN,W         · ∇W (k) ft         (z)
                                        T −d             1 + e−yt ft      (z)
                                                   t=d
                                                                                                          (56)
               x
and since 0 ≤ 1+x ≤ 1 for any x ≥ 0, we conclude by Jensen’s inequality that:
                                                                        T
            h                    (k)
                                       i                         1 X   h              (k)
                                                                                             i
          Ex ∇W (k) ℓ(y , f RNN,W (z))                     ≤         Ex ∇W (k) ftRNN,W (z)                  (57)
                                                     F         T −d                        F
                                                                       t=d
                                                                                           8

Now we will use an induction over i, to show that W (i+1) − W (0) F = O (i+1)T          √
                                                                                     m· n
                                                                                               for any
0 ≤ i < n.   By the induction    hypothesis,
                               √ 8           lemma  10  assure   us that for  wide  enough   networks
m⋆ = Ω hmax T 7 log3 n·T δ    , nT i    , with probability of at least 1 − δ over the initialization of
                         (k)
                   RNN,W
f RNN , Ex ∇W (k) ft         (z)     = O T 8 for any d ≤ t ≤ T . Therefore, in this case
                                        F

                                                                                   T8

                                                                                          1
                  W (k+1) − W (k)               = ηO T 8 + 1 = O

                                                                                     √ +  √                 (58)
                                            F                                     m · n m2 n

                                                (i+1)T 8
and hence W (i+1) − W (0) F = O                    √
                                                 m· n
                                                               as required.

Now after we showed the assumptions of lemma 11 upholds, we can use it to obtain first order Taylor
approximation of the training loss for any x:
                 (i)
                                                  D                   (i)
                                                                                         E
    l y, f RNN,W (z) − l y, f RNN,W̃ (z) ≤ ∇W (i) ℓ(y , f RNN,W (z)), W (i) − W̃               (59)
                                   RNN,W           8   13                 !
                       yt · e−yt f       (z)
                                                  T           √
            + max                  RNN,W (z) ·O
                                                  √       T 10 m (log m)    W (i) − W̃         (60)
              d≤t≤T 1 + e−yt f                      m                                    F
                     |         {z            }
                                   ≤1

                                                                                          T8
Where we assumed that m⋆ > n and therefore W (i) − W (0) F < O                            √
                                                                                            m
                                                                                                    .


                                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Using algorithm 3 update rule for W (k+1) again (see eq 55), we can use an inequality from Shalev-
Shwartz & Ben-David (2014)’s section 14.1.1 to get that
                           n D     h                           i                 E
                          X                             (i)
                                Ex ∇W (i) ℓ(y , f RNN,W (z)) + σi , W (i) − W̃                (61)
                             i=1
                                2
                   W (1) − W̃           ηX
                                           n    h                    (i)
                                                                          i      2
                                F
                                    +         Ex ∇W (i) ℓ(y , f RNN,W (z)) + σ i                       (62)
                        2η              2 i=1                                    F

Now, we can take expectation over eq 59, and combine the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality with the
above bound and get that:
                                                                           2
n
X      h           (i)
                                                  i   W (1) − W̃
    Ex l y, f RNN,W (z) − l y, f RNN,W̃ (z) ≤                    F
                                                                                        (63)
i=1
                                                           2η
       n                                                 8   13                   ! n             !
    ηX       h
                             RNN,W (i)
                                           i      2        T       10
                                                                      √             X
                                                                                            (i)
  +        Ex ∇W (i) ℓ(y , f           (z)) + σ i + O     √      T      m (log m)        W − W̃
    2 i=1                                         F         m                       i=1
                                                                                                F

                                                                                        (64)
Substituting the upper bounds from eqs 57, 58 we get that:
     n      h                                           i O T 16   η · n
   X
                    RNN,W (i)              RNN,W ⋆
                                                                                   2
        Ex l y, f             (z) − l y, f         (z) ≤           +     O T8 + 1                      (65)
   i=1
                                                             2ηm     2
                                     8   13                !
                                     T                                    3
                                            T 10 n (log m) 2nT 8 + O m− 2 n2 T 8

                              +O     √                                                                 (66)
                                       m
                                      √               1  62
                                                                            3

                              ≤ O T 16 n + O m− 6 T 3 n2 (log m) + O m− 2 n2 T 8                       (67)

                                                                 √
To ensure the left hand side is upper bounded by O R2 n we will chose m⋆ such that
      ⋆       9
    m                                      ⋆
    3 m⋆ ) > n , note that, as required, m   is polynomial in n, T . Then since eq 53 assure us that
              2
(logh                 i          2
                                 R
                                                      Pn        h
                                                                         RNN,W (i)
                                                                                        i       √
Ex l y, f RNN,W̃ (z) ≤ O √         n
                                      , we have  that    i=1 Ex  l  y, f           (z)    ≤ O R2 n
for m > m⋆ . Therefore,
                               n                                     2
                           1X        h               (i)
                                                            i          R
                                  Ex l y, f RNN,W (z) ≤ O √                                     (68)
                           n i=1                                         n
                                                                   RNN,W

Finally, for yt · ftRNN,W (z) < 0 we have that log 1 + e−yt ·ft          (z)
                                                                               > log 2. In addition, clearly
                                                                                                 (i)

              −yt ·ftRNN,W (z)
                                                                       PT
log 1 + e                        > 0. Therefore, we conclude that T −d t=d lo−1 yt , ftRNN,W (z) <
                                                                    1

  1            RNN,W (i)
log 2 l   y, f            (z)    and thus eq 52 uphold.



E    L EARNABILITY O F RNN S
In this section we state and extend several lemmas from Wang et al. (2021) and Allen-Zhu et al.
(2019). We will use this lemmas in sections C,D for extending theorem 2 in the main text for finite
precision SGD and GD.
Following Wang et al. (2021)’s notations, for any target function h ∈ Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) and n samples
      n
 z(i) i=1 we will denote:
                            1 D               (0)                     (0)
                                                                               E
                   Hti,j :=     ∇W (0) ftRNN,W (z(i) ), ∇W (0) ftRNN,W (z(j) )            (69)
                            m


                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and
                                                                     
                                                     ht z(1)
                                                  

                                          ỹ (t) = 
                                                       ..             
                                                                                                         (70)
                                                         .
                                                                       
                                                             (n)
                                                      ht z
                          13
We start with theorem 4 from Wang et al. (2021) measuring the complexity of a learned hypothesis
class with respect to random initialization of f RNN .
Lemma 6. Let δ > 0 and n ∈ N, then there exist m⋆ = poly n, δ −1 , T such that if m > m⋆ then

                                      n
for any h ∈ Hϕ(T,ψ,N ) and z(i) i=1 with probability at least 1 − δ over the random initialization
of f RNN there exists matrices Hd,∞ , Hd+1,∞ , . . . , HT,∞ ∈ Rn×n such that for any d ≤ t ≤ T the
following holds:
                                                                   !
                        (t)                          1
                                                                                         T
       1. There exist v ∈ BF 0, q                  T        −1 (t)
                                                                     such that Ht + v(t) v(t) − Ht,∞
                                        100 (ỹ ) (H
                                               (t)     t,∞ ) ỹ
          is positive semi-definite matrix.
          q          T                      p
                             −1
       2.     ỹ (t) (Ht,∞ ) ỹ (t) = O         ϕ (T, ψ, N ) .

Now we state lemma 15 from Wang et al. (2021). Essentially this lemma state that with high proba-
bility over the initialization of f RNN , there exists weights that are not far from the initialization and
have low training loss.
                              n
Lemma 7. Let z(i) , y(i) i=1 be the training set and denote by Li (W ) := l y(i) , f RNN,W z(i)
                                                                            T, δ −1 such that if m > m⋆

the training loss. Then for any δ > 0 there exists m⋆ =  poly n, R,
                                                                                                          2
then with probability at least 1 − δ, there exist W ⋆ ∈ B W (0) , √Rm such that Li (W ⋆ ) ≤ 1+R         n
                         q
                  PT                T        −1
and R = Õ T t=d             ỹ (t) (Ht,∞ ) ỹ (t) .

Now we state theorem 13 from Wang et al. (2021). Essentially this lemma bounds the finite width
deviation of f RNN from its infinite width neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2018).

                                                        )
Lemma 8. Let m, n ∈ N and r = O poly(n,T            √
                                                      m
                                                            , then with probability of at least 1 −
                   1                                                    n
O (n) exp −Ω m 3 14 over the initialization of f RNN , for all z(i) i=1 and W, W̃ ∈ B W (0) , r
for any d ≤ t ≤ T and i ∈ [n] the following hold:
                                              D                           E
                ftRNN,W̃ z(i) − ftRNN,W z(i) − ∇W ftRNN,W (z(i) ), W̃ − W                                (71)
                                                 1    √
                                          = O r 3 T 10 m (log m) W̃ − W                                  (72)
                                                                                          F

Now we state a simple corollary of lemmas B.3 and C.2.a in Allen-Zhu et al. (2019). Essentially
this corollary bound the output of f RNN with high probability over its initialization.

                                                      )
Lemma 9. Let m ∈ N and W ∈ B 15 W (0) , poly(T    √
                                                    m
                                                          , then for a given x and d < t ≤ T with
                                    1
                                     3
                                −Ω m
                                   T2
probability of at least 1 − e             over the random initialization of f RNN the following hold:

                                ftRNN,W (z) = O T 6 W − W (0) + t                                   (73)
                                                                           F
                                                        1
                                                         3
                                               O(T )−Ω m
                                                       T2
Moreover, with probability of at least 1 − e           also the following holds:

                       max      max ftRNN,W (z) = O T 6 W − W (0) + T                                    (74)
                     x∈{0,1}d d<t≤T                                            F
  13
     Combined with Remark H.1 in Wang et al. (2021)’s supplementary materials.
  14
     Note that lemma 13 from Wang et al. (2021) ensure only weaker guaranties of probability 1 −
O (n) exp (−Ω (log m)), but we confirm with the authors that theirs proof proves also our stronger guaranties.
  15
     The ball is with respect to the distance that defined by the Frobenius matrix norm.


                                                      22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. We begin by showing that it is enough to bound ht (z). This is indeed the case since
it is well known that ∥B∥2 = O (1) with probability of at least 1 − e−Ω(m) (see for exam-
ple Bandeira & Van Handel (2016)). Now lemma B.3 from Allen-Zhu et al. (2019) assure us that
      (0)
  hW
   t      (z) = O (t), and finally lemma C.2.a from Allen-Zhu et al. (2019) bounds the deviation
                                     W (0)

from the initialization hWt (z) − ht       (z) = O T 6 W − W (0) F . Finally a simple union
bound on all the possible d bits configurations prove also equation 74.

Now, we use lemma 9 proof together with lemmas B.11 and C.9 from Allen-Zhu et al. (2019) to
prove a lemma that bounds the magnitudes of f RNN ’s gradients. We will use this lemma for bounding
the finite width deviation of f RNN from its infinite width neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2018).
Beyond its application for proving our positive results, lemma 10 below also implies that f RNN , for
which we proved our positive results when intermediate supervision exists, upholds the polynomially
bounded gradients requirement in the parities negative results with high probability. Thus proving
the actual factor enabling efficient learning is, therefore, intermediate supervision. 4

                                                          )
Lemma 10. Let m ∈ N and W ∈ B 16 W (0) , poly(T       √
                                                        m
                                                              , then for a given x and d < t ≤ T with
                                       1
                                        3
                                   −Ω m
                                      T2
probability of at least 1 − e             over the random initialization of f RNN the following hold:

                              ∇W ftRNN,W (z) = O T 8 W − W (0) + T 4                                (75)
                                                F                             F
                                                             1
                                                              3
                                                    O(T )−Ω m
                                                            T2
Moreover, with probability of at least 1 − e                       it holds simultaneously for all x’s and t’s.

Proof. Let Dt ∈ Rm×m be a diagonal matrix that its diagonal equals to 1 when hW
                                                                              t (z) > 0 and
otherwise 0. Then we can write the gradients of f RNN as:
                                           X t i+1
                                                Y
                              RNN,W
                                                     W T Dt BDi hW

                        ∇W ft        (z) =                       i (z)                 (76)
                                                     i=1 j=t

The proof of lemma 9 assure us that               hW
                                                   t (z)       = O T 6 W − W (0) F + t with probabil-
                                   1
                                  m3
                         −Ω       T2
ity of at least 1 − e        over the random initialization of f RNN . In addition, lemma B.11
                                                                           Qi+1      T

together with lemma C.9.d from Allen-Zhu et al. (2019) assure us that        j=t W Dt       =
                                                                                            1             2
                                                                                             3
                                                                                        −Ω m
                                                                                           T2
O T 7 W − W (0) F + T for all i, j with probability of at least 1 − e
                                   3
                                                                                     . Now, it is
                                                                −Ω(m)
well known that ∥B∥2 = O (1) with probability of at least 1 − e        (see for example Bandeira
& Van Handel (2016)), and clearly ∥Dt ∥2 ≤ 1 for any t. Therefore, overall we got that equation 75
                                                  1
                                                   3
                                              −Ω m
                                                 T2
holds with probability of at least 1 − e         . Finally, a simple union bound on all the possible
d bits configurations and T − d t’s proves the bound holds simultaneously for all x’s and t’s.

Finally, we rely on lemma 8 from Wang et al. (2021) to bounds the finite width deviation of f RNN
from its infinite width neural tangent kernel (Jacot et al., 2018).

                                                        )
Lemma 11. Let m ∈ N and r = O poly(T                √
                                                      m
                                                            , then with probability of at least 1 −
                          1
exp O (T log T ) − Ω m 3          over the initialization of f RNN , for all W, W̃ ∈ B W (0) , r the
following hold:
                                                             D                       E
               max max ftRNN,W̃ (z) − ftRNN,W (z) − ∇W ftRNN,W (z), W̃ − W                       (77)
              d≤t≤T z
                                                        1      √
                                                = O r 3 T 10 m (log m) W̃ − W                    (78)
                                                                                               F

Proof. Simple union bound on all the possible d bits configurations and T − d t’s proves the bound
in lemma 8 holds simultaneously for all x’s and t’s.
  16
       The ball is with respect to the distance that defined by the Frobenius matrix norm.


                                                        23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F        B IT-S UBSET PARITY E ND -T O -E ND N EGATIVE R ESULT P ROOFS

In this section, we present a theorem stating that without intermediate supervision, for any neural
network with gradients that are polynomially bounded, one must use an exponential number of GD
steps to achieve non negligible accuracy in the above-presented task of bit subset parity.
                                                       h            2
                                                                      i
                                                          ∂
Theorem 4. Let fθ be any neural-network with Ex ∂θ           fθ (x)     = O (poly (d))17 (polyno-
mially bounded gradients), and let A be any iterative gradient-based18 optimization        algorithm
that runs for n = O (poly (d)) iterations, and at each iteration receives Ω e−d/3 -approximation


of Ex [∇l (y, fθ (x))]. Then, with probability of at least 1−O e−d/3 over the target parity function,


the loss of A will be higher than 12 − O(e−d ).

This theorem follows directly from Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017) and Shamir (2018) and from the
fact that random guessing has high zero-one loss, see full proof below. Importantly, lemma 10
shows that f RNN , for which we proved our positive results when intermediate supervision exists,
upholds the polynomially bounded gradients requirement in theorem 4 above with high probability.
Moreover, section D shows that our positive results holds also for an finite-precision gradient descent
optimization algorithm, for with theorem 4 proves the negative results. So overall both the positive
and negative proof are on the exact same setup and hence corollary 1follows.
We will use abuse of notations and sometimes identify a predictor h ∈ H with the corresponding
                d
vector in {0, 1} that his i’th coordinate equals to 1 if i is one of the indices in the subset and
0 otherwise. We start by describing a measure from Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017) that quantifies
the amount of “signal” on the underlying target function contained in the gradient. Consider the
stochastic optimization problem associated with learning a target function h.
                                                minFh (w)                                         (79)
                                                 w
                                   where: Fh (w) := Ex [l (pw (x) , h (x))]
where l is a loss function, x are the stochastic inputs, and pw is some predictor parametrized by a
parameter vector w (e.g. a neural network of a certain architecture). We assume that F is differen-
tiable. We measure the variance of the gradient of F with respect to h, when h is drawn uniformly
at random from a collection of candidate target functions H:
                                            h                              2i
                       Var (H, F, w) := Eh ∇Fh (w) − Eh̃ ∇Fh̃ (w)                              (80)

To measure meaningful learnability, we will define the expected loss of random guessing from
α ∈ (0, 1) fraction of the hypothesis class H as:
                                                        h h                  ii
                    E H,α,l :=      min       Eh̃∼U (H̃) Ex l h (x) , h̃ (x)             (81)
                                         h∈H
                                    H̃⊆H,|H̃|≥α·|H|

As α approaches 1, this measure reflects the expected loss to be attained by randomly assigning a
hypothesis from H. We will use this measure in the following lemma, which is a direct corollary of
theorem 4 in Shamir (2018). Essentially, this addresses any iterative algorithm (possibly random-
ized), which relies on an ϵ-approximate gradient oracle to optimize Fh in eq 79. The lemma states
                                                                  −1/3
that if the number of iterations is not larger than Var (H, F, w)      then with high probability, the
algorithm will return the same predictor independent of h.
                           p
Lemma 12. Define ϵ = 3 supw Var (H, F, w) and let A be any iterative gradient-based19 opti-
mization algorithm that runs for n iterations, and at each iteration receives Ω (ϵ)-approximation of
∇Fh (w). Then the following holds:

                      Ph∼U (H) Ex [l (h (x) , pA (x))] ≥ E H,1−nϵ,l ≥ 1 − nϵ

                                                                                                  (82)
    17
       For any θ that is reachable by A with n iterations.
    18
       See footnote 3.
    19
       See footnote 3.


                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 12 above assures us that in order to prove negative learning results regarding some task, it is
enough to show it has both exponentially low variance of gradient and high random guessing error.
Now we will show both of these for the task of learning bit subset parity presented in section 5.
Following Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017), we start by showing that different parities functions are
uncorrelated, and hence this task has exponentially low gradient variance:
                         d            d2
Lemma 13. For any (ij )j=1
                         2
                              ̸= ĩj j=1 we have that:
                                  "                      d
                                                               #
                                            Pd
                                             2
                                                            P2
                                             j=1 xij            j=1 xĩj
                                 Ex (−1)               (−1)                =0                        (83)


                                 d
                                                                             d           d2
Proof. Denote by h ̸= h̃ ∈ {0, 1} the vectors that corresponding to the (ij )j=1
                                                                              2
                                                                                  , ĩj j=1 . Then
                    "                               #
                           Pd            Pd
                                                                     (−1)⟨ ⟩
                                           2
                             2
                                                          h                       i
                             j=1 xij       j=1 xĩj            ⟨x,h⟩         x,h̃
                E (−1)
                   x                 (−1)             = E (−1)  x                                (84)

                                                          = Ex (−1)⟨
                                                                    x,h+h̃⟩
                                                               h            i
                                                                                                     (85)
                                                                                 
                                                                 d
                                                                   (−1) j ( j j ) 
                                                                 Y     x   h  +h̃
                                                          = Ex                                      (86)
                                                                     j=1

Since the coordinates are independent we can swap the order of the expectation and the product:
                           d                        d      h +h̃       0
                                 h              i Y    (−1) j j + (−1)
                               Ex (−1) j ( j j ) =
                           Y          x h +h̃
                       =                                                                             (87)
                           j=1                     j=1
                                                               2
                           d     h +h̃
                           Y (−1) j j + 1
                       =                                                                             (88)
                           j=1
                                        2

Finally, since h ̸= h̃ there exists some j ∈ [d] such that hj ̸= h̃j and therefore hj + h̃j = 1 and
Qd (−1)hj +h̃j +1
  j=1        2      = 0.

Now following Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017), we show that the zero correlation between different
parities implies exponentially low gradient variance.
                                  h             2
                                                  i
                                     ∂
Lemma 14. Assuming that Ex ∂w          pw (x)       = O (poly (d)) , then supw Var (H, F, w) =

        −1
O |H|        where H denote the hypothesis class of d dimensional parities described in section 5.


Proof. We use theorem 1 from Shalev-Shwartz et al. (2017). Essentially, this theorem shows that
if the
    h functions in2 ithe hypothesis class are uncorrelated, then the variance is upper bounded by
       ∂
Ex ∂w    pw (x)       times the inverse of the hypothesis class size.

In our case, lemma 13 above shows that:
                                                 "                                          #
                       d           d2                     Pd                   Pd
                                                                                2
                                                           2
                                                              j=1 xij           j=1 xĩj
                 (ij )j=1 ̸= ĩj j=1 =⇒ Ex (−1)
                       2
                                                                        (−1)                    =0   (89)

And therefore we have that
                                                            "                       #
                                                                                2
                                                  −1             ∂
                            Var (H, F, w) ≤ |H|        Ex          pw (x)               .            (90)
                                                                ∂w

.


                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Having low gradient variance alone does not imply that learning is impossible, it only implies that all
hypotheses perform similarly. To show the negative result for our parity problem, we must also show
that the random guessing error is high. Lemma 15 establishes this, showing that the task of learning
bit-subset parity has non-vanishing random guessing error of Θ (1) with respect to the dimension d,
and linear with respect to the fraction of the hypothesis class from which the guessing occurs.
Lemma 15. Let H denote the hypothesis class of d dimensional parities described in section 5, and
l0−1 denote the zero one loss. then the following holds:

                                              H,α,l0−1    1          1
                             ∀α ∈ (0, 1) E             =      1−                                  (91)
                                                          2        α |H|

Proof. Let h ∈ H, we begin by writing the zero-one loss with elementary algebraic operation:
             h h                      ii                       h                          i
   Eh̃∼U (H̃) Ex l0−1 h (x) , h̃ (x)      = Eh̃∼U (H̃⊆{0,1}d ) Ex 1(−1)⟨x,h⟩ ̸=(−1)⟨x,h̃⟩       (92)

                                                                                 · (−1)⟨ ⟩
                                                      "                                      !#
                                                                          ⟨x,h⟩         x,h̃
                                                               1 − (−1)
                                          = Eh̃∼U (H̃) Ex                                       (93)
                                                                               2
                                            1
                                                1 − Eh̃∼U (H̃) Ex (−1)⟨
                                                                             x,h+h̃⟩

                                          =                                                     (94)
                                            2
Since the coordinates are independent we can swap the order of the expectation and the product:
                                              d
                                                                        !!
                          1                  Y            xi (hi +h̃i )
                      =      1 − Eh̃∼U (H̃)      Exi (−1)                                       (95)
                          2                 i=1
                                              " d                              #!
                          1       1             Yh        hi +h̃i          0
                                                                             i
                      =      1 − d Eh̃∼U (H̃)        (−1)         + (−1)                        (96)
                          2      2               i=1

Now, in cases where h ̸= h̃ there exists some j ∈ [d] such that hj ̸= h̃j . Therefore, in such cases
                                Qd          hj +h̃j
hj + h̃j = 1 which implies that j=1 (−1) 2 +1 = 0 and we get that:

                                  1         1             d
                               =      1 − d Eh̃∼U (H̃) 2 · 1h=h̃                                (97)
                                  2        2
                                  1
                               =     1 − Eh̃∼U (H̃) 1h=h̃                                       (98)
                                  2
Now clearly
                                                     ( 1
                                                             h ∈ H̃
                               Eh̃∼U (H̃) 1h=h̃ = |H̃|

                                                                                                (99)
                                                       0     h∈/ H̃
And therefore
                                                                     ( 1
                            h  h                     ii 1 1                   h ∈ H̃
                  Eh̃∼U (H̃) Ex l0−1 h (x) , h̃ (x)    = − ·          |H̃|                       (100)
                                                        2 2           0       h∈
                                                                               / H̃


Finally, by combining lemmas 14,15 with lemma 12 we prove theorem 4.
                                                                                            k
                                                                 −1
                                                                      . Now since nk > nk for

Proof. By lemma 14 we know that supw Var (H, F, w) = O |H|
any k < n, we have that |H| = dd = Ω ed i.e. we have exponentially low variance. Therefore,

                                2
lemma 12 assure us that with probability of at least 1 − n · O e−d/3 the loss of A will be higher

                      1
         H,1−n·O |H|− 3 ,l0−1
than E                     . Finally, lemma 15 implies that:
                                                                          
                          −1           1                      1

               H,1−n·O |H| 3  ,l0−1
             E                      = 1 −                n     2
                                                                          o                     (101)
                                       2      |H| − max O |H| · n, |H| − 1
                                                                3


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Learning Bit-Subset Parity with Transformers results. We say that a model is better than
random when its validation accuracy are higher than 60%. In addition, for each task we also eval-
uated the test accuracy after 100k training iteration. The reported test accuracies are of the models
with the best hyper-parameters according to the validation loss. Each value after the ± sign indicates
the two standard deviations over three different random seeds.

                     With Intermediate Supervision                 Without Intermediate Supervision
 Task Size     Test Accuracy         Iterations until better   Test Accuracy         Iterations until better
                                     than random                                     than random
 8 Bits        100% ± 0.0            79 ± 21.16                100% ± 0.0            185 ± 79.89
 10 Bits                                                       100% ± 0.0            843 ± 424.22
 12 Bits                                                       100% ± 0.0            4.049K ±1.132K
 14 Bits                                                       100% ± 0.0            31.16K ±7.23K
 16 Bits       100% ± 0.0            333 ± 67.002              51.82% ± 1.06%        211.66K ±57.9K
 18 Bits                                                       50.16% ± 2.65%        1.534M ±1.094M
 32 Bits       100% ± 0.0            1.48K ±61.101             49.87% ± 0.72%        > 100K
 64 Bits       100% ± 0.0            11K±1.154K                49.93% ± 0.43%        > 100K
 128 Bits      99.96% ± 0.06%        58.33K ±5.20K             50.71% ± 1.26%        > 100K
 256 Bits      48.24% ± 2.06%        720.16K ±83.17K           50.34% ± 0.73%        > 100K


Table 2: Hyper-Parameters and the random seed that examined in the experiment of learning bit-
subset parity with Transformers.
                      Learning Rate         10−6 , 10−5 , 10−4
                      Weight Decay          0, 10−6 , 10−4 , 10−2
                      Dropout               0
                      Batch Size            32
                      Warmup Steps          1k 20
                      Total Steps           100k 21
                      Number of Layers      12
                      Hidden Size           768
                      FFN Inner Hidden Size 3072
                      Initializer Range     0.02
                      Adam β1               0.9
                      Adam β2               0.999
                      Adam ϵ                10−8
                      Validation Size       min(1024, 12.5% of the data)
                      Test Size             min(1024, 12.5% of the data)
                      Dataset Seed          27, 67, 93


G        B IT-S UBSET PARITY E XPERIMENTS F ULL D ETAILS

Section 5.2 in the main text empirically demonstrates that there exists a large gap when using the
commonly used Transformer architecture for learning bit subset parity with and without intermediate
supervision. In this section, we present the full details of the experiments.
Following the bit-subset parity definition in section 5, we randomly sampled a subset of d/2 prede-
fined unique indices and then we randomly sampled non-overlapping training, validation and test
datasets. For reproducibility purposes, Table 2 reports the random seeds that used for this sampling.
Then, we used the standard implementation of GPT-2 from the transformers framework (Wolf et al.,
2020) and trained a BERT-Base size Transformer decoder model with a vocabulary size of 2. Even
though the small vocabulary size of our model may indicate that it is too shallow for its size (Wies
    21
    For models that converged after less than 5K steps we disabled the learning rate warmup.
    21
    For models that did not converged after 100K steps we continue the training until convergence. Note that
even for thus models Table 1 reports the test accuracy at step 100k.


                                                    27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2021), we still choose to use the standard Transformer-Base configuration. See full archi-
tecture and optimization details in Table 2. While the evaluation of a model without intermediate
supervision is straightforward, we can simply use argmax over the last token logits. This is no
longer the case when intermediate supervision is used since at evaluation time the model must cre-
ate its own intermediate steps. As a result, in this case, we need a decoding algorithm that iteratively
predicates the intermediate steps. Since we found in preliminary experiments that greedy decoding
tends to be more efficient for longer sequences than random sampling, we choose to use it.
To complement Figure 3 in the main text, Table 1 shows the first iteration22 for which the model
is better than random as well as the test accuracy after 100k training iterations. Though “better
than random" could be defined in a variety of ways. Figure 4 illustrates a typical learning tra-
jectory and demonstrate the insignificant differences in definitions due to the observed grokking
phenomenon (Power et al., 2021). For each task we repeated the task 3 times with different dataset
seeds, and perform grid search over the hyper-parameters in Table 2. Table 1 reports the mean
and standard deviation test accuracy of the best hyper-parameters according to the validation binary
cross-entropy loss, where we break ties by choosing the model that converged faster. As excepted,
without intermediate supervision, the Transformer models can not learn beyond random guessing
tasks with more than 18 bits. In contrast, with intermediate supervision, the test accuracy is almost
perfect even at 128 bits.

                                      100%
                                                                            Almost Perfect
                           Accuracy


                                      75%



                                                        Random Guessing

                                      50%

                                             1K   20K       40K       60K        80K         100K
                                                              Iterations


Figure 4: Illustration of a typical bit-subset parity learning trajectory. In these tasks we observed a
grokking phenomenon (Power et al., 2021) where very soon after the validation accuracy became
higher than random level it also became almost flawless (accuracy > 95%). Therefore, successful
learning is not sensitive to the exact cutoff.


   22
      Validation accuracy was evaluated at 1K-step intervals, except for models that converged in less than 4K
steps for which we run the evaluation every 10 steps.


                                                             28
