Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M ETAGL: E VALUATION -F REE S ELECTION OF G RAPH
L EARNING M ODELS VIA M ETA -L EARNING
 Namyong Park                                             Ryan Rossi
 Carnegie Mellon University                               Adobe Research
 namyongp@cs.cmu.edu                                      ryrossi@adobe.com

 Nesreen Ahmed                                            Christos Faloutsos
 Intel Labs                                               Carnegie Mellon University
 nesreen.k.ahmed@intel.com                                christos@cs.cmu.edu

                                            A BSTRACT
         Given a graph learning task, such as link prediction, on a new graph, how can we
         select the best method as well as its hyperparameters (collectively called a model)
         without having to train or evaluate any model on the new graph? Model selection
         for graph learning has been largely ad hoc. A typical approach has been to apply
         popular methods to new datasets, but this is often suboptimal. On the other hand,
         systematically comparing models on the new graph quickly becomes too costly,
         or even impractical. In this work, we develop the first meta-learning approach for
         evaluation-free graph learning model selection, called M ETAGL, which utilizes
         the prior performances of existing methods on various benchmark graph datasets
         to automatically select an effective model for the new graph, without any model
         training or evaluations. To quantify similarities across a wide variety of graphs, we
         introduce specialized meta-graph features that capture the structural characteristics
         of a graph. Then we design G-M network, which represents the relations among
         graphs and models, and develop a graph-based meta-learner operating on this G-M
         network, which estimates the relevance of each model to different graphs. Extensive
         experiments show that using M ETAGL to select a model for the new graph greatly
         outperforms several existing meta-learning techniques tailed for graph learning
         model selection (up to 47% better), while being extremely fast at test time (∼1 sec).

1    I NTRODUCTION
Given a graph learning (GL) task, such as link prediction, for a new graph dataset, how can we
select the best method as well as its hyperparameters (HPs) (collectively called a model) without
performing any model training or evaluations on the new graph? GL has received increasing attention
recently (Zhang et al., 2022), achieving successes across various applications, e.g., recommendation
and ranking (Fan et al., 2019; Park et al., 2020), traffic forecasting (Jiang & Luo, 2021), bioinformat-
ics (Su et al., 2020), and question answering (Park et al., 2022). However, as GL methods continue to
be developed, it becomes increasingly difficult to determine which model to use for the given graph.
Model selection (i.e., selecting a method and its configuration such as HPs) for graph learning has
been largely ad hoc to date. A typical approach, called “no model selection”, is to simply apply
popular methods to new graphs, often with the default HP values. However, it is well known that there
is no universal learning algorithm that performs best on all problem instances (Wolpert & Macready,
1997), and such consistent model selection is often suboptimal. At the other extreme lies “naive model
selection” (Fig. 1b), where all candidate models are trained on the new graph, evaluated on a hold-out
validation graph, and then the best performing model for the new graph is selected. This approach is
very costly as all candidate models are trained when a new graph arrives. Recent methods on neural
architecture search (NAS) and hyperparameter optimization (HPO) of GL methods, which we review
in Section 3, adopt smarter and more efficient strategies, such as Bayesian optimization (Snoek et al.,
2012; Tu et al., 2019), which carefully choose a relatively small number of HP settings to evaluate.
However, they still need to evaluate multiple configurations of each GL method on the new graph.
Evaluation-free model selection is yet another paradigm, which aims to tackle the limitations of the
above approaches by attempting to simultaneously achieve the speed of no model selection and the
accuracy of exhaustive model selection. Recently, a seminal work by Zhao et al. (2021) proposed a
technique for outlier detection (OD) model selection, which carries over the observed performance of


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                   No model training/
  Proposed             evaluation                              𝐌∗
                                                               best
                                                              model
                            MetaGL
                 𝐆𝐆
                            Model
                                                  inferred model
  new graph                                        performances
 (a) MetaGL infers the best model with no model training/evaluation.
                    train       evaluate
  Existing         models        models                        𝐌∗
                     𝑀!            𝐸!                          best
                                                              model

                      ...


                                     ...
                                                       model
  new graph           𝑀"             𝐸"            performances
                        Validation
                      ...


                                     ...
                         Graph 𝑮!
 (b) Existing model selection methods train/evaluate multiple models.   (c) MetaGL consistently performs the best.
Figure 1: (a) Given an unseen graph G and a large space M of models to search over, M ETAGL
efficiently infers the best model M ∗ ∈ M without having to train a single model from M on the new
graph G. (b) Existing approaches, by contrast, need to train and evaluate multiple models Mi ∈ M to
be able to select the best one. (c) Given observed performance with varying sparsity levels, M ETAGL
consistently outperforms existing meta-learners, with up to 47% better model selection performance.

OD methods on benchmark datasets for selecting OD methods. However, it does not address the
unique challenges of GL model selection, and cannot be directly used to solve the problem. Inspired
by this work, we systematically tackle the model selection problem for graph learning, especially
link prediction. We choose link prediction as it is a key task for graph-structured data: It has many
applications (e.g., recommendation, knowledge graph reasoning, and entity resolution), and several
inference and learning tasks can be cast as a link prediction problem (e.g., Fadaee & Haeri (2019)).
In this work, we develop M ETAGL, the first meta-learning framework for evaluation-free selection
of graph learning models, which finds an effective GL model to employ for a new graph without
training or evaluating any GL model on the new graph, as Figure 1a illustrates. M ETAGL satisfies all
of desirable features for GL model selection listed in Table 1, while no existing paradigms satisfy all.
The high-level idea of meta-learning based model selection is to estimate a candidate model’s perfor-
mance on the new graph based on its observed performances on similar graphs. Our meta-learning
problem for graph data presents a unique challenge of how to model graph similarities, and what
characteristic features (i.e., meta-features) of a graph to consider. Note that this step is often not
needed for traditional meta-learning problems on non-graph data, as features for non-graph objects
(e.g., location, age of users) are often readily available. Also, the high complexity and irregularity of
graphs (e.g., different number of nodes and edges, and widely varying connectivity patterns among
different graphs) makes the task even more challenging. To handle these challenges, we design
specialized meta-graph features that can characterize major structural properties of real-world graphs.
Then to estimate the performance of a candidate model on a given graph, M ETAGL learns to embed
models and graphs in the shared latent space such that their embeddings reflect the graph-to-model
affinity. Specifically, we design a multi-relational graph called G-M network, which captures multiple
types of relations among models and graphs, and develop a meta-learner operating on this G-M
network, based on an attentive graph neural network that is optimized to leverage meta-graph features
and prior model performance into producing model and graph embeddings that can be effectively used
to estimate the best performing model for the new graph. M ETAGL greatly outperforms existing meta-
learners in GL model selection (Fig. 1c). In sum, the key contributions of this work are as follows.
 • Problem Formulation. We formulate the problem of selecting effective GL models in an
   evaluation-free manner (i.e., without ever having to train/evaluate any model on the new graph),
   To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to study this important problem.
 • Meta-Learning Framework and Features. We propose M ETAGL, the first meta-learning frame-
   work for evaluation-free GL model selection. For meta-learning on various graphs, we design meta-
   graph features that quantify graph similarities by capturing structural characteristics of a graph.
 • Effectiveness. Using M ETAGL for GL model selection greatly outperforms existing meta-learning
   techniques (up to 47% better, Fig. 1c), with negligible runtime overhead at test time (∼1 sec).
Benchmark Data/Code: To facilitate further research on this important new problem, we release
code and data at https://github.com/NamyongPark/MetaGL, including performances of
400+ models on 300+ graphs, and 300+ meta-graph features.

                                                         2
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



  Table 1: The proposed M ETAGL wins on features in comparison to existing graph learning (GL)
  model selection (MS) paradigms, all of which fail to satisfy some of desirable properties for GL MS.
                  GL Model Selection (MS) Paradigms                                        Graph HPO/NAS
                                                          No model Naive model                                   M ETAGL
                                                                                        (e.g., AutoNE, AGNN;
                                                          selection selection (Fig. 1b)                        (Ours, Fig. 1a)
Desiderata for Graph Learning (GL) MS                                                   See Sec 3 and Fig. 1b)
Evaluation-free GL model selection                           X                                                       !
Capable of MS from among multiple GL algorithms                             X                                        !
Capitalizing on graph similarities for GL MS                                                                         !
Estimating model performance based on past observations                                           X                  !


  2    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
  Given a new unseen graph, our goal is to select the best model from a heterogeneous set of graph
  learning models, without requiring any model evaluations and user intervention. In comparison to
  traditional meta-learning problems where a model denotes a single method and its hyperparameters,
  a model in the graph meta-learning problem is more broadly defined to be
      model M = {(graph embedding method, hyperparameters), (predictor, hyperparameters)},                               (1)
  as graph learning tasks usually involve two steps: (1) embedding the graph using a graph representation
  learning method, and (2) providing node embeddings to the predictor of a downstream task like link
  prediction. Both steps require learning a method with specific hyperparameters. Thus, there can be
  many models with the same embedding method and predictor, which have different hyperparameters.
  Also, the set M of models may contain many different graph representation learning methods (e.g.,
  node2vec (Grover & Leskovec, 2016), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), DeepGL (Rossi et al.,
  2020) to name a few), as well as multiple task-specific predictors, making M heterogeneous.
  Given a training meta-corpus of n graphs G = {Gi }ni=1 , and m models M = {Mj }m j=1 for GL tasks,
  we derive performance matrix P ∈ Rn×m where Pij is the performance (e.g., accuracy) of model j
  on graph i. Our meta-learning problem for evaluation-free GL model selection is defined as follows.
  Problem 1 (Evaluation-Free Graph Learning Model Selection).
  Given
  • an unseen test graph Gtest ∈
                               / G, and
  • a potentially sparse performance matrix P ∈ Rn×m of m heterogeneous graph learning models
    M = {M1 , . . . , Mm } on n graphs G = {G1 , . . . , Gn },
  Select
  • the best model M ∗ ∈ M to employ on Gtest without evaluating any model in M on Gtest .

  3    R ELATED W ORK
  A majority of works on GL focus on developing new algorithms for certain graph tasks and applica-
  tions (Xia et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022). In comparison, there exist relatively few recent works
  that address the GL model selection problem (Zhang et al., 2021). They mainly focus on neural
  architecture search (NAS) and hyperparameter optimization (HPO) for GL models, especially graph
  neural networks (GNNs). Toward efficient and effective NAS and HPO in GL, they investigated
  several approaches, such as Bayesian optimization (AutoNE by Tu et al. (2019)), reinforcement learn-
  ing (GraphNAS by Gao et al. (2020), AGNN by Zhou et al. (2019), Policy-GNN by Lai et al. (2020)),
  hypernets (ST-GCN by Zhu et al. (2021)), and evolutionary algorithms (Bu et al. (2021)), as well as
  techniques like subgraph sampling (AutoNE by Tu et al. (2019)), graph coarsening (JITuNE by Guo
  et al. (2021)), and hierarchical evaluation (HESGA by Yuan et al. (2021)). However, as summarized
  in Table 1, these methods cannot perform evaluation-free GL model selection (Problem 1), since they
  need to evaluate multiple configurations of each GL method on the new graph for model selection.
  Further, they are limited to finding the best configuration of a single algorithm, and thus cannot select
  a model from a heterogeneous model set M with various GL models, as Problem 1 requests. An
  earlier work on GNN design space (You et al., 2020) is somewhat relevant, as it proposes an approach
  to quantify graph similarities, which can be used to find an observed graph similar to the test graph,
  and select a model that performed best on it. However, their approach evaluates a set of anchor models
  on all graphs, and computes similarities between two graphs based on anchor models’ performance
  on them. As it needs to run anchor models on the new graph, it is inapplicable to Problem 1. For the
  first time, M ETAGL enables evaluation-free model selection from a heterogeneous set of GL models.

                                                             3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                           𝐆
                                Meta-Graph                  MetaGL
                       𝐆
                                 Features                   Model f                     𝐌∗
           new graph                                                                  best
                                                                          inferred   model
                                              meta-graph                performances
                                               features
Figure 2: Given a new graph G, M ETAGL extracts meta-graph features, and applies a meta-learned
model to them, which efficiently infers the best model M ∗ ∈ M for G, with no model evaluation.

4     F RAMEWORK
In this section, we present M ETAGL, our meta-learning based framework that solves Problem 1
by leveraging prior performances of existing methods. M ETAGL consists of two phases: (1) offline
meta-training phase (Section 4.1) that trains a meta-learner using observed graphs G and model
performances P, and (2) online model prediction phase (Section 4.2), which selects the best model
for the new graph. A summary of notations used in this work is provided in Table 3 in the Appendix.
4.1   O FFLINE M ETA -T RAINING
Meta-learning leverages prior experience from related learning tasks to do a better job on the new
task. When the new task is similar to some historical learning tasks, then the knowledge from those
similar tasks can be transferred and applied to the new task. Thus effectively capturing the similarity
between an input task and observed ones is fundamentally important for successful meta-learning. In
meta-learning, the similarity between learning tasks is modeled using meta-features, i.e., characteristic
features of the learning task that can be used to quantify the task similarity.
Meta-Graph Features. Given the graph learning model selection problem (where new graphs
correspond to new learning tasks), M ETAGL captures the graph similarity by extracting meta-graph
features such that they reflect the structural characteristics of a graph. Notably, since graphs have
irregular structure, with different number of nodes and edges, M ETAGL designs meta-graph features
to be of the same size for any arbitrary graph such that they can be easily compared using meta-graph
features. We use the symbol m ∈ Rd to denote the fixed-size meta-graph feature vector of graph G.
We defer the details of how M ETAGL computes m to Section 4.3.
Model Performance Estimation. To estimate how well a model would perform on a given graph,
M ETAGL represent models and graphs in the latent k-dimensional space, and captures the graph-
to-model affinity using the dot product similarity between the two representations hGi and hMj
of the i-th graph Gi and j-th model Mj , respectively, such that pij ≈ hhGi , hMj i where pij is the
performance of model Mj on graph Gi . Then to obtain the latent representation h, we design a
learnable function f (·) that takes in relevant information on models and graphs from the meta-graph
features m and the prior knowledge (i.e., model performances P and observed graphs G). Below in
this section, we focus on the inputs to the function f (·), and defer the details of f (·) to Section 4.4.
We first factorize performance matrix P into latent graph factors U ∈ Rn×k and model factors
V ∈ Rm×k , and take the model factor Vj ∈ Rk (the j-th row of V) as the input representation
of model Mj . Then, M ETAGL obtains the latent embedding hMj of model Mj by hMj = f (Vj ).
For graphs, more information is available since we have both meta-graph features m and meta-train
graph factors U. However, while we have the same number of models during training and inference,
we observe new graphs during inference, and thus cannot obtain the graph factor Utest for the
test graph as for the train graphs since matrix factorization (MF) is transductive by construction
(i.e., existing models’ performance on the test graph is needed to get latent factors for the test
graph directly via MF). To handle this issue, we learn an estimator φ : Rd 7→ Rk that maps the
meta-graph features m into the latent factors of meta-train graphs obtained via MF above (i.e., for
graph Gi with m, φ(m) = U     b i ≈ Ui ) and use this estimated graph factor. We then combine both
inputs ([m; φ(m)] ∈ Rd+k ), and apply linear transformation to make the input representation of
graph Gi to be of the same size as that of model Mj , obtaining the latent embedding of graph Gi
to be hGi = f (W[m; φ(m)]) where W ∈ Rk×(d+k) is a weight matrix. Thus in M ETAGL, the
performance pij of model Mj on graph Gi with meta-graph features m is estimated as
                               pij ≈ pbij = hf (W[m; φ(m)]), f (Vj )i.                                (2)

Meta-Learning Objective. For tasks where the goal is to estimate real values, such as accuracy, the
mean squared error (MSE) is a typical choice for the loss function. While MSE is easy to optimize and


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


effective for regression, it does not directly take the ranking quality into account. By contrast, in our
problem setup, accurately ranking models for each graph dataset is more important than estimating
the performance itself, which makes MSE a suboptimal choice. In particular, Problem 1 focuses on
finding the model with the best performance on the given graph. Therefore, we consider rank-based
learning objectives, and among them, we adapt the top-1 probability to the proposed Problem 1 as
follows. Let P b i ∈ Rm be the i-th row of P   b (i.e., estimated performance of all m models on graph
                                          P
Gi ). Given P                             top1 (j) of j-th model Mj in the model set M is defined to be
             b i , the top-1 probability p bi


                                          π(b
                                            pij )          exp(b
                                                               pij )
                            pP
                             top1 (j) = Pm             = Pm
                             bi
                                                                                                           (3)
                                         k=1 π(bp ik )    k=1 exp(bpik )
where π(·) is an increasing, strictly positive function, which we define to be an exponential function.
Theorem 1 (Cao et al. (2007)). Given the performance P   b i of all models on graph Gi , pPi (j)     b
                                                                                              top1
represents the probability of model Mj to be ranked at the top of the list (i.e., all models in M).
Top-1 probabilities pP
                     top1 (j) for all j = 1, . . . , m form a probability distribution over m models.
                       i
                      b


Based on Theorem 1, we obtain two probability distributions by applying top-1 probability to the
true performance Pi and estimated performance P  b i of m models, and optimize M ETAGL such that
the distance between the two resulting distributions gets decreased. Using the cross entropy as the
distance metric, we obtain the following loss over all n meta-train graphs G:
                                         Xn X m                   b
                          L(P, P)b =−            pP i
                                                  top1  (j) log  pPi
                                                                  top1 (j)                      (4)
                                           i=1 j=1

When P is sparse, meta-training can be performed via slightly modified Eqs. (3) and (4) in App. G.2.
4.2 O NLINE M ODEL P REDICTION
In the meta-training phase, M ETAGL learns estimators f (·) and φ(·), as well as weight matrix W and
latent model factors V. Given a new graph Gtest , M ETAGL first computes the meta-graph features
mtest ∈ Rd as we discuss in Section 4.3. Then mtest is regressed to obtain the (approximate) latent
graph factors Ub test = φ(mtest ) ∈ Rk . Recall that the model factors V learned in the meta-training
stage can be directly used for model prediction. Then model Mj ’s performance on test graph Gtest
can be estimated by applying Equation (2) with mtest and φ(mtest ). Finally, the model that has the
highest estimated performance is selected by M ETAGL as the best model M ∗ , i.e.,
                          M ∗ ← arg max f (W[mtest ; φ(mtest )]), f (Vj )                                  (5)
                                  Mj ∈M

Note that model selection using Equation (5) depends only on the meta-graph features mtest of the
test graph and other pretrained estimators and latent factors that M ETAGL learned in the meta-training
phase. As no model training or evaluation is involved, model prediction by M ETAGL is much faster
than training and evaluating different models multiple times, as our experiments show in Section 5.4.
Further, model prediction process is fully automatic since it does not require users to choose or
fine-tune any values at test time. Figure 2 shows an overview of the model prediction process, and
Algorithm 1 in the Appendix lists steps for offline meta-training and online model prediction.
4.3 S TRUCTURAL M ETA -G RAPH F EATURES                                    Input Graph 𝐺
Meta-graph features are a crucial component of our meta-
learning approach M ETAGL since they capture important struc-            ψ(          )
tural characteristics of an arbitrary graph. Meta-graph features
enable M ETAGL to quantify graph similarities, and utilize prior        𝜓!   𝜓"      ...    𝜓#
experience with observed graphs for GL model selection. It is
important that a sufficient and representative set of meta-graph                      ...
                                                                                                          Meta-
features are used to capture the important structural properties         Σ      Σ           Σ             Graph
of graphs from a wide variety of domains, including biological,                                          Features
technological, information, and social networks to name a few.      [                 ...
                                                                                                 ]         𝒎
In this work, we are not able to leverage the commonly used Figure 3: Meta-graph features in
simple statistical meta-features used by previous work on model M ETAGL are derived in two steps.
selection-based meta-learning, as they cannot be used directly See Section 4.3 for details.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


over irregular and complex graph data. To address this problem, we introduce the notion of meta-graph
features and develop a general framework for computing them on any arbitrary graph.
Meta-graph features in M ETAGL are derived in two steps, which is shown in Figure 3. First, we
apply a set of structural meta-feature extractors Ψ = {ψ1 , . . . , ψq } to the input graph G, obtaining
Ψ(G) = {ψ1 (G), . . . , ψq (G)}. Applying ψ ∈ Ψ to G yields a vector or a distribution of values
for the nodes (or edges) in the graph, such as degree distribution and PageRank scores. That is,
in Figure 3, ψ1 can be a degree distribution, ψ2 can be PageRank scores of all nodes, and so on.
Specifically, we use both local and global structural feature extractors. To capture the local structural
properties around a node or an edge, we compute node degree, number of wedges (i.e., a path of
length 2), triangles centered at each node, and also frequency of triangles for every edge. To capture
global structural properties of a node, we derive eccentricity, PageRank score, and k-core number of
each node. Appendix D summarizes meta-feature extractors used in this work.
Let ψ denote the local structural extractors for nodes. Given a graph Gi = (Vi , Ei ) and ψ, we obtain
an |Vi |-dimensional node vector ψ(Gi ). Since any two graphs Gi and Gj are likely to have a different
number of nodes and edges, the resulting structural feature matrices ψ(Gi ) and ψ(Gj ) for these
graphs are also likely to be of different sizes as the rows of these matrices correspond to nodes or
edges of the corresponding graph. Thus, in general, these structural feature-based representations of
the graphs cannot be used directly to derive similarity between graphs.
Now, to address this issue, we apply the set Σ of global statistical meta-graph feature extractors
to every ψi (G), ∀i = 1, . . . , q, which summarizes each ψi (G) to a fixed-size vector. Specifically,
Σ(ψi (G)) applies each of the statistical functions in Σ (e.g., mean, kurtosis, etc) to the distribution
ψi (G), which computes a real number that summarizes the given feature distribution ψi (G) from
different statistical point of view, producing a vector Σ(ψi (G)) ∈ R|Σ| . Then we obtain the meta-
graph feature vector m of graph G by concatenating the resulting meta-graph feature vectors:
                               m = [Σ(ψ1 (G)) · · · Σ(ψq (G))] ∈ Rd .                                (6)
Table 5 in Appendix D lists the global statistical functions Σ used in this work to derive meta-
graph features. Further, in addition to the node- and edge-level structural features, we also compute
global graph statistics (scalars directly derived from the graph, e.g., density and degree assortativity
coefficient), and append them to m, i.e., the node- or edge-level structural features obtained above.
Most importantly, given any arbitrary graph G0 , the proposed approach is guaranteed to output a fixed
d-dimensional meta-graph feature vector characterizing G0 . Hence, the structural similarity of any
two graphs G and G0 can be quantified using a similarity function over m and m0 , respectively.
4.4 E MBEDDING M ODELS AND G RAPHS
Given an informative context (i.e., input features) of models and graphs that M ETAGL learns from
model performances P and meta-graph features M (Sections 4.1 and 4.3), how can we use it to
effectively learn model and graph embeddings that capture graph-to-model affinity? We note that
similar entities can make each other’s context more accurate and informative. For instance, in our
problem setup, similar models tend to have similar performance distributions over graphs, and likewise
similar graphs are likely to exhibit similar affinity to different models. With this consideration, we
model the task as a graph representation learning problem, where we construct a graph called G-M
network that connects similar graphs and models, and learn the graph and model embeddings over it.
G-M Network. We define G-M network to be a multi-relational graph with two types of nodes (i.e.,
models and graphs) where edges connect similar model nodes and graph nodes. To measure similarity
among graphs and models, we utilize the latent graph and model factors (U and V, respectively)
obtained by factorizing P, as well as the meta-graph features M. More precisely, we use the estimated
graph factor U b instead of U to let the same graph construction process work for new graphs. Note
that this gives us two types of features for graph nodes (i.e., U
                                                                b and M), and one type of features for
model nodes (i.e., V). To let different features influence the embedding step differently as needed, we
connect graph nodes and model nodes using five type of edges: M-g2g, P-g2g, P-m2m, P-g2m, P-m2g
where g and m denote the type of nodes that an edge connects (graph and model, respectively), and
M and P denote that the edge is based on meta-graph features and model performance, respectively.
For example, M-g2g and P-g2g edges connect two graph nodes that are similar in terms of M and
U,
 b respectively. Then for each edge type, we construct a k-NN graph by connecting nodes to their
top-k similar nodes, where node-to-node similarity is defined as the cosine similarity between the


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


corresponding node features. For instance, for P-g2m edge type, graph nodes and model nodes are
                                       b and V. Fig. 7 in the Appendix illustrates the G-M network.
linked based on the similarity between U
Learning Over G-M Network. Given the G-M network Gtrain with meta-train graphs and models,
graph neural networks (GNNs) provide an effective framework to embed models and graphs via
(weighted) neighborhood aggregation over Gtrain . However, since the structure of G-M network
is induced by simple k-NN search, some of the neighbors may not provide the same amount of
information as others, or may even provide noisy information. We found it helpful to perform
attentive neighborhood aggregation, so more informative neighbors can be given more weights. To
this end, we choose to use attentive GNNs designed for multi-relational networks, and specifically
use HGT (Hu et al., 2020). Then the embedding function f (·) in Section 4.1 is defined to be f (x) =
HGT(x, Gtrain ) during training, which transforms the input node feature x into an embedding via
attentive neighborhood aggregation over Gtrain . Further details of HGT are provided in Appendix G.4.
Inference Over G-M Network. For inference at test time, we extend Gtrain to be a larger G-M
network Gtest that additionally contains test graph nodes, and edges between test graph nodes, and
existing graphs and models in Gtrain . The extension is done in the same way as in the training phase, by
finding top-k similar nodes. Then the embedding at test time can be done by f (x) = HGT(x, Gtest ).
5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
Models and Evaluation. A model in our problem (Eqn. 1) consists of two components. The first
component performs graph representation learning (GRL), and the other component leverages the
learned embeddings for a downstream task of interest. In this work, we focus on link prediction,
which is a key task for graph-structured data as we discuss in Section 1. We evaluate the performance
of selecting a link prediction model for new graphs without any model evaluation. For the first
component, we use 12 popular GRL methods, and for the second component for link scoring, we use
a simple estimator that computes the cosine similarity between two node embeddings. This results in
a model set M with 423 models. The full list of models is given in Table 4 in Appendix C.
For evaluation, we create a testbed containing benchmark graphs, meta-graph features, and a perfor-
mance matrix. We construct the performance matrix by evaluating each link prediction model in M
on the graphs in the testbed, in terms of mean average precision score. Then we evaluate M ETAGL
and baselines via 5-fold cross validation where the benchmark graphs are split into meta-train Gtrain
and meta-test Gtest graphs for each fold, and meta-learners trained over the meta-train graph data are
evaluated using the meta-test graph datasets. Thus, model performances over the meta-test graphs
Gtest and the meta-graph features of Gtest were unseen during training, but used only for testing.
Since model selection aims to accurately predict         Table 2: The proposed M ETAGL outper-
the best model for a new graph, we evaluate the          forms existing meta-learners, given fully ob-
top-1 prediction performance in terms of MRR             served performance matrix. Best results are
(Mean Reciprocal Rank), AUC, and NDCG (Nor-              in bold, and second best results are under-
malized Discounted Cumulative Gain). To apply            lined. “M ETAGL_Baseline” notation (e.g.,
MRR and AUC, we label models such that the top-          M ETAGL_S2) indicate that the baseline meta-
1 model (i.e., the model with the best performance       learner uses M ETAGL’s meta-graph features.
for the given graph) is labeled as 1, while all others
are labeled as 0. For NDCG, we report NDCG@1,                               Method          MRR AUC NDCG@1
which evaluates the relevance of top-1 predicted                         Random Selection    0.011 0.490   0.745
model. All metrics range from 0 to 1, with larger                        Global Best-AvgPerf 0.163 0.877   0.932
values indicating better performance.
                                                           Simple


                                                                         Global Best-AvgRank 0.103 0.867   0.930
Baselines. Being the first work for evaluation-free      M ETAGL_AS       0.222 0.905   0.947
model selection in GL, we do not have immedi-            M ETAGL_ISAC     0.202 0.887   0.939
ate baselines for comparison. Instead, we adapt          M ETAGL_S2       0.170 0.910   0.945
                                                         Optimization-


baselines used for OD model selection (Zhao et al.,      M ETAGL_ALORS    0.190 0.897   0.950
                                                            based


2021) and collaborative filtering for our problem        M ETAGL_NCF      0.140 0.869   0.934
setting. In Appendix A, we describe baselines in de-     M ETAGL_MetaOD   0.075 0.599   0.889
tail. Baselines are grouped into two categories: (a)     M ETAGL          0.259 0.941   0.962
Simple meta-learners select a model that performs
generally well, either globally or locally: Global Best (GB)-AvgPerf, GB-AvgRank, ISAC (Ka-
dioglu et al., 2010), and ARGOSMART (AS) (Nikolić et al., 2013); (b) Optimization-based meta-


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


learners learn to estimate the model performance by modeling the relation between meta features
and model performances: Supervised Surrogates (S2) (Xu et al., 2012), ALORS (Misir & Sebag,
2017), NCF (He et al., 2017), and MetaOD (Zhao et al., 2021). We also include Random Selection
(RS) as a baseline to see how these methods compare to random scoring.
Note that, except the simplest meta-learners RS and GB, no baselines can handle graph data, and thus
they cannot estimate model performance on the new graph on their own. In that sense, they are not
direct competitors of M ETAGL. We enable them to be used for GL model selection by providing
the proposed meta-graph features. MetaOD, which was originally designed for OD model selection,
is also given the same meta-graph features to perform GL model selection. We denote baselines
either by combining M ETAGL with their names (e.g., M ETAGL_S2) to clearly show that they use
M ETAGL’s meta-graph features, or using their name alone (e.g., S2) for simplicity.
5.2          M ODEL S ELECTION ACCURACY
Fully Observed Performance Matrix. In this setup, meta-learners are trained using a full perfor-
mance matrix P with no missing entries. The model selection accuracy of all meta-learners in this
setup is reported in Table 2, where M ETAGL achieves the best performance in all metrics, with 17%
higher MRR than the best baseline (AS).
• Among simple meta-learners, Global Best meta-learners, which simply average model performance
  or rank over all observed graphs, are outperformed by more sophisticated meta-learners AS and
  ISAC, which leverage dataset similarities for model selection using meta-graph features.
• For optimization-based meta-learners, it is important to be aware of how models and graphs relate
  to each other, and have high flexibility to capture that complex relationship. In methods like ALORS
  and MetaOD, relations between models and datasets (i.e., relative position of models and datasets
  in the embedding subspace) are learned rather indirectly via reconstructing the performance matrix.
• M ETAGL, in contrast, directly captures graph-to-model affinity by modeling their relations via
  employing flexible GNNs over the G-M network, as well as reconstructing the performance matrix.
  As a result, M ETAGL consistently outperforms other optimization-based meta-learners.
Partially Observed Performance Matrix. In this setup, meta-learners are trained using a sparse
performance matrix P, obtained by randomly masking out a full P. Figure 4 reports results obtained
with varying sparsity, ranging up to 0.9. In this more challenging setup, M ETAGL consistently
performs the best across all levels of sparsity, achieving up to 47% higher MRR than the best baseline.
• With increased sparsity, nearly all meta-learners perform increasingly worse, as one might expect.
• While AS was the best baseline given a full P, its accuracy decreased rapidly as sparsity increased.
  Since AS selects a model based on the 1NN meta-train graph, it is highly sensitive to P’s sparsity.
• Baselines such as the Global Best baselines are more stable as they average across multiple graphs.
• Optimization-based methods like M ETAGL and S2 perform favorably to simple meta-learners in
  sparse settings as they learn to reconstruct P by modeling the relation between graphs and models.
                   MetaGL (Ours)         ISAC       AS          S2   NCF         MetaOD     ALORS             GB-AvgPerf     GB-AvgRank
      0.25                                                                                             0.96
                                          Better


                                                                                                                                       Better



                                                         0.9
                                                                                                       0.95
      0.20                                                                                             0.94
                                                         0.8
                                                                                              Better
                                                                                           NDCG@1
MRR


                                                                                                       0.93
                                                   AUC


      0.15                                               0.7                                           0.92
      0.10                                                                                             0.91
                                                         0.6
                                                                                                       0.90
      0.05
             0.1   0.3    0.5      0.7      0.9                0.1   0.3       0.5   0.7    0.9               0.1   0.3    0.5   0.7      0.9
     Sparsity of Performance Matrix P Sparsity of Performance Matrix P Sparsity of Performance Matrix P
Figure 4: M ETAGL consistently performs the best, as the sparsity of performance matrix P varies.
M ETAGL and all baseline meta-learners used the same meta-graph features proposed in this work.
5.3          E FFECTIVENESS OF M ETA -G RAPH F EATURES
In Figure 5, we evaluate how the performance of meta-learners obtained with the proposed meta-graph
feature (Section 4.3) compares to that obtained with existing graph-level embedding (GLE) techniques,
GL2Vec (Chen & Koga, 2019), Graph2Vec (Narayanan et al., 2017), and GraphLoG (Xu et al., 2021).


                                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                 MetaGL (Ours)                   ISAC   AS       S2    NCF     MetaOD                 ALORS
                    0.3                                         0.3                                             0.3


                                             MRR w/ Graph2Vec


                                                                                              MRR w/ GraphLoG
    MRR w/ GL2Vec   0.2                                         0.2                                             0.2

                    0.1                                                                                         0.1
                                                                0.1

                    0.0
                           MetaGL wins                                  MetaGL wins                                   MetaGL wins
       0.0     0.1      0.2      0.3            0.1      0.2      0.3             0.1    0.2       0.3
         MRR w/ MetaGL's Features           MRR w/ MetaGL's Features         MRR w/ MetaGL's Features
Figure 5: Using the proposed meta-graph features (Section 4.3), all meta-learners nearly consistently
perform better (i.e., points are below the diagonal) than with existing graph-level embedding methods.

Figure 8 in App. I.1 provides results for three other GLE methods, WaveletCharacteristic (Wang et al.,
2021), SF (de Lara & Pineau, 2018), and LDP (Cai & Wang, 2019).
• Most points are below the diagonal in Figure 5, i.e., all meta-learners nearly consistently perform
  better when they use M ETAGL’s meta-graph features than when they use existing GLE methods.
  This shows the effectiveness of M ETAGL’s features for the proposed task of GL model selection.
• M ETAGL performs the best, whether M ETAGL’s features or existing GLE methods are used.

5.4                  M ODEL S ELECTION E FFICIENCY
To evaluate how efficient M ETAGL’s model selection                                        Better
is, we measure its runtime (i.e., the time to create meta-
                                                           0.5s   1.0s    1.5s  2.0s    2.5s      3.0s
graph features for the new graph at test time, plus the (a) M ETAGL’s runtime (seconds) at test time.
time to predict the best model), and compare it with the
time to train a GL model. Figure 6 shows the distribu-
tion in box plots, where red and green lines denote the
                                                                                             Better
median and mean, respectively.                             0%   10%   20%  30% 40%   50%   60%    70%
                                                                                      (b) M ETAGL’s runtime / Time to train GL mod-
Results show that M ETAGL is fast, and incurs negligible els for 5% of their potential settings (in pct.).
runtime overhead: its runtime is just around 1 seconds Figure 6: M ETAGL is fast (∼1 sec.), and in-
or less in most cases (Figure 6a). Notably, compared curs negligible overhead. Red and green lines
to training each GL model for only 5% of its available denote the median and mean, respectively.
model configurations, M ETAGL takes considerably less
time, i.e., a median of 5% and a mean of 11% of the time required for model training (Figure 6b).
Given large-scale test graphs in practice, the speed-up enabled by M ETAGL will be greater than that
reported in Figure 6b, due to the increased training time on such graphs. Also, M ETAGL’s model
selection process can be further streamlined, e.g., by parallelizing meta-feature generation process.
We provide additional results on the runtime of M ETAGL and naive model selection in Appendix I.2.

5.5 A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
We present ablation study in Appendix I.3, which shows the effectiveness of M ETAGL’s proposed
components, e.g., the meta-learning objective, G-M network, and the graph encoder used by M ETAGL.
We evaluate the sensitivity of model selection approaches to the variance of performance matrix P
in Appendix I.4, and compare the predicted model performance with the actual best performance in
Appendix I.5.

6                   C ONCLUSION
As more and more GL models are developed, selecting which one to use is becoming increasingly
hard. Toward near-instantaneous, automatic GL model selection, we make the following contributions.
• Problem Formulation. We present the first problem formulation to select effective GL models in
  an evaluation-free manner (i.e., without ever having to train/evaluate any model on the new graph).
• Meta-Learning Framework and Features. We propose M ETAGL, the first meta-learning frame-
  work for evaluation-free GL model selection, and meta-graph features to quantify graph similarities.
• Effectiveness. Using M ETAGL for model selection greatly outperforms existing meta-learning
  techniques (up to 47% better), while incurring negligible runtime overhead at test time (∼1 sec).


                                                                             9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Salisu Mamman Abdulrahman, Pavel Brazdil, Jan N. van Rijn, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Speeding up
  algorithm selection using average ranking and active testing by introducing runtime. Mach. Learn.,
  107(1):79–108, 2018.
Nesreen K Ahmed, Theodore L Willke, and Ryan A Rossi. Estimation of local subgraph counts. In
  2016 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 586–595. IEEE, 2016.
Nesreen K. Ahmed, Ryan A. Rossi, John Boaz Lee, Xiangnan Kong, Theodore L. Willke, Rong Zhou,
  and Hoda Eldardiry. Learning role-based graph embeddings. CoRR, abs/1802.02896, 2018.
James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. J. Mach.
  Learn. Res., 13:281–305, 2012.
Chenyang Bu, Yi Lu, and Fei Liu. Automatic graph learning with evolutionary algorithms: An
  experimental study. In PRICAI (1), volume 13031 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp.
  513–526. Springer, 2021.
Chen Cai and Yusu Wang. A simple yet effective baseline for non-attributed graph classification. In
  2019 ICLR Workshop: Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Lei Cai, Zhengzhang Chen, Chen Luo, Jiaping Gui, Jingchao Ni, Ding Li, and Haifeng Chen.
  Structural temporal graph neural networks for anomaly detection in dynamic graphs. In CIKM, pp.
  3747–3756. ACM, 2021.
Shaosheng Cao, Wei Lu, and Qiongkai Xu. Grarep: Learning graph representations with global
  structural information. In CIKM, pp. 891–900. ACM, 2015.
Zhe Cao, Tao Qin, Tie-Yan Liu, Ming-Feng Tsai, and Hang Li. Learning to rank: from pairwise
  approach to listwise approach. In ICML, volume 227 of ACM International Conference Proceeding
  Series, pp. 129–136. ACM, 2007.
Hong Chen and Hisashi Koga. Gl2vec: Graph embedding enriched by line graphs with edge features.
  In ICONIP (3), volume 11955 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 3–14. Springer, 2019.
Nathan de Lara and Edouard Pineau. A simple baseline algorithm for graph classification. 2018.
Seyed Amin Fadaee and Maryam Amir Haeri. Classification using link prediction. Neurocomputing,
  359:395–407, 2019.
Stefan Falkner, Aaron Klein, and Frank Hutter. BOHB: robust and efficient hyperparameter optimiza-
  tion at scale. In ICML, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1436–1445.
  PMLR, 2018.
Wenqi Fan, Yao Ma, Qing Li, Yuan He, Yihong Eric Zhao, Jiliang Tang, and Dawei Yin. Graph
 neural networks for social recommendation. In WWW, pp. 417–426. ACM, 2019.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In ICML, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1126–1135.
  PMLR, 2017.
Yang Gao, Hong Yang, Peng Zhang, Chuan Zhou, and Yue Hu. Graph neural architecture search. In
  IJCAI, pp. 1403–1409, 2020.
Daniel Golovin, Benjamin Solnik, Subhodeep Moitra, Greg Kochanski, John Karro, and D. Sculley.
  Google vizier: A service for black-box optimization. In KDD, pp. 1487–1495. ACM, 2017.
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In KDD, pp.
  855–864. ACM, 2016.
Mengying Guo, Tao Yi, Yuqing Zhu, and Yungang Bao. JITuNE: Just-in-time hyperparameter tuning
 for network embedding algorithms. CoRR, abs/2101.06427, 2021.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large
 graphs. In NIPS, pp. 1024–1034, 2017.
Xiangnan He, Lizi Liao, Hanwang Zhang, Liqiang Nie, Xia Hu, and Tat-Seng Chua. Neural
  collaborative filtering. In WWW, pp. 173–182. ACM, 2017.
Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, and Yizhou Sun. Heterogeneous graph transformer. In
  WWW, pp. 2704–2710. ACM / IW3C2, 2020.
Weiwei Jiang and Jiayun Luo. Graph neural network for traffic forecasting: A survey. CoRR,
 abs/2101.11174, 2021.
Di Jin, Mark Heimann, Ryan A. Rossi, and Danai Koutra. node2bits: Compact time- and attribute-
  aware node representations for user stitching. In ECML/PKDD (1), volume 11906 of Lecture Notes
  in Computer Science, pp. 483–506. Springer, 2019.
Serdar Kadioglu, Yuri Malitsky, Meinolf Sellmann, and Kevin Tierney. ISAC - instance-specific algo-
  rithm configuration. In ECAI, volume 215 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications,
  pp. 751–756. IOS Press, 2010.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In ICLR (Poster). OpenReview.net, 2017.
Kwei-Herng Lai, Daochen Zha, Kaixiong Zhou, and Xia Hu. Policy-gnn: Aggregation optimization
 for graph neural networks. In KDD, pp. 461–471. ACM, 2020.
Junying Li, Deng Cai, and Xiaofei He. Learning graph-level representation for drug discovery. CoRR,
  abs/1709.03741, 2017a.
Lisha Li, Kevin G. Jamieson, Giulia DeSalvo, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Hyper-
  band: A novel bandit-based approach to hyperparameter optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 18:
  185:1–185:52, 2017b.
Petro Liashchynskyi and Pavlo Liashchynskyi. Grid search, random search, genetic algorithm: A big
  comparison for NAS. CoRR, abs/1912.06059, 2019.
Bin Luo, Richard C. Wilson, and Edwin R. Hancock. Spectral embedding of graphs. Pattern
  Recognit., 36(10):2213–2230, 2003.
Mustafa Misir and Michèle Sebag. Alors: An algorithm recommender system. Artif. Intell., 244:
 291–314, 2017.
Annamalai Narayanan, Mahinthan Chandramohan, Rajasekar Venkatesan, Lihui Chen, Yang Liu, and
  Shantanu Jaiswal. graph2vec: Learning distributed representations of graphs. In Proceedings of
  the 13th International Workshop on Mining and Learning with Graphs (MLG), 2017.
Mladen Nikolić, Filip Marić, and Predrag Janičić. Simple algorithm portfolio for sat. Artificial
 Intelligence Review, 40(4):457–465, 2013.
Namyong Park, Andrey Kan, Xin Luna Dong, Tong Zhao, and Christos Faloutsos. Multiimport:
  Inferring node importance in a knowledge graph from multiple input signals. In KDD, pp. 503–512.
  ACM, 2020.
Namyong Park, Fuchen Liu, Purvanshi Mehta, Dana Cristofor, Christos Faloutsos, and Yuxiao Dong.
  Evokg: Jointly modeling event time and network structure for reasoning over temporal knowledge
  graphs. In WSDM, pp. 794–803. ACM, 2022.
Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. Deepwalk: online learning of social representations.
  In KDD, pp. 701–710. ACM, 2014.
Ryan A. Rossi and Nesreen K. Ahmed. The network data repository with interactive graph analytics
  and visualization. In AAAI, 2015. URL http://networkrepository.com.
Ryan A. Rossi, Nesreen K. Ahmed, and Eunyee Koh. Higher-order network representation learning.
  In WWW (Companion Volume), pp. 3–4. ACM, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ryan A. Rossi, Rong Zhou, and Nesreen K. Ahmed. Deep inductive graph representation learning.
  IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., 32(3):438–452, 2020.
Benedek Rozemberczki, Oliver Kiss, and Rik Sarkar. Karate Club: An API Oriented Open-source
  Python Framework for Unsupervised Learning on Graphs. In CIKM, pp. 3125–3132. ACM, 2020.
Michael Sejr Schlichtkrull, Thomas N. Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne van den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max
 Welling. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In ESWC, volume 10843 of
 Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 593–607. Springer, 2018.
Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P. Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of machine
  learning algorithms. In NIPS, pp. 2960–2968, 2012.
Chang Su, Jie Tong, Yongjun Zhu, Peng Cui, and Fei Wang. Network embedding in biomedical data
  science. Briefings Bioinform., 21(1):182–197, 2020.
Jian Tang, Meng Qu, Mingzhe Wang, Ming Zhang, Jun Yan, and Qiaozhu Mei. LINE: large-scale
   information network embedding. In WWW, pp. 1067–1077. ACM, 2015.
Ke Tu, Jianxin Ma, Peng Cui, Jian Pei, and Wenwu Zhu. AutoNE: Hyperparameter optimization for
  massive network embedding. In KDD, pp. 216–225. ACM, 2019.
Petar Velickovic, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Liò, and Yoshua
  Bengio. Graph attention networks. In ICLR (Poster). OpenReview.net, 2018.
Lili Wang, Chenghan Huang, Weicheng Ma, Xinyuan Cao, and Soroush Vosoughi. Graph embedding
  via diffusion-wavelets-based node feature distribution characterization. In CIKM, pp. 3478–3482.
  ACM, 2021.
Xuanhui Wang, Cheng Li, Nadav Golbandi, Michael Bendersky, and Marc Najork. The lambdaloss
  framework for ranking metric optimization. In CIKM, pp. 1313–1322. ACM, 2018.
David H. Wolpert and William G. Macready. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE Trans.
  Evol. Comput., 1(1):67–82, 1997.
Felix Wu, Amauri H. Souza Jr., Tianyi Zhang, Christopher Fifty, Tao Yu, and Kilian Q. Weinberger.
  Simplifying graph convolutional networks. In ICML, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 6861–6871. PMLR, 2019a.
Jia Wu, Xiu-Yun Chen, Hao Zhang, Li-Dong Xiong, Hang Lei, and Si-Hao Deng. Hyperparameter
   optimization for machine learning models based on bayesian optimization. Journal of Electronic
   Science and Technology, 17(1):26–40, 2019b.
Fen Xia, Tie-Yan Liu, Jue Wang, Wensheng Zhang, and Hang Li. Listwise approach to learning to
  rank: theory and algorithm. In ICML, volume 307 of ACM International Conference Proceeding
  Series, pp. 1192–1199. ACM, 2008.
Feng Xia, Ke Sun, Shuo Yu, Abdul Aziz, Liangtian Wan, Shirui Pan, and Huan Liu. Graph learning:
  A survey. IEEE Trans. Artif. Intell., 2(2):109–127, 2021.
Lin Xu, Frank Hutter, Jonathan Shen, Holger H Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Satzilla2012:
  Improved algorithm selection based on cost-sensitive classification models. Proceedings of SAT
  Challenge, pp. 57–58, 2012.
Minghao Xu, Hang Wang, Bingbing Ni, Hongyu Guo, and Jian Tang. Self-supervised graph-level
 representation learning with local and global structure. In ICML, volume 139 of Proceedings of
 Machine Learning Research, pp. 11548–11558. PMLR, 2021.
Jiaxuan You, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Design space for graph neural networks. In NeurIPS,
   2020.
Yingfang Yuan, Wenjun Wang, George M. Coghill, and Wei Pang. A novel genetic algorithm with
  hierarchical evaluation strategy for hyperparameter optimisation of graph neural networks. CoRR,
  abs/2101.09300, 2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ziwei Zhang, Xin Wang, and Wenwu Zhu. Automated machine learning on graphs: A survey. In
  IJCAI, pp. 4704–4712, 2021.
Ziwei Zhang, Peng Cui, and Wenwu Zhu. Deep learning on graphs: A survey. IEEE Trans. Knowl.
  Data Eng., 34(1):249–270, 2022.
Yue Zhao, Ryan A. Rossi, and Leman Akoglu. Automatic unsupervised outlier model selection. In
  NeurIPS, pp. 4489–4502, 2021.
Kaixiong Zhou, Qingquan Song, Xiao Huang, and Xia Hu. Auto-GNN: Neural architecture search of
  graph neural networks. CoRR, abs/1909.03184, 2019.
Ronghang Zhu, Zhiqiang Tao, Yaliang Li, and Sheng Li. Automated graph learning via population
  based self-tuning GCN. In SIGIR, pp. 2096–2100. ACM, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Appendix, we provide a description of the baselines (Appendix A), notations used in this work
(Appendix B), and the model set (Appendix C), and present a summary of meta-graph features
(Appendix D), details of graph datasets in the testbed (Appendix E), and experimental details
(Appendix F). We then provide additional details and analysis of M ETAGL (Appendix G), e.g., the
G-M network and the embedding function f (·) discussed in Section 4.4, as well as additional results
(Appendix I), e.g., ablation studies and sensitivity analysis.

A    BASELINES
Being the first work for evaluation-free model selection in graph learning (GL), we do not have
immediate baselines for comparison. Instead, we adapt baselines used in MetaOD (Zhao et al., 2021)
for outlier detection (OD) model selection as well as collaborative filtering for our problem setting.
The baselines used in experiments can be organized into the following two categories.
(a) Simple meta-learners select a model that performs generally well, either globally or locally.
• Global Best (GB)-AvgPerf selects the model that has the largest average performance over all
  meta-train graphs.
• Global Best (GB)-AvgRank computes the rank of all models (in percentile) for each graph, and
  selects the model with the largest average ranking over all meta-train graphs.
• ISAC (Kadioglu et al., 2010) first clusters meta-train datasets using meta-graph features, and at
  test time, finds the cluster closest to the test graph, and selects the model with the largest average
  performance over all graphs in that cluster.
• ARGOSMART (AS) (Nikolić et al., 2013) finds the meta-train graph closest to the test graph (i.e.,
  1NN) in terms of meta-graph feature similarity, and selects the model with the best result on the
  1NN graph.
(b) Optimization-based meta-learners learn to estimate the model performance by modeling the
relation between meta-graph features and model performances.
• Supervised Surrogates (S2) (Xu et al., 2012) learns a surrogate model (a regressor) that maps
  meta-graph features to model performances.
• ALORS (Misir & Sebag, 2017) factorizes the performance matrix into latent factors on graphs
  and models, and estimates the performance to be the dot product between the two factors, where a
  non-linear regressor maps meta-graph features into the latent graph factors.
• NCF (He et al., 2017) replaces the dot product used in ALORS with a more general neural
  architecture that estimates performance by combining the linearity of matrix factorization and
  non-linearity of deep neural networks.
• MetaOD (Zhao et al., 2021) pioneered the field of unsupervised OD model selection by designing
  meta-features specialized to capture the outlying characteristics of datasets, as well as improving
  upon ALORS with the adoption of an NDCG-based meta-training objective. We enable MetaOD
  to be applicable to our problem setting, by applying our proposed meta-graph features to MetaOD.
In addition, we also include Random Selection (RS) as a baseline, to see how meta-learners perform
in comparison to random scoring. Note that among the above approaches, only GB-AvgPerf and
GB-AvgRank do not rely on meta-features for model selection. All other meta-learners make use of
the proposed meta-graph features to estimate model performances on an unseen test graph.

B    N OTATIONS
Table 3 provides a list of notations frequently used in this work.

C    M ODEL S ET
A model in the model set M refers to a graph representation learning (GRL) method along with its
hyperparameters settings, and a predictor that makes a downstream task-specific prediction given
the node embeddings from the GRL method. In this work, we use a link predictor which scores a
given link by computing the cosine similarity between the two nodes’ embeddings. Table 4 shows the


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       Table 3: Summary of notations.

 G          set of graphs {G1 , . . . , Gn } in the training set
 n          number of graphs in training set n = |G|
 Gtest      new unseen test graph Gtest 6∈ G
 M          model set {M1 , . . . , Mm } to search over
 m          number of models to search over m = |M|
 Ψ          set of structural meta-node/edge feature extractors
 Σ          set of meta-graph feature extractors
 M          meta-graph feature matrix where M ∈ Rn×d
 d          number of meta-graph features
 mtest      meta-graph feature vector for the new unseen test graph Gtest
 k          embedding size
 P          performance matrix of m models on n graphs
 U          latent graph factors obtained by factorizing P (P ≈ UV| )
 V          latent model factors obtained by factorizing P (P ≈ UV| )
 f (·)      learnable embedding function for models and graphs

Table 4: Graph representation learning (GRL) models and their hyperparameter settings, which collec-
tively comprise the model set M with 423 unique GRL models. For details of the hyperparameters,
please refer to the cited paper.

Methods                               Hyperparameter Settings                                                        Count

SGC (Wu et al., 2019a)             # (number of) hops k ∈ {1, 2, 3}                                                      3
GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017)         # layers L ∈ {1, 2, 3}, # epochs N ∈ {1, 10}                                          6
GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) # layers L ∈ {1, 2, 3}, # epochs N ∈ {1, 10}, aggregation functions                   18
                                   f ∈ {mean, gcn, lstm}
node2vec (Grover & Leskovec, 2016) p, q ∈ {1, 2, 4}                                                                      9
role2vec (Ahmed et al., 2018)      p, q ∈ {0.25, 1, 4}, α ∈ {0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 0.9, 0.99}, motif combinations            180
                                      H ∈ {{H1 }, {H2 , H3 }, {H2 , H3 , H4 , H6 , H8 }, {H1 , H2 , . . . , H8 }}
GraRep (Cao et al., 2015)             k ∈ {1, 2}                                                                         2
DeepWalk (Perozzi et al., 2014)       p = 1, q = 1                                                                       1
HONE (Rossi et al., 2018)             k ∈ {1, 2}, Dlocal ∈ {4, 8, 16}, variant v = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}                      30
node2bits (Jin et al., 2019)          walk num wn ∈ {5, 10, 20}, walk len wl ∈ {5, 10, 20}, log base b ∈                36
                                      {2, 4, 8, 10}, feats f ∈ {16}
DeepGL (Rossi et al., 2020)           α        ∈       {0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9},   motif size ∈              {4},     135
                                      eps tolerance t       ∈       {0.01, 0.05, 0.1}, relational aggr. ∈
                                      {{m}, {p}, {s}, {v}, {m, p}, {m, v}, {s, m}, {s, p}, {s, v}}           where
                                      m, p, s, v denote mean, product, sum, var
LINE (Tang et al., 2015)              # hops/order k ∈ {1, 2}                                                            2
Spectral Emb. (Luo et al., 2003)      tolerance t ∈ {0.001}                                                              1
Total Count                                                                                                            423



complete list of 12 popular GRL methods and their specific hyperparameter settings, which compose
412 unique models in the model set M. Note that the link predictor is omitted from Table 4 since we
employ the same link predictor based on cosine similarity to all GRL methods.

D        M ETA -G RAPH F EATURES

Structural Meta-Feature Extractors. To capture the local structural properties around a node or
an edge, we compute the distribution of node degrees, number of wedges (i.e., a path of length
2), triangles centered at each node, as well as the frequency of triangles for each edge. To capture
the global structural properties of a node, we derive the eccentricity, PageRank score, and k-core
number of each node. We also capture the global graph-level statistics (i.e., different from local


                                                         15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


node/edge-level structural properties), such as the density of A and AAT where A is the adjacency
matrix, and also the degree assortativity coefficient r.
Global Statistical Functions. For each of the structural property distributions (degree, k-core num-
bers, and so on) derived by the above structural meta-feature extractors, we apply the set Σ of
global statistical functions (Table 5) over it to obtain a fixed-length vector representation for the
node/edge/graph-level structural feature distribution.
After obtaining a set of meta-graph features, we concatenate all of them together to create the final
meta-graph feature vector m for the graph.



Table 5: Summary of the global statistical functions Σ for deriving a set of meta-graph features from
a graph invariant (e.g., k-core numbers, node degrees, and so on). Let x denote an arbitrary graph
invariant vector for some graph Gi = (Vi , Ei ) and π(x) is the sorted vector of x. Note x can be any
representation, e.g., node degree vector (value for each node in Gi ) or a degree distribution vector.


        Name                            Equation
        Num. unique values              card(x)
        Density                         nnz(x)/|x|

        Q1 , Q3                         median of the |x| /2 smallest (largest) values
        IQR                             P3 − Q1
                                        Q
        Outlier LB α ∈ {1.5, 3}         Pi I(xi < Q1 − αIQR)
        Outlier UB α ∈ {1.5, 3}         Pi I(xi > Q3 + αIQR) P
        Total outliers α ∈ {1.5, 3}       i I(xi < Q1 −αIQR) +        i I(xi > Q3 + αIQR)
        (α-std) outliers α ∈ {2, 3}     µx ± ασx
        Spearman (ρ, p-val)             spearman(x, π(x))
        Kendall (τ , p-val)             kendall(x, π(x))
        Pearson (r, p-val)              pearson(x, π(x))
        Min, max                        min(x), max(x)
        Range                           max(x) − min(x)
        Median                          med(x)
                                           −1 Q
        Geometric Mean                  |x| P i xi
        Harmonic Mean                   |x| / i x1i
        Mean, Stdev, Variance           µx , σx , σx2
        Skewness                        E(x−µx )3/σ 3
                                                      x
        Kurtosis                        E(x−µx )4/σ 4
                                                      x

                                        Q3 −Q1
        Quartile Dispersion Coeff.      Q3 +Q1
        Median Absolute Deviation       med(|x − med(x)|)
                                         1 T
        Avg. Absolute Deviation         |x| e |x − µx |
        Coeff. of Variation             σx/µx
                                         2
        Efficiency ratio                σx/µ2x
                                         2
        Variance-to-mean ratio          σx/µx
        Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)     µ2x/σ 2
                                             x            P
        Entropy                         H(x) = −          i   xi log xi
        Norm. entropy                   H(x)/log |x|
                                                2
        Gini coefficient                −
        Quartile max gap                max(Qi+1 − Qi )
        Centroid max gap                maxij |ci − cj |
        Histogram prob. dist.           ph = hhT e (with fixed # of bins)


                                                     16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E        G RAPH DATASETS
The testbed used in this work comprises 301 graphs that have widely varying structural characteristics.
Table 6 provides a list of all graph datasets in the testbed. All graph data are from (Rossi & Ahmed,
2015); they are publicly available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License.
                    Table 6: Summary of the 301 graph datasets that comprise the testbed.

                        Graph                     # Nodes   # Edges               Graph                  # Nodes     # Edges
     1                BA-1_10_60                     804     46410    152      enzymes_g297                  121         149
     2                BA-1_11_40                     917     35860    153      enzymes_g349                   64         118
     3                BA-1_12_10                     827      8215    154      enzymes_g355                   66         112
     4                BA-1_13_10                    1043     10375    155      enzymes_g504                   66         120
     5                BA-1_14_40                     829     32340    156      enzymes_g523                   48         111
     6                BA-1_16_40                    1126     44220    157      enzymes_g526                   58         110
     7                BA-1_17_10                     895      8895    158      enzymes_g527                   57         107
     8                BA-1_18_40                    1141     44820    159      enzymes_g532                   74         120
     9                 BA-1_1_10                     862      8565    160      enzymes_g575                   51         110
    10                BA-1_20_10                     830      8245    161      enzymes_g578                   60         103
    11                BA-1_22_10                    1094     10885    162      enzymes_g594                   52         114
    12                BA-1_24_40                     946     37020    163      enzymes_g597                   52         116
    13                 BA-1_3_40                    1017     39860    164      enzymes_g598                   55         100
    14                 BA-1_4_40                     970     37980    165       enzymes_g8                    88         133
    15                 BA-1_5_10                    1050     10445    166        ER-1_11_5                   917       20841
    16                 BA-1_6_60                     803     46350    167        ER-1_14_5                   829       17092
    17                 BA-1_7_40                     832     32460    168        ER-1_15_5                   826       17099
    18                 BA-1_8_10                    1040     10345    169        ER-1_24_5                   946       22383
    19                 bio-CE-GN                    2220     53683    170         ER-1_4_5                   970       23747
    20                 bio-CE-GT                     924      3239    171         ER-2_6_5                  8115       16868
    21                 bio-CE-HT                    2617      2985    172       inf-euroroad                1174        1417
    22                 bio-CE-LC                    1387      1648    173      inf-openflights              2939       15677
    23                 bio-CE-PG                    1871     47754    174   KPGM-log10-10-trial1             845        7194
    24                bio-DM-CX                     4040     76717    175   KPGM-log10-10-trial2             830        7265
    25                bio-DM-HT                     2989      4660    176   KPGM-log10-10-trial3             837        7251
    26                bio-DM-LC                      658      1129    177   KPGM-log10-12-trial1             845        8467
    27                 bio-DR-CX                    3289     84940    178   KPGM-log10-12-trial2             864        8339
    28           bio-grid-fission-yeast             2026     12637    179   KPGM-log10-12-trial3             856        8393
    29                 bio-HS-CX                    4413    108818    180   KPGM-log10-14-trial2             885        9405
    30                 bio-HS-HT                    2570     13691    181   KPGM-log10-8-trial1              824        6055
    31                 bio-HS-LC                    4227     39484    182   KPGM-log10-8-trial2              796        6040
    32                 bio-SC-CC                    2223     34879    183   KPGM-log10-8-trial3              813        6052
    33                 bio-SC-GT                    1716     33987    184   KPGM-log8-10-trial1              220        1502
    34                 bio-SC-HT                    2084     63027    185   KPGM-log8-10-trial2              220        1518
    35                 bio-SC-LC                    2004     20452    186   KPGM-log8-10-trial3              224        1520
    36                 bio-SC-TS                     636      3959    187   KPGM-log8-12-trial1              224        1729
    37              biogrid-human                   2005      3959    188   KPGM-log8-12-trial2              229        1756
    38               biogrid-mouse                  1450      1636    189   KPGM-log8-12-trial3              230        1761
    39                biogrid-plant                  523       838    190   KPGM-log8-14-trial1              229        1947
    40               biogrid-worm                   1930      3576    191   KPGM-log8-14-trial2              233        1950
    41                biogrid-yeast                  836      1049    192   KPGM-log8-14-trial3              230        1943
    42       bn-cat-mixed-species-brain1              65       730    193   KPGM-log8-16-trial1              232        2117
    43        bn-fly-drosophila-medulla1            1781      9016    194   KPGM-log8-16-trial2              230        2152
    44        bn-macaque-rhesus-brain1               242      3054    195   KPGM-log8-16-trial3              235        2178
    45        bn-macaque-rhesus-brain2                91       582    196    KPGM-log8-8-trial1              223        1324
    46    bn-macaque-rhesus-cerebral-cortex1          91      1401    197    KPGM-log8-8-trial2              218        1312
    47   bn-macaque-rhesus-interareal-cortical2       93      2262    198    KPGM-log8-8-trial3              215        1303
    48             bn-mouse-brain1                   213     16242    199        nci1_g1677                  102         106
    49          bn-mouse-kasthuri-v4                1029      1559    200        nci1_g1863                  107         111
    50         bn-mouse-visual-cortex2               193       214    201        nci1_g1893                   96         102
    51                 ca-AstroPh                  17903    196972    202        nci1_g1894                  104         108
    52                ca-CondMat                   21363     91286    203        nci1_g2079                   88         103
    53                    ca-cora                   2708      5278    204        nci1_g2082                   86         101
    54                  ca-CSphd                    1882      1740    205        nci1_g2172                  106         107
    55              ca-DBLP-kang                    2879     11326    206        nci1_g2228                   92          98
    56                ca-Erdos992                   5094      7515    207        nci1_g2229                   92          98
    57                   ca-GrQc                    4158     13422    208        nci1_g2443                   91          97
    58                  ca-HepPh                   11204    117619    209        nci1_g2455                   90          96
    59               ca-netscience                   379       914    210        nci1_g3139                  107         112
    60               ca-sandi-auths                   86       123    211        nci1_g3141                   92          98
    61            CL-1000-1d7-trial1                 928      4653    212        nci1_g3145                   91          97
    62            CL-1000-1d7-trial2                 932      4888    213        nci1_g3444                   93         102
    63            CL-1000-1d7-trial3                 938      4840    214        nci1_g3449                   95          99
    64            CL-1000-1d8-trial1                 925      3776    215        nci1_g3585                  105         107
    65            CL-1000-1d8-trial2                 930      4136    216        nci1_g3700                  111         119
                                                                                                   Continued on the next page



                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Table 6 – Continued from the previous page
                  Graph               # Nodes    # Edges                        Graph              # Nodes    # Edges
  66        CL-1000-1d8-trial3            925       3714     217                 nci1_g3711            89        106
  67        CL-1000-1d9-trial1            928       3510     218                 nci1_g3901            93        102
  68        CL-1000-1d9-trial2            912       3053     219                 nci1_g3990            90        105
  69        CL-1000-1d9-trial3            932       3278     220                 nci1_g4094            90         98
  70        CL-1000-2d0-trial1            909       2795     221             power-1138-bus          1138       2596
  71        CL-1000-2d0-trial2            899       2941     222               power-494-bus          494       1080
  72        CL-1000-2d0-trial3            916       3010     223               power-662-bus          662       1568
  73        CL-1000-2d1-trial1            903       2430     224               power-685-bus          685       1967
  74        CL-1000-2d1-trial2            911       2734     225             power-bcspwr09          1723       4117
  75        CL-1000-2d1-trial3            915       2782     226              power-eris1176         1176       9864
  76                DD_g1                 327        899     227                  rec-amazon        91813     125704
  77               DD_g10                 146        328     228    rec-movielens-tag-movies-10m    16528      71081
  78              DD_g100                 349       1005     229             road-chesapeake           39        170
  79             DD_g1000                 183        408     230         road-ChicagoRegional        1467       1298
  80             DD_g1001                  88        203     231               road-euroroad         1174       1417
  81             DD_g1002                 104        255     232         road-luxembourg-osm       114599     119666
  82             DD_g1003                  53        116     233              road-minnesota         2642       3303
  83             DD_g1004                  94        230     234             road-usroads-48       126146     161950
  84             DD_g1005                 370        903     235                    rt-retweet         96        117
  85             DD_g1006                 246        568     236              rt-twitter-copen        761       1029
  86             DD_g1007                 309        732     237                   rt_alwefaq        4171       7063
  87             DD_g1008                 109        304     238                     rt_assad        2139       2788
  88             DD_g1009                 129        272     239                   rt_bahrain        4676       7979
  89              DD_g101                 306        728     240              rt_barackobama         9631       9775
  90             DD_g1010                 157        363     241                 rt_damascus         3052       3869
  91             DD_g1011                  47        136     242                      rt_dash        6288       7436
  92             DD_g1012                 146        365     243                 rt_gmanews          8373       8721
  93             DD_g1013                  93        211     244                       rt_gop        4687       5529
  94             DD_g1014                 119        273     245                      rt_http        8917      10314
  95             DD_g1015                 102        244     246                     rt_islam        4497       4616
  96             DD_g1016                 113        291     247                     rt_israel       3698       4165
  97             DD_g1017                 162        376     248                   rt_lebanon        3961       4436
  98             DD_g1018                 296        680     249                     rt_libya        5067       5541
  99             DD_g1019                 131        353     250                    rt_lolgop        9765      10075
 100              DD_g102                 561       1422     251                    rt_obama         3212       3423
 101             DD_g1020                 228        541     252                   rt_occupy         3225       3944
 102             DD_g1021                 329        787     253           rt_occupywallstnyc        3609       3833
 103             DD_g1022                 294        730     254                     rt_oman         4904       6230
 104             DD_g1023                 172        425     255              rt_onedirection        7987       8103
 105             DD_g1024                  59        160     256                        rt_p2        4902       6018
 106             DD_g1025                  88        205     257                     rt_saudi        7252       8061
 107             DD_g1026                 247        578     258                       rt_tcot       4547       5503
 108             DD_g1027                 108        223     259                       rt_tlot       3665       4475
 109             DD_g1028                  72        137     260                       rt_uae        5248       6387
 110             DD_g1029                  99        215     261           rt_voteonedirection       2280       2464
 111              DD_g103                 265        647     262                   sc-nasasrb       54870    1311227
 112             DD_g1030                 136        351     263                soc-advogato         6551      43427
 113              DD_g104                 372        999     264                 soc-dolphins          62        159
 114              DD_g105                 423       1192     265             soc-firm-hi-tech          33         91
 115              DD_g106                 574       1355     266                    soc-gplus       23628      39194
 116              DD_g107                 130        292     267              soc-hamsterster        2426      16630
 117              DD_g108                 483       1137     268        soc-highschool-moreno          70        274
 118              DD_g109                 132        315     269               soc-physicians         241        923
 119               DD_g11                 312        761     270          soc-sign-bitcoinalpha      3783      14124
 120              DD_g110                 394       1137     271             soc-student-coop         185        311
 121              DD_g111                 483       1520     272               soc-wiki-Vote          889       2914
 122              DD_g112                 266        631     273               socfb-Amherst         2235      90954
 123              DD_g113                 347        853     274            socfb-Bowdoin47          2252      84387
 124              DD_g114                 334        761     275                socfb-Caltech         769      16656
 125              DD_g115                 336        946     276            socfb-Hamilton46         2314      96394
 126           eco-everglades              69        885     277           socfb-Haverford76         1446      59589
 127              eco-florida             128       2075     278               socfb-nips-ego        2888       2981
 128        eco-foodweb-baydry            128       2106     279             socfb-Oberlin44         2920      89912
 129       eco-foodweb-baywet             128       2075     280               socfb-Reed98           962      18812
 130            eco-mangwet                97       1446     281            socfb-Simmons81          1518      32988
 131             eco-stmarks               54        353     282               socfb-Smith60         2970      97133
 132       email-dnc-corecipient          906      10429     283          socfb-Swarthmore42         1659      61050
 133           email-dnc-leak            1891       4465     284             socfb-Trinity100        2613     111996
 134          email-enron-only            143        623     285             socfb-USFCA72           2682      65252
 135               email-EU             32430      54397     286              socfb-Vassar85         3068     119161
 136           email-radoslaw             167       3251     287            socfb-Villanova62        7772     314989
 137              email-univ             1133       5451     288            socfb-Wellesley22        2970      94899
 138           enzymes_g103                59        115     289            socfb-Williams40         2790     112986
 139           enzymes_g118                95        121     290               tech-routers-rf       2113       6632
                                                                                            Continued on the next page



                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  Table 6 – Continued from the previous page
                  Graph              # Nodes    # Edges                        Graph         # Nodes   # Edges
 140           enzymes_g123               90        127     291           tech-routers-rf      2113      6632
 141           enzymes_g199               62        108     292           web-BerkStan        12305     19500
 142           enzymes_g204               57        105     293              web-edu           3031      6474
 143           enzymes_g209               57        101     294              web-EPA           4271      8909
 144           enzymes_g215               48        104     295             web-google         1299      2773
 145           enzymes_g224               54        105     296         web-indochina-2004    11358     47606
 146           enzymes_g279               60        107     297            web-polblogs         643      2280
 147           enzymes_g291               62        104     298             web-spam           4767     37375
 148           enzymes_g292               60        100     299         web-webbase-2001      16062     25593
 149           enzymes_g293               96        109     300         web-wiki-chameleon     2277     31421
 150           enzymes_g295              123        139     301         web-wiki-crocodile    11631    170918
 151           enzymes_g296              125        141


F       E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

F.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

Software. We used PyTorch1 for implementing the training and inference pipeline, and used the
DGL’s implementation of HGT2 . For MetaOD (Zhao et al., 2021), we used the implementation
provided by the authors3 . We used the Karate Club library (Rozemberczki et al., 2020) for the
implementations of the following graph-level embedding (GLE) methods, Graph2Vec (Narayanan
et al., 2017), GL2Vec (Chen & Koga, 2019), WaveletCharacteristic (Wang et al., 2021), SF (de Lara
& Pineau, 2018), and LDP (Cai & Wang, 2019). For GraphLoG (Xu et al., 2021), we used the authors’
implementation4 . We used open source libraries, such as NetworkX5 and NumPy6 , for implementing
meta-graph feature extractors.
Hyperparameters. We set the embedding size k to 32 for M ETAGL and other meta-learners that
learn embeddings of models and graphs. For M ETAGL, we created the G-M network by connecting
nodes to their top-30 similar nodes. As an the embedding function f (·) in M ETAGL, we used
HGT (Hu et al., 2020) with 2 layers and 4 heads per layer. HGT is included in the Deep Graph Library
(DGL), which is licensed under the Apache License 2.0. For training, we used the Adam optimizer
with a learning rate of 0.00075 and a weight decay of 0.0001. For GLE approaches, we used the
default hyperparameter settings specified in the corresponding library and GitHub repository.
Link Prediction Model Training. Given a graph G, we first hold out 10% of the edges in graph G
to be used for evaluation, and train GL models with the resulting subgraph for link prediction. The
training of GL models was performed by sampling 20 negative edges per positive edge, computing
the link score by applying a dot product between the two corresponding node embeddings, followed
by a sigmoid function, and then optimizing a binary cross entropy loss for the positive and negative
edge scores. For evaluation, we randomly sampled the same number of negative edges as the positive
edges, and evaluated the predicted link scores in terms of mean average precision.

F.2     E VALUATION OF M ODEL S ELECTION ACCURACY (S ECTION 5.2)

In our evaluation involving a partially observed performance matrix, we extended baseline meta-
learners as follows so they can operate in the presence of missing entries in the performance matrix.
• Global Best-AvgPerf averaged observed performance entries alone, ignoring missing values. If an
  average performance cannot be computed for some model (which is the case when a model has no
  observed performance entries for all graphs), we use the mean of averaged performance for other
  models in its place.

    1
      https://pytorch.org/
    2
      https://www.dgl.ai/
    3
      https://github.com/yzhao062/MetaOD
    4
      https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/GraphLoG
    5
      https://networkx.org/
    6
      https://numpy.org/


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• Global Best-AvgRank computed the model rankings for each graph in percentile, as the number
  of observed model performances may be different for different graphs, and averaged the rank
  percentiles for observed cases only, as in Global Best-AvgPerf.
• ISAC handled the sparse performance matrix in the same way as Global Best-AvgPerf, except that
  only a subset of graphs, which is similar to the test graph, is considered in ISAC.
• ARGOSMART (AS) computed the mean of observed performance entries of the 1NN graph, and
  used this quantity in place of missing values.
• ALORS factorized the sparse performance matrix using a missing value-aware non-negative matrix
  factorization algorithm.
• Supervised Sur. (S2), NCF, and MetaOD performed optimization by only considering observed
  performance values in the loss function, while skipping over missing entries. Early stopping based
  on the validation performance was also done with respect to the observed performances alone.

F.3   E VALUATION OF M ETA -G RAPH F EATURES (S ECTION 5.3)

Except for WaveletCharacteristic and GraphLoG, we applied graph-level embedding (GLE) ap-
proaches to all graphs in our testbed, and meta-learners were trained and evaluated using the rep-
resentations of all graphs via 5-fold cross validation. Since WaveletCharacteristic and GraphLoG
could not scale up to some of the largest graphs in the testbed (e.g., due to out-of-memory error), we
excluded 9% and 27% largest graphs for GraphLoG and WaveletCharacteristic, respectively, and
evaluated meta-learners using the resulting subset of graphs. Note that, in these cases, M ETAGL was
also trained and evaluated using the same subset of graphs.

G     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS AND A NALYSIS OF M ETAGL
G.1    M ETAGL A LGORITHM AND M ETA -G RAPH F EATURES

Algorithm 1 provides detailed steps of M ETAGL, for both offline meta-training (top) and online
model selection (bottom). In M ETAGL, we log-transform the meta-graph features, and extend the
meta-graph features with them, as it helps with model selection. We use the notation m in Algorithm 1
as well as in the text to refer to these meta-graph features used by M ETAGL.

G.2    M ETA -L EARNING O BJECTIVE FOR S PARSE P ERFORMANCE M ATRIX

Given a sparse performance matrix P, meta-training of M ETAGL can be performed by modifying the
top-1 probability (Equation (3)) and the loss function (Equation (4)), such that the missing entries in
P are ignored as follows:
                                   Ipij (π(b
                                           pij ))          Ip (exp(bpij ))
                     pP
                      top1 (j) = Pm                    = Pm ij                 ,
                      bi
                                                                                                   (7)
                                       I
                                  k=1 pik  (π(bp ik ))        I
                                                          k=1 pik (exp(bpik ))
                                      n X
                                      X m                            b
                            b =−
                       L(P, P)                  Ipij pP i
                                                      top1 (j) log  pPi
                                                                     top1 (j)    .                 (8)
                                      i=1 j=1

where Ipij (·) is defined as

                            x   if pij exists in the observed performance matrix P,
               Ipij (x) =                                                                          (9)
                            0   if pij is missing in the observed performance matrix P.
Thus the supervision signal for each graph comes only from the model performances observed on it. If
an entire row in P is empty, the loss terms for the corresponding graph are dropped from Equation (8).

G.3    G-M N ETWORK

Figure 7 illustrates the G-M network (graph-model network) (Section 4.4), which is a multi-relational
bipartite network between graph nodes and model nodes. In the G-M network, model and graph
nodes are connected via five types of edges (e.g., P-m2m, P-g2m, M-g2g), which is shown as edges
with distinct line styles and colors. Note that while Figure 7 shows only one edge per edge type, in
the G-M network, each node is connected to its top-k similar nodes.

                                                    20
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         ...


                                                            ...
                                               P-g2m
                                        𝑚!                 𝑔#

                                   P-m2m             M-g2g         P-g2g
                                             P-m2g

                                        𝑚"                 𝑔$


                                         ...


                                                            ...
                                      models              graphs

  Figure 7: An illustration of the G-M network (Section 4.4), which is a multi-relational bipartite
  network between model nodes and graph nodes that are connected via five types of edges (e.g., P-
  m2m, M-g2g). Note that only a subset of the edges in the G-M network is shown here for illustration
  purposes. See Section 4.4 for more details.


  G.4    ATTENTIVE G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS AND H ETEROGENEOUS G RAPH T RANSFORMER

  The embedding function f (·) in M ETAGL (Section 4.4) produces embeddings of models and graphs
  via weighted neighborhood aggregation over the multi-relational G-M network. Specifically, we
  define f (·) using Heterogeneous Graph Transformer (HGT) (Hu et al., 2020), which is a relation-
  aware graph neural network (GNN) that performs attentive neighborhood aggregation over the G-M
  network. Let z`t denote the node t’s embedding produced by the `-th HGT layer, which becomes the


   Algorithm 1: M ETAGL: Offline Meta-Training (Top) and Online Model Selection (Bottom)
   Input: Meta-train graph database G, model set M, embedding dimension k
   Output: Meta-learner for model selection
   /* (Offline) Meta-Learner Training (Sec. 4.1)                                         */
 1 Train & evaluate models in M on graphs in G to get performance matrix P
 2 Extract meta-graph features M for each graph Gi in G (Sec. 4.3)
                                                                                  |
 3 Factorize P to obtain latent graph factors U and model factors V, i.e., P ≈ UV

 4 Learn an estimator φ(·) such that φ(m) = U  b i ≈ Ui
 5 Create meta-train graph Gtrain (Sec. 4.4)
 6 while not converged
 7     for i = 1, . . . , n do
 8          Get embeddings f (W[m; φ(m)]) of train graph Gi on Gtrain
 9          for j = 1, . . . , m do
10              Get embeddings f (Vj ) of each model Mj on Gtrain
11              Estimate pbij = hf (W[m; φ(m)]), f (Vj )i (Eqn. 2)
12          end
13     end
14     Compute meta-training loss L(P, P) b (Eqn. 4) and optimize parameters
15 end


   Input: new graph Gtest
   Output: selected model M ∗ for Gtest
   /* (Online) Model Selection (Sec. 4.2)                                                     */
16 Extract meta-graph features mtest = ψ(Gtest )

17 Estimate latent factor U
                          b test = φ(mtest ) for test graph Gtest
18 Create the test G-M network Gtest by extending Gtrain with new edges between test graph node
    and existing nodes in Gtrain (Sec. 4.4)
19 Get embeddings f (W[mtest ; U  b test ]) of test graph on Gtest
20 Get embeddings f (Vj ) of each model Mj on Gtest
                             ∗
21 Return the best model M ← arg maxM ∈M               f (W[mtest ; U
                                                                    b test ]), f (Vj )
                                               j


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


input of the (` + 1)-th layer. Given L total layers, the final embedding ht of node t is obtained to be
the output from the last layer, i.e., zL                                 `
                                       t . In general, node embeddings zt produced by the `-th layer in
an attention-based GNN, such as HGT, can be expressed as:

                       z`t = Aggregate             Attention(s, t) · Message(s)                    (10)
                             ∀s∈N (t),∀e∈E(s,t)
where s and t are source and target nodes, respectively; N (t) denotes all the source nodes of node
t; and E(s, t) denotes all edges from node s to t. There are three basic operators: Attention, which
assigns different weights to neighbors based on the estimated importance of node s with respect to
target node t; Message, which extracts the message vector from the source node s; and Aggregate,
which aggregates the neighborhood messages by the attention weight.
HGT effectively processes multi-relational graphs, such as the proposed G-M network, by designing
all of the above three operators to be aware of node types and edge types, e.g., by employing
distinct set of projection weights for each type of nodes and edges, and utilizing node- and edge-type
dependent attention mechanisms. We refer the reader to (Hu et al., 2020) for the details of how HGT
defines the above three operators. In summary, M ETAGL computes the embedding function f (xt )
by providing node t’s input features xt as the initial embedding (i.e., z0t ) to HGT, and returning zL
                                                                                                     t ,
the output from the last layer, which is computed over the G-M network via relation-aware attentive
neighborhood aggregation.
G.5   T IME C OMPLEXITY A NALYSIS
We now state the time complexity of our approach for inferring the best model given a new unseen
graph G0 = (V 0 , E 0 ). Let G = (V, E) be the G-M network, which is comprised of model nodes and
graph nodes, and induced by c-NN (nearest neighbor) search (Section 4.4 and Appendix G.3). Let k
denote the embedding size, and h be the number of attention heads in HGT (Appendix G.4). The
time complexity of M ETAGL is
                                        O(q|E 0 |∆ + |V|ck 2 /h)                                 (11)
where q is the number of meta-graph feature extractors, and |E 0 | is the number of edges in the new
unseen graph G0 . Note that both q and ∆ are small and thus negligible. Hence, M ETAGL is fast and
efficient.
Meta-Graph Feature Extraction: The first term of the above time complexity includes the time
required to estimate the frequency of all network motifs with {2, 3, 4}-nodes, which is O(|E 0 |∆) in
the worst case where ∆ is a small constant representing the maximum sampled degree which can
be set by the user. See Ahmed et al. (2016) for further details. The other structural meta-feature
extractors such as PageRank all take at most O(|E 0 |) time. Furthermore, our approach is flexible
and supports any set of meta-graph feature extractors. Thus, it is straightforward to see that we can
achieve a slightly better time by restricting the set of such meta-graph feature extractors to those
that can be computed in time that is linear in the number of edges of any arbitrary graph. Hence, in
this case, the ∆ term is dropped and we have simply O(q|E 0 | + |V|ck 2 /h). Also, note that feature
extractors are independent of each other, and thus can be run in parallel.
Embedding Models and Graphs: To augment the G-M network G given a new graph G0 , we find a
fixed number of nearest neighbors for G0 , which takes O(|V|k) time. Then we embed models and
graphs by applying HGT over the G-M network G = (V, E). Assuming an HGT with h attention
heads, the time to employ HGT over G is O(|V|k 2 + |E|k 2 /h). More specifically, the time taken
for Attention(·) and Message(·) functions is O(|V|k 2 + |E|k 2 /h), where O(|V|k 2 ) is for feature
transformation by h heads for all nodes, and O(|E|k 2 /h) is for message transformation/attention
computation over each edge. Similarly, Aggregate(·) step takes O(|V|k 2 + |E|k) time. Assuming
k 2 /h > k, the time for Aggregate(·) can be absorbed into the time for other steps. Further, given
that the G-M network is induced by c-NN search, we have that O(|E|) = O(c|V|), and thus the time
complexity for embedding models and graphs is O(|V|ck 2 /h).

H     A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
H.1   M ODEL S ELECTION IN M ACHINE L EARNING

In this section, we provide a further review of model selection in machine learning, which we group
into two categories.


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Evaluation-Based Model Selection: A majority of model selection methods belong to this category.
Representative techniques used by these methods include grid search (Liashchynskyi & Liashchynskyi,
2019), random search (Bergstra & Bengio, 2012), early stopping-based (Golovin et al., 2017) and
bandit-based (Li et al., 2017b) approaches, and Bayesian optimization (BO) (Snoek et al., 2012; Wu
et al., 2019b; Falkner et al., 2018). Among them, BO methods are more efficient than grid or random
search, requiring fewer evaluations of hyperparameter configurations (HCs), as they determine which
HC to try next in a guided manner using prior experience from previous trials. Since these methods
perform model training or evaluation multiple times using different HCs, they are much less efficient
than the following group of methods.
Evaluation-Free Model Selection: Methods in this category do not require model evaluation for model
selection. A simple approach (Abdulrahman et al., 2018) identifies the best model by considering the
models’ rankings observed on prior datasets. Instead of finding the globally best model, ISAC (Kadio-
glu et al., 2010) and AS (Nikolić et al., 2013) select a model that performed well on similar datasets,
where the dataset similarity is modeled in the meta-feature space via clustering (Kadioglu et al.,
2010) or k-nearest neighbor search (Nikolić et al., 2013). A different group of methods perform
optimization-based model selection, where the model performance is estimated by modeling the
relation between meta-features and model performances. Supervised Surrogates (Xu et al., 2012)
learns a surrogate model that maps meta-features to model performance. Recently, MetaOD (Zhao
et al., 2021) outperformed all of these methods in selecting outlier detection algorithms. As a method
in this category, the proposed M ETAGL builds upon MetaOD and extends it for an effective and
automatic GL model selection. Most importantly, M ETAGL selects a graph learning model (e.g., link
predictor) for the given graph, while MetaOD selects an outlier detection (OD) model for the given
dataset (n-dimensional input features). To this end, M ETAGL designs meta features to capture the
characteristics of graphs, while MetaOD designs meta features specialized for OD tasks. Also, they
adopt different meta-training objectives: M ETAGL adapts the top-1 probability for meta-training,
whereas MetaOD uses an NDCG-based objective. Furthermore, M ETAGL learns the embeddings
of models and graphs by applying a heterogeneous GNN over the G-M network, which allows a
flexible modeling of the relations between different models and graphs. By contrast, in MetaOD, the
embeddings of models and datasets are optimized separately, where the relations between models
and datasets are modeled rather indirectly via reconstructing the performance matrix. Note that all
of these earlier methods, except the first simple approach, rely on meta-features, and they focus on
non-graph datasets. By using the proposed meta-graph features, they could be applied to the graph
learning model selection task.

H.2    C OMPARISON W ITH M ODEL -AGNOSTIC M ETA -L EARNING (MAML) (F INN ET AL ., 2017)

MAML employs meta-learning to train a model’s initial parameters such that the model can perform
well on a new task after the parameters have been updated via a few gradient steps using the data
from the new task. In other words, given a model, MAML initializes one specific model’s parameters
via meta-learning over multiple observed tasks, such that the meta-trained model can quickly adapt to
a new task after learning from a small number of new data (i.e., few-shot learning). On the other hand,
M ETAGL employs meta-learning to carry over the prior knowledge of multiple different models’
performance on different graphs for evaluation-free selection of graph learning algorithms.
Since MAML meta-trains a specific model for fast adaptation to a new dataset, it is not for selecting a
model from a model set consisting of a wide variety of learning algorithms. Further, MAML fine-tunes
a meta-trained model in a few-shot learning setup, whereas in our problem setup, no training and
evaluation is to be done given a new graph dataset. Due to these reasons, MAML is not applicable to
the proposed evaluation-free GL model selection problem (Problem 1).

I     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
I.1   E FFECTIVENESS OF M ETA -G RAPH F EATURES

Figure 8 shows how accurately meta-learners can perform model selection when they use the proposed
meta-graph features (Section 4.3) vs. six state-of-the-art graph-level embedding (GLE) techniques,
i.e., GL2Vec (Chen & Koga, 2019), Graph2Vec (Narayanan et al., 2017), GraphLoG (Xu et al., 2021),
WaveletCharacteristic (Wang et al., 2021), SF (de Lara & Pineau, 2018), and LDP (Cai & Wang,
2019). As discussed in Section 5.3, all meta-learners achieve a higher model selection accuracy nearly


                                                  23
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            MetaGL (Ours)                            ISAC       AS       S2    NCF          MetaOD                       ALORS
                      0.3                                                           0.3                                                        0.3


                                                                 MRR w/ Graph2Vec


                                                                                                                             MRR w/ GraphLoG
MRR w/ GL2Vec

                      0.2                                                           0.2                                                        0.2

                      0.1                                                                                                                      0.1
                                                                                    0.1

                      0.0
                                  MetaGL wins                                                  MetaGL wins                                                  MetaGL wins
                            0.0   0.1    0.2      0.3                                        0.1      0.2      0.3                                       0.1     0.2      0.3
                             MRR w/ MetaGL's Features                                     MRR w/ MetaGL's Features                                   MRR w/ MetaGL's Features
                      0.3                                                           0.3                                                        0.3
MRR w/ WaveletChar.


                                                                                                                             MRR w/ LDP
                                                                                    0.2
                                                                 MRR w/ SF
                      0.2                                                                                                                      0.2

                      0.1                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                                               0.1
                                  MetaGL wins                                                  MetaGL wins                                                  MetaGL wins
                                                                                    0.0
                                0.1     0.2      0.3                                   0.0    0.1    0.2      0.3                                       0.1      0.2      0.3
                            MRR w/ MetaGL's Features                                     MRR w/ MetaGL's Features                                    MRR w/ MetaGL's Features

 Figure 8: Using the proposed meta-graph features (Section 4.3), all meta-learners nearly consistently
 perform better than when they use existing graph-level embedding methods (most of the points are
 below the diagonal).


 consistently by using M ETAGL’s meta-graph features than when they use these GLE techniques, and
 M ETAGL outperform all meta-learners, regardless of which features are used.

 Table 7: M ETAGL is fast and incurs negligible overhead. The runtime (in secs) of naive model
 selection (i.e., training each method using all configurations in the model set M), versus the runtime
 of M ETAGL, i.e., the time to generate meta-graph features (the penultimate row) plus the time taken
 for model prediction on average (the last row). Datasets are taken from (Rossi & Ahmed, 2015).
                                                     soc-wiki-                 ia-             tech-                 power-          socfb-
                                                                                                        ca-cora              web-EPA         tech-pgp
                                                       Vote                  reality         routers-rf              US-Grid         Caltech
       line                                              5.45    5.85                             5.40      6.47         8.23                       7.28       8.19     10.15
       node2vec                                         65.28  504.38                           154.54    159.32       315.35                     317.55     184.09    722.66
       deepwalk                                          7.03   55.01                            16.89     17.95        35.62                      33.09      18.24     84.35
       HONE                                            203.71   53.15                           552.31    276.11        127.4                     882.35     737.49   2082.06
       node2bits                                        64.85  113.06                            92.22     93.37        211.3                     117.55     106.66    284.42
       deepGL                                          145.93  633.44                           331.87     504.2      1027.25                     880.03     445.89    2349.3
       GraphSage                                       272.97 1451.87                           513.18    283.35       115.86                    1020.30    2586.93   1171.54
       GCN                                              26.30   57.10                            45.64     52.96        57.38                      66.12      94.65     163.4
                                 (meta feat. gen.)       0.16                        0.97         0.36        0.4          1.07                      0.78      0.61       2.05
       M ETAGL
                                 (model pred.)                                                                      0.39


 I.2                        M ODEL S ELECTION T IME

 Table 7 shows results comparing the runtime (in seconds)
 for naive model selection with the runtime of M ETAGL.
                                                                   50%    100% 150% 200% 250%
 Note that naive model selection requires training and eval-
 uating each method in the model set, while in M ETAGL, Figure 9: Distribution of the time for
 the runtime involves only the time to generate meta-graph M ETAGL to make a prediction / the time
 feature (penultimate row) and predict the best model via to create meta-graph features (in percent-
 a forward pass (last row). Results show that M ETAGL is age). Red and green lines denote the me-
 fast, and incurs negligible computational overhead.         dian and mean, respectively.


                                                                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9 shows the distribution of the time taken for M ETAGL to predict the best model, divided by
the time taken by M ETAGL for creating meta-graph features (in percentage). On average, it takes
∼20% less time for M ETAGL to make an inference than to generate meta-graph features.

                                                                             MetaGL
                       MetaGL            MetaGL-MLE                          MetaGL-SingleType GM
                       MetaGL-MSE        MetaGL-lambda                       MetaGL-No GM
                   0.96
                                                  Better                                       Better
                   0.94                                           0.94
                   0.92
                                                                  0.92
                   0.90
                AUC


                                                            AUC
                   0.88                                           0.90
                   0.86                                           0.88
                   0.84
                          0.10   0.15     0.20     0.25                   0.200    0.225     0.250
                                        MRR                                        MRR
                      (a) Meta-learning objective.                       (b) G-M network.

                       MetaGL             MetaGL-GCN                      MetaGL          MetaGL- (m)
                       MetaGL-RGCN        MetaGL-GAT                      MetaGL-m

                   0.95
                                                  Better                                      Better
                                                                 0.94
                   0.90
                   0.85                                          0.93
                AUC


                                                            AUC


                   0.80
                   0.75                                          0.92
                   0.70
                      0.0        0.1        0.2       0.3                0.200    0.225      0.250
                                        MRR                                       MRR
                      (c) Graph neural networks.                 (d) Input for embedding graphs.

Figure 10: Ablation study of M ETAGL on several components that M ETAGL uses for meta-learning.
The proposed M ETAGL achieves the best performance, in comparison to the variants that adopt
different modeling choices.



I.3     A BLATION S TUDY

Figure 10 presents ablation studies on several components of M ETAGL for meta-learning, namely,
meta-learning objective, the G-M network, the GNN encoder, and the input for embedding graphs. To
that end, we compare M ETAGL against several variants that differ from M ETAGL in just one aspect,
which we explain below. In Figure 10, M ETAGL refers to the proposed meta-learner as described
in Section 4.

I.3.1    M ETA -L EARNING O BJECTIVE

To optimize the framework such that it can find the best model, M ETAGL employs the top-1
probability as its meta-learning objective (see Section 4.1). We evaluate how M ETAGL’s performance
changes when it uses different loss functions for meta-training. M ETAGL-MSE uses mean squared
error (MSE), M ETAGL-MLE employs ListMLE (Xia et al., 2008), and M ETAGL-lambda uses
LambdaLoss (Wang et al., 2018). Figure 10a shows that M ETAGL with the top-1 probability most
effectively identifies the top-performing model for the new graph, while variants that employ different
learning objectives obtain suboptimal results in terms of both MRR and AUC.


                                                            25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I.3.2         G-M N ETWORK

To learn the embeddings of models and graphs, M ETAGL uses a G-M network (GM), which is a multi-
relational network containing multiple types of nodes and edges (see Section 4.4 and Appendix G.3).
M ETAGL-SingleType GM is a variant of M ETAGL that uses a single-relational G-M network,
where all of the nodes and edges in the original G-M network have been converted to be of the same
type. M ETAGL-No GM is another variant where M ETAGL does not use the G-M network at all;
instead, the input features of models and graphs, which are normally provided as input to the GNN
in M ETAGL, were directly taken to be the final model and graph embeddings. Figure 10b shows
that M ETAGL with the multi-relational G-M network is the most effective, and in utilizing the G-M
network, it is helpful to be able to distinguish between the multiple types of nodes and edges. Further,
in comparison to M ETAGL-No GM, learning the embeddings of graphs and models via the G-M
network greatly improves the model selection performance.

I.3.3         G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS

To effectively learn the embeddings of models and graphs over a multi-relational G-M network,
M ETAGL utilizes an attentive, heterogeneous graph neural network (GNN) as its graph encoder
(see Section 4.4 and appendix G.4), which can adaptively determine the aggregation weight of the
neighbors (thus attentive), while being aware of and utilizing the multiple node and edge types in
learning the embeddings (hence heterogeneous). To see how helpful attentive, heterogeneous GNNs
are in learning effective model and graph embeddings, here we create the following variants of
M ETAGL, which use GNNs that are not attentive and/or not heterogeneous (i.e., no mechanism to
handle different node and edge types). M ETAGL-RGCN uses RGCN (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018),
which is a heterogeneous GNN, but is not attentive. M ETAGL-GAT uses GAT (Velickovic et al.,
2018), which is an attentive GNN, but is not heterogeneous. M ETAGL-GCN uses GCN Kipf &
Welling (2017), which is neither heterogeneous nor attentive. In Figure 10c, the highest performance
is achieved by M ETAGL that uses heterogeneous and attentive GNNs, while the lowest performance
is obtained when it uses GCN, which is not attentive nor heterogeneous. Both the ability to perform
attentive neighborhood aggregation, and to be able to distinguish between and utilize different node
and edge types are essential in effectively capturing the complex relations between graphs and models.

I.3.4         I NPUT FOR E MBEDDING G RAPHS

We have two sources of information for graphs: one is the performance matrix P, and the other is
graph data. Meta-graph feature m captures the information from the graph data, while φ(·) captures
the information from the performance matrix by estimating the latent graph factor obtained by
factorizing P. Therefore, the two terms m and φ(m) in Equation (2) aim to incorporate two different
sources of information. Here we create the following two variants of M ETAGL: In Equation (2),
M ETAGL-m uses m alone, and similarly M ETAGL-φ(m) uses only φ(m). Figure 10d shows that
they provide complementary information, and using both leads to the best result.

I.4          S ENSITIVITY TO THE VARIANCE OF THE P ERFORMANCE M ATRIX
                 MetaGL (Ours)   ISAC         AS         S2   NCF    MetaOD     ALORS             GB-AvgPerf   GB-AvgRank
                                                                                           0.96
                                    Better


                                                                                                                        Better


      0.25
                                                   0.9
                                                                                           0.94
      0.20
                                                   0.8
                                                                                  Better


                                                                                           0.92
                                                                               NDCG@1
MRR


                                             AUC


      0.15
                                                                                           0.90
                                                   0.7
      0.10                                                                                 0.88
                                                   0.6                                     0.86
      0.05
          0.0% 3.0% 6.0% 9.0% 12.0% 15.0%            0.0% 3.0% 6.0% 9.0% 12.0% 15.0%          0.0% 3.0% 6.0% 9.0% 12.0% 15.0%
       Performance Perturbation Rate   Performance Perturbation Rate Performance Perturbation Rate
Figure 11: Across varying performance perturbation rates, M ETAGL consistently improves upon
existing model selection approaches, achieving up to 53% higher MRR than the best baseline.


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We evaluate how sensitive M ETAGL and baselines are to the variance of the performance matrix P,
which can be introduced due to the non-deterministic nature of model training and evaluation. For
evaluation, we perturb all entries of the fully-observed performance matrix P to varying degrees, and
measure the model selection performance using the perturbed performance matrix P.     e Specifically,
given a performance perturbation rate r (r ≥ 0), we replace each performance entry n in P with
the perturbed performance n  e, which is uniformly randomly sampled from [n(1 − r/2), n(1 + r/2)],
bounded by 0 and 1. For instance, given a perturbation rate of 0.2, a mean average precision of 0.5 is
perturbed by sampling from [0.45, 0.55]. As a result, higher perturbation rate makes the perturbed
matrix more random, and thus harder to predict. Figure 11 shows that while an increased perturbation
rate indeed makes model selection harder for all methods, M ETAGL consistently outperforms baseline
model selection approaches across varying performance perturbation rates, obtaining up to 53%
higher MRR than the best baseline.

I.5   C OMPARISON WITH THE ACTUAL B EST P ERFORMANCE
      Between Actual Best and Predicted Best


                                               0.25
                                                       Better


                                               0.20
             Performance Difference


                                               0.15

                                               0.10

                                               0.05

                                               0.00
                                                      MetaGL ALORS NCF   S2    MetaOD   AS   ISAC     GB-    GB-
                                                      (Ours)                                        AvgRank AvgPerf
Figure 12: The smallest performance difference between the actual best and predicted best models is
obtained with M ETAGL (27% and 20% less than the second smallest difference obtained by ALORS
in terms of median and mean, respectively). M ETAGL’s distribution is also much tighter than others.

Here we compare the actual best performance observed for each graph against the performance of the
model chosen by different model selection approaches. Figure 12 is a box plot showing how those
performance differences are distributed. Figure 12 shows that using M ETAGL leads to the smallest
performance difference between the actual best and the predicted best models (27% and 20% less
than the second smallest difference obtained by ALORS in terms of median and mean, respectively).
Further, the performance difference distribution obtained with M ETAGL is much tighter than that of
baselines.


                                                                              27
