Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EINFORCEMENT LEARNING FOR INSTANCE SEGMEN -
TATION WITH HIGH - LEVEL PRIORS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Instance segmentation is a fundamental computer vision problem which remains
         challenging despite impressive recent advances due to deep learning-based meth-
         ods. Given sufficient training data, fully supervised methods can yield excellent
         performance, but annotation of groundtruth remains a major bottleneck, especially
         for biomedical applications where it has to be performed by domain experts. The
         amount of labels required can be drastically reduced by using rules derived from
         prior knowledge to guide the segmentation. However, these rules are in general not
         differentiable and thus cannot be used with existing methods. Here, we revoke this
         requirement by using stateless actor critic reinforcement learning, which enables
         non-differentiable rewards. We formulate the instance segmentation problem as
         graph partitioning and the actor critic predicts the edge weights driven by the
         rewards, which are based on the conformity of segmented instances to high-level
         priors on object shape, position or size. The experiments on toy and real data
         demonstrate that a good set of priors is sufficient to reach excellent performance
         without any direct object-level supervision.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Instance segmentation is the task of segmenting all objects in an image and assigning each of them
a different id. It is the necessary first step to analyze individual objects in a scene and is thus of
paramount importance in many computer vision applications. Over the recent years, fully supervised
instance segmentation methods have made tremendous progress both in natural image applications
and in scientific imaging, achieving excellent segmentations for very difficult tasks (Chen, Wang, and
Qiao 2021; Lee et al. 2017).
A large corpus of training images is hard to avoid when the segmentation method needs to take
into account the full variability of the natural world. However, in many practical segmentation
tasks the appearance of the objects can be expected to conform to certain rules that are known a
priori. Examples include surveillance, industrial quality control and especially medical and biological
imaging applications where full exploitation of such prior knowledge is particularly important as the
training data is sparse and difficult to acquire: pixelwise annotation of the necessary instance-level
groundtruth for a microscopy experiment can take weeks or even months of expert time. The use of
shape priors has a strong history in this domain (Delgado-Gonzalo et al. 2014; Osher and Paragios
2007), but the most powerful learned shape models still require groundtruth (Oktay et al. 2018) and
generic shapes are hard to combine with the CNN losses and other, non-shape, priors. For many
high-level priors it has already been demonstrated that integration of the prior directly into the CNN
loss can lead to superior segmentations while significantly reducing the necessary amounts of training
data (Kervadec et al. 2019). However, the requirement of formulating the prior as a differentiable
function poses a severe limitation on the kinds of high-level knowledge that can be exploited with
such an approach. Our contribution addresses this limitation and establishes a framework in which a
rich set of non-differentiable rules and expectations can be used to steer the network training.
To circumvent the requirement of a differentiable loss function, we turn to the reinforcement learning
paradigm, where the rewards can be computed from a non-differentiable cost function. We base our
framework on a stateless actor-critic setup (Pfau and Vinyals 2016), providing one of the first practical
applications of this important theoretical construct. In more detail, we solve the instance segmentation
problem as agglomeration of image superpixels, with the agent predicting the weights of the edges in


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the superpixel region adjacency graph. Based on the predicted weights, the segmentation is obtained
through (non-differentiable) graph partitioning. The segmented objects are evaluated by the critic,
which learns to approximate the rewards based on object- and image-level reasoning (see Fig. 1).
The main contributions of this work can be summarized as follows: (i) we formulate instance segmen-
tation as a RL problem based on a stateless actor-critic setup, encapsulating the non-differentiable
step of instance extraction into the environment and thus achieving end-to-end learning; (ii) we do
not use annotated images for supervision and instead exploit prior knowledge on instance appearance
and morphology by tying the rewards to the conformity of the predicted objects to pre-defined
rules and learning to approximate the (non-differentiable) reward function with the critic; (iii) we
introduce a strategy for spatial decomposition of rewards based on fixed-sized subgraphs to enable
localized supervision from combinations of object- and image-level rules. (iv) we demonstrate the
feasibility of our approach on synthetic and real images and show an application to two important
segmentation tasks in biology. In all experiments, our framework delivers excellent segmentations
with no supervision other than high-level rules.


2    R ELATED WORK

Reinforcement learning has so far not found significant adoption in the segmentation domain. The
closest to our work are two methods in which RL has been introduced to learn a sequence of
segmentation decision steps as a Markov Decision Process. In the actor critic framework of Araslanov,
Rothkopf, and Roth 2019, the actor recurrently predicts one instance mask at a time based on the
gradient provided by the critic. The training needs fully segmented images as supervision and the
overall system, including an LSTM sub-network between the encoder and the decoder, is fairly
complex. In Jain et al. 2011, the individual decision steps correspond to merges of clusters while
their sequence defines a hierarchical agglomeration process on a superpixel graph. The reward
function is based on Rand index and thus not differentiable, but the overall framework requires full
(super)pixelwise supervision for training.
Reward decomposition was introduced for multi agent RL by Sunehag et al. 2017 where a global
reward is decomposed into a per agent reward. Bagnell and Ng 2006 proves that a stateless RL setup
with decomposed rewards requires far less training samples than a RL setup with a global reward. In
Xu et al. 2019 reward decomposition is applied both temporally and spatially for zero-shot inference
on unseen environments by training on locally selected samples to learn the underlying physics of the
environment.
The restriction to differentiable losses is present in all application domains of deep learning. Common
ways to address it are based on a soft relaxation of the loss that can be differentiated. The relaxation
can be designed specifically for the loss, for example, Area-under-Curve (Eban et al. 2017) for
classification or Jaccard Index (Berman, Triki, and Blaschko 2018) for semantic segmentation. These
approaches are not directly applicable to our use case as we aim to use a variety of object- and
image-level priors, which should be combined without handcrafting an approximate loss for each
case. More generally, but still for a concrete task loss, Direct Loss Minimization has been proposed
in Y. Song et al. 2016. For semi-supervised learning of a classification or ranking task, Discriminative
Adversarial Networks have been proposed as a means to learn an approximation to the loss (Santos,
Wadhawan, and Zhou 2017). Most generally, Grabocka, Scholz, and Schmidt-Thieme 2019 propose
to train a surrogate neural network which will serve as a smooth approximation of the true loss. In
our setup, the critic can informally be viewed as a surrogate network as it learns to approximate the
priors through the rewards by Q-learning.
Incorporation of rules and priors is particularly important in biomedical imaging applications, where
such knowledge can be exploited to augment or even substitute scarce groundtruth annotations.
For example, the shape prior is explicitly encoded in popular nuclear (Schmidt et al. 2018) and
cellular (Stringer et al. 2021) segmentation algorithms based on spatial embedding learning. Learned
non-linear representations of the shape are used in Oktay et al. 2018, while in Hu et al. 2019 the loss
for object boundary prediction is made topology-aware. Domain-specific priors can also be exploited
in post-processing by graph partitioning (Pape et al. 2019). Interestingly, the energy minimization
procedure underlying the graph partitioning can also be incorporated into the learning step (Abbas
and Swoboda 2021; Maitin-Shepard et al. 2016; J. Song et al. 2019).


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Interaction of the agent with the environment: (a) shows the state, which is composed of the
image and superpixels; (b) depicts the agent, which consists of the actor and critic networks as well
as the feature extractor that computes the node input features; (c) given the state, the agent performs
the actions by predicting edge weights on the graph; (d) the environment, which includes the image,
superpixels, graph and graph partitioning based on the weights predicted through agent actions ; (e)
rewards are obtained by evaluating the segmentation arising from the graph partitioning, based on
pre-defined and data dependent rules. The rewards are given back to the agent where they are used
for training.


3    M ETHODS
The task of instance segmentation can be formalized as transforming an image x into a labeling y
that maps each pixel to a label value. An instance corresponds to the maximal set of pixels with the
same label value. Typically, the instance segmentation problem is solved via supervised learning,
i.e. using a training set with groundtruth labels ŷ. Note that y is invariant under the permutation
of label values, which makes it difficult to formulate instance segmentation in a fully differentiable
manner. Most approaches first predict a "soft" representation with a CNN, e.g. affinities (Gao
et al. 2019; Lee et al. 2017; Wolf et al. 2020), boundaries (Beier et al. 2017; Funke et al. 2018)
or embeddings (De Brabandere, Neven, and Van Gool 2017; Neven et al. 2019) and apply non-
differentiable post-processing, such as agglomeration (Bailoni et al. 2019; Funke et al. 2018), density
clustering (Comaniciu and Meer 2002; McInnes and Healy 2017) or partitioning (Andres et al. 2012),
to obtain the instance segmentation. Alternatively, proposal-based methods predict a bounding-box
per instance and then predict the instance mask for each bounding-box (He et al. 2017). Furthermore,
the common evaluation metrics for instance segmentation (Meilă 2003; Rand 1971) are also not
differentiable.
Our main motivation to explore RL for the instance segmentation task is to circumvent the restriction
to differentiable losses and - regardless of the loss - to make the whole pipeline end-to-end even in
presence of non-differentiable steps that transform pixelwise CNN predictions into instances.
We formulate the instance segmentation problem using a region adjacency graph G = (V, E), where
the nodes V correspond to superpixels (clusters of pixels) and the edges E connect nodes that belong
to spatially adjacent superpixels. Given edge weights W , the instance segmentation is obtained
by partitioning the graph, here using an approximate multicut solver (Kernighan and Lin 1970).
Together, the image data, superpixels, graph and the graph partitioning make up the environment
E of our RL setup. Based on the state s of E, the agent A predicts actions a. Here, the actions are
interpreted as edge weights W and used to partition the graph. The reward r is then computed based
on this partitioning. Our agent A is a stateless actor-critic (Haarnoja et al. 2018), represented by two
graph neural networks (GNN) (Gilmer et al. 2017). The actor predicts the actions a based on the
graph and its node features F . The node(superpixel) features are computed by pooling together the
corresponding pixel features based on the raw image data.
We compute the node features F with a UNet (Ronneberger, Fischer, and Brox 2015) that takes the
image as input and outputs a feature vector per pixel. These features are spatially averaged over the


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


superpixels to obtain F . The feature extractor UNet is part of the agent A, thus training it end-to-end
with the actor and critic networks (Fig. 1). In low data regimes it is also possible to use a pre-trained
and fixed feature extractor or to combine the learned features with hand-crafted ones.
Crucially, the reinforcement setup enables us to use both a non-differentiable instance segmentation
step and reward function, by encapsulation of the “pixels to instances” step in the environment and
learning a policy based on the rewards with the stateless actor critic.

3.1   S TATELESS R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING S ETUP

Unlike most RL settings (Sutton and Barto 2018), our approach does not require an explicitly time
dependent state: the actions returned by the agent correspond to the real-valued edge weights in [0, 1],
which are used to compute the graph partitioning. Any state can be reached by a single step from the
initial state and there exists no time dependency in the state transition. Unlike Jain et al. 2011, we
predict all edge values at once which allows us to avoid the iterative strategy of Araslanov, Rothkopf,
and Roth 2019 and deliver and evaluate a complete segmentation in every step. Hence, we implement
a stateless actor critic formulation.
Stateless RL was introduced in Pfau and Vinyals 2016 to study the connection between generative
adversarial networks and actor critics, our method is one of the first practical applications of this
concept. Here, the agent consists of an actor, which predicts the actions a and a critic, which predicts
the action value Q (expected future discounted reward) given the actions. The stateless approach
simplifies the action value: it estimates the reward for a single step instead of the expected sum of
discounted future rewards for many steps. We have explored a multi-step setup as well, but found that
it yields inferior results for our application; details can be found in the App. A.8. Furthermore, we
compute sub-graph rewards instead of relying on a single global reward in order to provide a more
localized reward signal (see Section 3.2 for details).
The actor corresponds to a single GNN, which predicts the mean and variance of a Normal distribution
for each edge. The actions a are determined by sampling from this distribution and applying a sigmoid
to the result to obtain continuous edge weights in the value range [0, 1]. The GNN takes the state
s = (G, F ) as input arguments and its graph convolution for the ith node is defined as in Gilmer et al.
2017:
                                                                      
                                               1    X
                              fi = γπ fi ,               ϕπ (fi , fj )                            (1)
                                            |N (i)|
                                                       j∈N (i)

where γπ as well as ϕπ are MLPs, (·, ·) is the concatenation of vectors and N (i) is the set of neighbors
of node i. The gradient of the loss for the actor is given by:
                                                                                    
                                      1 X  X
                  ∇θ Lactor = ∇θ                  α      log(π θ (â|s)) − Qsg (s, a)                (2)
                                    |SG|
                                          sg∈G      â∈sg

This loss gradient is derived following Haarnoja et al. 2018. We adapt it to the sub-graph reward
structure by calculating the joint action probability of the policy π θ over each sub-graph sg in
the set of all sub-graphs SG. Using this loss to optimize the policy parameters θ minimizes the
Kullback-Leibler divergence between the Gibbs distribution of action values for each sub-graph
Qsg (s, a) and the policy with respect to the parameters θ of the policy. α is a trainable temperature
parameter which is optimized following the method introduced by Haarnoja et al. 2018.

The critic predicts the action value Qsg for each sub-graph sg ∈ SG. It consists of a GNN Qsg (s, a)
that takes the state s = (G, F ) as well as the actions a predicted by the actor as input and predicts a
feature vector for each edge. The graph convolution from Equation 1 is slightly modified:
                                                                             
                                             1      X
                            fi = γQ fi ,                ϕQ fi , fj , a(i,j)                        (3)
                                          |N (i)|
                                                 j∈N (i)

again γQ and ϕQ are MLPs. Based on these edge features Qsg is predicted for each sub-graph via an
MLP. Here, we use a set of subgraph sizes (typically, 6, 12, 32, 128) to generate a supervison signal


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Figure 2: The graph is subdivided into sub-
 graphs, each sub-graph is highlighted by a            Figure 3: An example reward landscape Cir-
 different color. All sub-graphs have the same         cle Hough Transform (CHT) rewards. High
 number of edges (here 3). Overall, we use a           rewards are given if the overall number of
 variety of sizes covering different notions of        predicted objects is not too high and if the
 locality.                                             respective object has a large CHT value.


for different neighborhood scales. A given MLP is only valid for a fixed graph size, so we employ a
different MLP for each size. The loss for the critic is given by:
                                            1 X 1 δ
                              Lcritic =          (Q (s, a) − r)2                                     (4)
                                          |SG|  2 sg
                                               sg∈G

Minimizing this loss with respect to the action value function’s parameters δ minimizes the difference
between the expected reward and action values Qδsg (s, a).

3.2   L OCALIZED S UB - GRAPH R EWARDS

In most RL applications a global scalar reward is provided per state transition. In our application of
graph-based instance segmentation, it is instead desirable to introduce several more localized rewards
in order to learn from a reward for the specific action, rather than a global scalar. Here, reward
decomposition is natural because we evaluate the segmentation quality per object and can use the
object scores to provide a localized reward. In order to formalize this idea, we have designed our
actor critic (Section 3.1) to learn from sub-graph rewards.
A good set of sub-graphs should fulfill the following requirements: each sub-graph should be
connected so that the input to the MLP that computes the activation value for the sub-graphs is
correlated. The size of the sub-graphs should be adjustable and all sub-graphs should be extracted
with the exact same size to be valid inputs for the MLP. The union of all sub-graphs should cover
the complete graph so that each edge contributes to at least one action value Qsg . The sub-graphs
should overlap to provide a smooth sum of action values. We have designed Alg. 1 to extract a set of
sub-graphs according to these requirements. Fig. 2 shows an example sub-graph decomposition.
While some of the rewards used in our experiments can be directly defined for sub-graphs, most are
instead defined per object (see App. A.2 for details on reward design). We use the following general
procedure to map object-level rewards to sub-graphs: first assign to each superpixel the reward of its
corresponding object. The reward per edge is determined by the maximum value of its two incident
superpixels’ rewards. The edge rewards are averaged to obtain the reward per sub-graph.
By taking the maximum we assign the higher score to edges whose incident superpixels belong to
different objects, because they probably correspond to a correct split. Note that the uncertainty in the
assignment of low rewards can lead to a noisy reward signal, but the averaging of the edge rewards
over the sub-graphs and the overlaps between the sub-graphs smooth the rewards. We have also
explored a different actor critic setup that can use object level rewards directly, with no sub-graph
extraction and mapping. However, this approach yields inferior results, see App. A.3 for details.


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) Reinforcement learning output.                               (b) Mutex watershed baseline.

Figure 4: Synthetic data. a) top left to right: groundtruth segmentation, raw data, superpixels and
visualization of the actions (merge actions in green, split actions in red). Bottom left to right: pre-
trained pixel embeddings, superpixel edges, segmentation result and visualization of the rewards
(light green for high rewards, dark red for low rewards. b) comparison of segmentation from our
method and the mutex watershed.

4     E XPERIMENTS

We evaluate our approach on three instance segmentation problems: one synthetic and two real. For a
proof-of-principle, we construct a synthetic dataset with circular shapes on structured background,
showing how our framework can exploit simple geometric priors. Next, we apply the method to
a popular microscopy benchmark dataset for nucleus segmentation (Caicedo et al. 2019). Finally,
we consider a challenging biological segmentation problem with boundary-labeled cells. Here, we
evaluate both learning restricted to prior rules and mixed supervision combining rule-based and direct
rewards computed from groundtruth annotations. The problem setup, network architectures and
hyperparameters are reported in detail in App. A.9.

4.1   S YNTHETIC DATA : C IRCLES ON S TRUCTURED G ROUND

We create synthetic images of circles on a structured background and segment this data using only
simple geometric rules. Superpixels were generated with the mutex watershed (Wolf et al. 2020)
applied to the gaussian gradient of the image. Here, we demonstrate that the actor critic can be trained
without any direct object-level supervision and apply a simplified setup with a fixed pixel feature
extractor, pre-trained through self-supervision (see App. A.1).
The object-level reward is based on the Circle Hough Transform (CHT) (Hassanein et al. 2015). It is
combined with an estimate for the total number of objects in the image as an additional global reward.
The global reward gives useful gradients during early training stages: when too few potential objects
are found in the prediction, a low reward can be given to the tentative background object. If too many
potential objects are found, a low reward can be given to all the foreground objects with a low CHT
value. The surface created by the per-object and global reward is shown in Fig. 3. The exact reward
computation can be found in App. A.11.
Fig. 4 shows the output of all algorithm components on a sample image. We also computed results
with the mutex watershed (Wolf et al. 2020), a typical algorithm for boundary based instance
segmentation in microscopy. Texture within objects and structured background are inherently difficult
for region-growing algorithms, but our approach can exploit higher-level reasoning along with
low-level information and achieve a good segmentation.

4.2   R EAL DATA : N UCLEUS S EGMENTATION

Nuclei are a very frequent target of instance segmentation in microscopy, which is also reflected in
the large amount of publicly available annotated data. The availability of training data sparked the
development of popular pre-trained solutions, such as a generalist UNet (Falk et al. 2019) or StarDist


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Schmidt et al. 2018) and CellPose (Stringer et al. 2021) which both have an (implicit) shape prior.
Also, due to ubiquity of nuclei in microscopy, detailed prior knowledge exists on their shape and their
appearance under different stainings. The experiments in this section aim to answer the following
questions: i) given fully annotated groundtruth images for training, is there an advantage in using our
RL formulation with object-level rewards compared to commonly used fully supervised baselines?
ii) given superpixels that can be combined into the correct solution, but no other direct supervision,
can our approach learn to combine the superpixels correctly only from high-level rules? iii) what
happens if superpixels are suboptimal? For data, we turn to the dataset of Caicedo et al. 2019 and
select images that contain nuclei of medium size (175 for training and 22 for test).
Features are learned end-to-end. In the unsuper-
vised setting, we compute the reward by combining           Method          Superpixel   mAP     IoU50   IoU75
several object descriptors: eccentricity, extent, mi-       UNet            -            0.710   0.900   0.756
nor diameter, perimeter, solidity as well as mean,          StarDist        -            0.645   0.938   0.736
                                                            Cellpose        -            0.666   0.931   0.776
maximum and minimum intensity per object. The               UNet + MC       GT           0.674   0.806   0.702
object reward is then given by the normalized sum           ours (sup.)     GT           0.766   0.907   0.799
of square distances of these quantities and their           Otsu            -            0.554   0.763   0.579
                                                            ours (unsup.)   GT           0.743   0.916   0.787
expected value. Objects larger than 15,000 pixels           ours (unsup.)   UNET         0.671   0.872   0.704
are considered to belong to the background and are          ours (unsup.)   RAW          0.453   0.785   0.439
not assigned a reward. Since the superpixels serve          sp gt           UNET         0.793   0.98    0.852
                                                            sp gt           RAW          0.554   0.969   0.505
as fixed input into our model that do not get modi-
fied, the accuracy of our segmentations is bound by
their accuracy. To investigate their influence, we      Table 1: Nuclei segmentation: for mAP and
evaluate our approach with three different sets of      IoU higher values are better. Methods above
superpixels: “GT”, where we intersect the superpix-     the first middle line were trained fully super-
els with the groundtruth object masks to ensure that    vised. Methods below the first middle line were
a correct segmentation can be recovered, “UNET”,        trained without groundtruth, the results below
where we compute the superpixels using predic-          the second middle line indicate the quality of the
tions of a pre-trained U-Net as an edge detector and    superpixels projected to the groundtruth (best
“RAW”, where we only take into account the raw          possible result that can be achieved with the
image data. See A.12 for more details on superpix-      given superpixels).
els and object descriptors.
Tab. 1 summarizes the results, with a comparison to popular generalist pre-trained nuclear segmenta-
tion methods: StarDist (Schmidt et al. 2018), Cellpose (Stringer et al. 2021) and UNet (Falk et al.
2019). For StarDist and Cellpose, we use the pre-trained models provided with the papers. The UNet
is trained on the same images as StarDist, the instance segmentation is recovered either by applying
connected components to the boundary-subtracted foreground prediction (“UNet”) or, to obtain a
comparison conditioned on a particular set of superpixels, by using the UNet boundary predictions
and superpixels described above as input to Multicut graph-based agglomeration (“UNet + MC”).
Otsu threshold serves as a simple unsupervised baseline (Otsu 1979), where binarizing the image is
followed by connected components to obtain the instance segmentation.
For the first question, we train our pipeline fully supervised (“ours (sup.)”) as described in App. A.10:
we use pixelwise groundtruth, but can also exploit our RL formulation where the loss is assigned
to individual objects through the non-differentiable graph agglomeration step. Here, our method
performs better than all baselines without RL, so there is clearly an advantage to using object-level
supervision (as also demonstrated recently for non-RL setups, e.g. by Wolny, Yu, et al. 2021).
For the other two questions, we train our method using only rule-based rewards (“ours (unsup.)”).
Given superpixels from which the groundtruth image can be recovered (”GT”), we then achieve better
segmentation quality than the fully supervised baselines and the gap in performance between our
unsupervised and supervised approach is smaller than the gap to the runner-up baseline. Of note, our
unsupervised model also outperforms the “UNet + MC” baseline using the same ”GT” superpixels, so
its performance cannot be explained just by the use of groundtruth in superpixel generation. Example
results and failure cases are shown in App. A.12.
In the third experiment, we use a pretrained UNet as an edge detector to create superpixels of
”medium” quality and again obtain strong results, outperforming StarDist, CellPose and UNet+MC
with ”GT” superpixels. Finally, with our worst set of superpixels obtained directly from the raw data,
the method can learn to exploit the rules, but is clearly hindered by the superpixel quality.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3   R EAL DATA : C ELL S EGMENTATION

Biomedical applications often require segmentation of objects of known morphology arranged in a
regular pattern (Thompson 1992). Such data presents the best use case for our algorithm as the reward
function can leverage such priors. We address a cell segmentation problem from developmental
biology, where cells often follow stereotypical shapes and arrangement: 317 drosophila embryo
images from Bhide et al. 2020, including 10 with expert annotations used as test data. Note that
several pre-trained networks are available for cell segmentation in light microscopy (Chamier et al.
2021; Stringer et al. 2021; Wolny, Cerrone, et al. 2020); however, they produce sub-par results on
this data due to experimental differences.
The rewards express that the cells are arranged in
a radial pattern, with the average size known from           Method               VI      VI merge   VI split
other experiments (see Fig. 5). We set a high reward         sp gt                1.266   0.672      0.594
for merging superpixels that certainly belong to
                                                             ours                 2.213   0.839      1.374
the background (close to the image boundary or               ours (semisup.)      1.634   0.733      0.901
center). For background edges near the foreground            ours (handcrafted)
                                                             UNet + MC
                                                                                  2.523
                                                                                  3.361
                                                                                          0.987
                                                                                          3.019
                                                                                                     1.536
                                                                                                     0.342
area, we modulate the reward by the circularity              contrastive          4.440   1.155      3.28
of the overall foreground contour. For the likely
foreground edges, we compute object-level rewards      Table 2: Cell segmentation results, measured
by fitting a rotated bounding box to each object       by variation of information (VI) (Meilă 2003).
and comparing its radii and orientation to template    This entropy-based metric is commonly used to
values. We use a weight profile based on the known     evaluate crowded segmentations in microscopy.
embryo width to combine object and background          We also report its merge and split component
rewards (App. A.6).                                    that measure the over-/under-segmentation error
                                                       respectively. Lower values are better.
More formally, the rewards are calculated as fol-
lows: for each edge, we define the position h as the
average of the centers of the two incident superpixels. Given the image center c, the radius of a circle
that approximately covers the foreground j and the (maximal) image border position m, we use a
gaussian kernel K(·) for weighting and define edge reward redge :
                                               Here γ, η and δ are normalization constants. The
                                              kernel function in Eq. 5 determines the back-
           K ||h−c|| (1 − a), if h ≤ j        ground probability of an edge; 1 − a constitutes
    rbg =        γ                         (5) a reward that favors merges. It is scaled by the
           K ||m−h|| (1 − a), otw             background probability. The object rewards ro
                     η
                                               are found by fitting a rotated bounding box to
               ||h − j||
    rf g = K               max(ro1 , ro2 ) (6) the object and then comparing orientation and
                   δ                           extent to expected values known from previous
  redge = rf g + rbg                       (7) experiments. They are mapped to edge rewards
                                               ro1 , ro2 using the maximum value of the two
                                               incident objects.
We pre-compute superpixels by using boundary predictions as input to a watershed seeded from
local maxima. We use the UNet from Wolny, Cerrone, et al. 2020, which was trained on roughly
similar images. As it was trained on plant cells in different microscope modality, its prediction is
far from perfect, especially around the inner circle, see Fig. 5“Edge prediction”. We combine the
learned node features with hand-crafted features: the normalized polar coordinate of the superpixel
center and the normalized superpixel size. Fig. 5 shows visualisations of the learned and hand-crafted
features. Interestingly, the learned features converge to a representation that resembles a semantic
segmentation of boundaries.
Tab. 2 shows the results: “ours” is the method described above; for “ours (semisup.)” we train a
model that additionally receives direct supervision from groundtruth for a single patch using the
reward from App. A.10 and for “ours (handcrafted)” we only use the hand-crafted features and
not the learned features. We include the UNet from Wolny, Cerrone, et al. 2020 with Multicut for
instance segmentation (“UNet + MC”) as well as the method of De Brabandere, Neven, and Van Gool
2017 trained on the same data as Wolny, Cerrone, et al. 2020 (“contrastive”) as baselines. Since
only 10 images of the dataset are annotated, we cannot efficiently finetune any of the popular cell
segmentation networks on this dataset. We also project the superpixels to their respective groundtruth


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Cell segmentation experiment. Top left to right: groundtruth segmentation; raw data;
boundary predictions; superpixel over-segmentation; visualization for the actions on every edge
(green = merge action, red = split action). Bottom left to right: a) handcrafted features per superpixel;
b) learned features averaged over superpixels; c) learned features per pixel; Multicut segmentations;
visualization of the rewards (light green = high reward, dark red = low reward). For all features, we
use the first 3 PCA components for visualisation. White arrows point to remaining errors.


cluster (“sp gt”) to indicate the best possible solution that can be achieved with the given superpixels.
Our approach clearly outperforms the baseline methods trained on the data from Wolny, Cerrone, et al.
2020. While predictions are not perfect (white arrows in Fig. 5, prior rules turn out to be sufficient to
assemble most cells correctly. The remaining errors are caused by objects not fully conforming to the
priors ("bent" rather than straight oval cells) or by a very weak boundary prediction. Furthermore,
we see that the learned features significantly improve results and that the semi-supervised approach
provides a large boost, even with a single patch used for direct supervision. We only report results for
the best model as measured by the reward on a validation set across several training runs. App. Fig. 8
shows validation reward curves consistently improve during training for all random seeds.
5 D ISCUSSION AND O UTLOOK
We introduced an end-to-end instance segmentation algorithm that can exploit non-differentiable
loss functions and high-level prior information. Our novel RL approach is based on the stateless
actor-critic and predicts the full segmentation at every step, allowing us to assign rewards to all objects
and reach stable convergence. The segmentation problem is formulated as graph partitioning; we
design a reward decomposition algorithm which maps object- and image-level rewards to sub-graphs
for localized supervision. Our experiments demonstrate good segmentation quality on synthetic and
real data using only rule-based supervision without any object- or pixel-level labels, such as centers,
boxes or masks. Furthermore, in case of full supervision, our method enables end-to-end instance
segmentation with direct object-level reasoning, which will allow for post-processing-aware training
of segmentation CNNs. In the future, we plan to explore other tasks and reward functions and will
further study the semi-supervised setup that showed very promising initial results.
Limitations Our method relies on superpixels which are fixed and not optimized jointly, so the
upper bound on the performance is defined by superpixel accuracy. We believe an extension to pixels
is possible and envision working on this in the future, but the current setup will not scale to the pixel
level directly. Also, our method is limited to problems where consistent prior rules can be formulated
for all instances. While this is the case for many applications in life science and medical imaging,
not all object classes in the natural world can be described in this way. Here, our method could
contribute by complementing training annotations with rules, reducing the overall labelling load in a
semi-supervised setting. Finally, our approach requires non-trivial reward engineering as a trade-off
for not performing any annotations.



                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Abbas, Ahmed and Paul Swoboda (2021). “Combinatorial Optimization for Panoptic Segmentation: A Fully
   Differentiable Approach”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34.
Andres, Bjoern et al. (2012). “Globally optimal closed-surface segmentation for connectomics”. In: European
   Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, pp. 778–791.
Araslanov, Nikita, Constantin Rothkopf, and Stefan Roth (2019). “Actor-Critic Instance Segmentation”. In:
   Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Bagnell, Drew and Andrew Ng (2006). “On Local Rewards and Scaling Distributed Reinforcement Learn-
   ing”. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf, and J.
   Platt. Vol. 18. MIT Press. URL: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2005 / file /
   02180771a9b609a26dcea07f272e141f-Paper.pdf.
Bailoni, Alberto et al. (2019). “A generalized framework for agglomerative clustering of signed graphs applied
   to instance segmentation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.11713.
Beier, Thorsten et al. (2017). “Multicut brings automated neurite segmentation closer to human performance”.
   In: Nature methods 14.2, pp. 101–102.
Berman, Maxim, Amal Rannen Triki, and Matthew B Blaschko (2018). “The lovász-softmax loss: A tractable
   surrogate for the optimization of the intersection-over-union measure in neural networks”. In: Proceedings of
   the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4413–4421.
Bhide, Sourabh et al. (2020). Semi-Automatic Generation of Tight Binary Masks and Non-Convex Isosurfaces
   for Quantitative Analysis of 3D Biological Samples. arXiv: 2001.11469 [eess.IV].
Brabandere, Bert De, Davy Neven, and Luc Van Gool (2017). Semantic Instance Segmentation with a Discrimi-
   native Loss Function. arXiv: 1708.02551 [cs.CV].
Caicedo, Juan C et al. (2019). “Nucleus segmentation across imaging experiments: the 2018 Data Science Bowl”.
   In: Nature methods 16.12, pp. 1247–1253.
Chamier, Lucas von et al. (Apr. 2021). “Democratising deep learning for microscopy with ZeroCostDL4Mic.”
   In: Nature Communications.
Chen, Liang-Chieh, Huiyu Wang, and Siyuan Qiao (2021). Scaling Wide Residual Networks for Panoptic
   Segmentation. arXiv: 2011.11675 [cs.CV].
Comaniciu, Dorin and Peter Meer (2002). “Mean shift: A robust approach toward feature space analysis”. In:
   IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 24.5, pp. 603–619.
De Brabandere, Bert, Davy Neven, and Luc Van Gool (2017). “Semantic instance segmentation with a discrimi-
   native loss function”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.02551.
Delgado-Gonzalo, Ricard et al. (2014). “Snakes on a plane: A perfect snap for bioimage analysis”. In: IEEE
   Signal Processing Magazine 32.1, pp. 41–48.
Eban, Elad et al. (2017). “Scalable learning of non-decomposable objectives”. In: Artificial intelligence and
   statistics. PMLR, pp. 832–840.
Falk, Thorsten et al. (2019). “U-Net: deep learning for cell counting, detection, and morphometry”. In: Nature
   methods 16.1, pp. 67–70.
Funke, Jan et al. (2018). “Large scale image segmentation with structured loss based deep learning for connec-
   tome reconstruction”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 41.7, pp. 1669–
   1680.
Gao, Naiyu et al. (2019). “Ssap: Single-shot instance segmentation with affinity pyramid”. In: Proceedings of
   the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 642–651.
Gilmer, Justin et al. (2017). “Neural Message Passing for Quantum Chemistry”. In: CoRR abs/1704.01212.
   arXiv: 1704.01212. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01212.
Grabocka, Josif, Randolf Scholz, and Lars Schmidt-Thieme (2019). “Learning surrogate losses”. In: arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1905.10108.
Haarnoja, Tuomas et al. (2018). “Soft Actor-Critic Algorithms and Applications”. In: CoRR abs/1812.05905.
   arXiv: 1812.05905. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.05905.
Hassanein, Allam Shehata et al. (2015). “A Survey on Hough Transform, Theory, Techniques and Applications”.
   In: CoRR abs/1502.02160. arXiv: 1502.02160. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.02160.
He, Kaiming et al. (2017). “Mask r-cnn”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
   vision, pp. 2961–2969.
Hu, Xiaoling et al. (2019). “Topology-Preserving Deep Image Segmentation”. In: Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems. Vol. 32. URL: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
   2d95666e2649fcfc6e3af75e09f5adb9-Paper.pdf.
Jain, Viren et al. (Jan. 2011). “Learning to Agglomerate Superpixel Hierarchies”. In: Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems 24.
Kernighan, Brian W and Shen Lin (1970). “An efficient heuristic procedure for partitioning graphs”. In: The Bell
   system technical journal 49.2, pp. 291–307.
Kervadec, Hoel et al. (2019). “Constrained-CNN losses for weakly supervised segmentation”. In: Medical Image
   Analysis 54, pp. 88–99. ISSN: 1361-8415. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2019.02.
   009.



                                                     10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lee, Kisuk et al. (2017). Superhuman Accuracy on the SNEMI3D Connectomics Challenge. arXiv: 1706.
   00120 [cs.CV].
Maitin-Shepard, Jeremy B et al. (2016). “Combinatorial Energy Learning for Image Segmentation”.
   In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by D. Lee et al. Vol. 29. Curran As-
   sociates, Inc. URL: https : / / proceedings . neurips . cc / paper / 2016 / file /
   31857b449c407203749ae32dd0e7d64a-Paper.pdf.
McInnes, Leland and John Healy (2017). “Accelerated hierarchical density based clustering”. In: 2017 IEEE
   International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). IEEE, pp. 33–42.
Meilă, Marina (2003). “Comparing clusterings by the variation of information”. In: Learning theory and kernel
   machines. Springer, pp. 173–187.
Neven, Davy et al. (2019). “Instance segmentation by jointly optimizing spatial embeddings and clustering
   bandwidth”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 8837–8845.
Oktay, Ozan et al. (2018). “Anatomically Constrained Neural Networks (ACNNs): Application to Cardiac
   Image Enhancement and Segmentation”. In: IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 37.2, pp. 384–395. DOI:
   10.1109/TMI.2017.2743464.
Osher, S. and N. Paragios (2007). Geometric Level Set Methods in Imaging, Vision, and Graphics. Springer New
   York. ISBN: 9780387218106. URL: https://books.google.de/books?id=ZWzrBwAAQBAJ.
Otsu, Nobuyuki (1979). “A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms”. In: IEEE transactions on
   systems, man, and cybernetics 9.1, pp. 62–66.
Pape, Constantin et al. (2019). “Leveraging domain knowledge to improve microscopy image segmentation with
   lifted multicuts”. In: Frontiers in Computer Science 1, p. 6.
Pfau, David and Oriol Vinyals (2016). “Connecting Generative Adversarial Networks and Actor-Critic Methods”.
   In: CoRR abs/1610.01945. arXiv: 1610.01945. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.01945.
Rand, William M (1971). “Objective criteria for the evaluation of clustering methods”. In: Journal of the
   American Statistical association 66.336, pp. 846–850.
Ronneberger, Olaf, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox (2015). “U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical
   Image Segmentation”. In: CoRR abs/1505.04597. arXiv: 1505.04597. URL: http://arxiv.org/
   abs/1505.04597.
Santos, Cicero Nogueira dos, Kahini Wadhawan, and Bowen Zhou (2017). Learning Loss Functions for Semi-
   supervised Learning via Discriminative Adversarial Networks. arXiv: 1707.02198 [cs.LG].
Schmidt, Uwe et al. (2018). “Cell detection with star-convex polygons”. In: International Conference on Medical
   Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention. Springer, pp. 265–273.
Shamir, Reuben R. et al. (2019). “Continuous Dice Coefficient: a Method for Evaluating Probabilistic Seg-
   mentations”. In: CoRR abs/1906.11031. arXiv: 1906.11031. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.
   11031.
Song, Jie et al. (2019). “End-to-end learning for graph decomposition”. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
   International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 10093–10102.
Song, Yang et al. (2016). “Training Deep Neural Networks via Direct Loss Minimization”. In: International
   Conference on Machine Learning.
Stringer, Carsen et al. (2021). “Cellpose: a generalist algorithm for cellular segmentation”. In: Nature Methods
   18.1, pp. 100–106.
Sunehag, Peter et al. (2017). Value-Decomposition Networks For Cooperative Multi-Agent Learning. arXiv:
   1706.05296 [cs.AI].
Sutton, Richard S. and Andrew G. Barto (2018). Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Second. The MIT
   Press. URL: http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html.
Thompson, D’Arcy Wentworth (1992). On Growth and Form. Ed. by John TylerEditor Bonner. Canto. Cambridge
   University Press. DOI: 10.1017/CBO9781107325852.
Wolf, Steffen et al. (2020). “The Mutex Watershed and its Objective: Efficient, Parameter-Free Graph Partition-
   ing”. In: IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence.
Wolny, Adrian, Lorenzo Cerrone, et al. (2020). “Accurate and versatile 3D segmentation of plant tissues at
   cellular resolution”. In: Elife 9, e57613.
Wolny, Adrian, Qin Yu, et al. (2021). “Sparse Object-level Supervision for Instance Segmentation with Pixel
   Embeddings”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.14572.
Xu, Huazhe et al. (2019). “Scoring-Aggregating-Planning: Learning task-agnostic priors from interactions
   and sparse rewards for zero-shot generalization”. In: CoRR abs/1910.08143. arXiv: 1910.08143. URL:
   http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.08143.


                                                     11
