Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F ROM P LAY TO P OLICY: C ONDITIONAL B EHAVIOR
G ENERATION FROM U NCURATED ROBOT DATA
    Zichen Jeff Cui∗       Yibin Wang          Nur Muhammad (Mahi) Shafiullah               Lerrel Pinto

                                           New York University

                                               A BSTRACT
            While large-scale sequence modeling from offline data has led to impressive
            performance gains in natural language and image generation, directly translating
            such ideas to robotics has been challenging. One critical reason for this is that
            uncurated robot demonstration data, i.e. play data, collected from non-expert human
            demonstrators are often noisy, diverse, and distributionally multi-modal. This
            makes extracting useful, task-centric behaviors from such data a difficult generative
            modeling problem. In this work, we present Conditional Behavior Transformers
            (C-BeT), a method that combines the multi-modal generation ability of Behavior
            Transformer with future-conditioned goal specification. On a suite of simulated
            benchmark tasks, we find that C-BeT improves upon prior state-of-the-art work in
            learning from play data by an average of 45.7%. Further, we demonstrate for the
            first time that useful task-centric behaviors can be learned on a real-world robot
            purely from play data without any task labels or reward information. Robot videos
            are best viewed on our project website: play-to-policy.github.io.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Machine Learning is undergoing a Cambrian explosion in large generative models for applications
across vision (Ramesh et al., 2022) and language (Brown et al., 2020). A shared property across these
models is that they are trained on large and uncurated data, often scraped from the internet. Inter-
estingly, although these models are trained without explicit task-specific labels in a self-supervised
manner, they demonstrate a preternatural ability to generalize by simply conditioning the model
on desirable outputs (e.g. “prompts” in text or image generation). Yet, the success of conditional
generation from uncurated data has remained elusive for decision making problems, particularly in
robotic behavior generation.
To address this gap in behavior generation, several works (Lynch et al., 2019; Pertsch et al., 2020b)
have studied the use of generative models on play data. Here, play data is a form of offline, uncurated
data that comes from either humans or a set of expert policies interacting with the environment.
However, once trained, many of these generative models require significant amounts of additional
online training with task-specific rewards (Gupta et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2020). In order to obtain
task-specific policies without online training, a new line of approaches employ offline RL to learn
goal-conditioned policies (Levine et al., 2020; Ma et al., 2022). These methods often require rewards
or reward functions to accompany the data, either specified during data collection or inferred through
hand-crafted distance metrics, for compatibility with RL training. Unfortunately, for many real-world
applications, data does not readily come with rewards. This prompts the question: how do we learn
conditional models for behavior generation from reward-free, play data?

Table 1: Comparison between existing algorithms to learn from large, uncurated datasets: GCBC (Lynch et al.,
2019), GCSL (Ghosh et al., 2019), Offline GCRL (Ma et al., 2022), Decision Transformer Chen et al. (2021)

                         GCBC      GCSL      Offline RL    Decision Transformer       C-BeT (ours)
         Reward-free       ✓         ✓           ✗                    ✗                     ✓
         Offline           ✓         ✗           ✓                    ✓                     ✓
         Multi-modal       ✗         ✗           ✗                    ✗                     ✓
    ∗
        Corresponding author, email: jeff.cui@nyu.edu


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Goal:
 Turn right
knob & left
    knob

  Result:
  Success
                Initialization      Grasping r. knob    Turning r. knob          Retracting        Grasping l. knob    Turning l. knob

   Goal:
   Open
 microwave
  & oven

  Result:
  Success
                Initialization     Grasping microwave     Missed grasp      Re-opening microwave    Grasping Oven       Opening Oven

    Goal:
     Open
  microwave
 & move pot

  Result:
  Failure
              Grasping microwave   Opening microwave    Closing microwave       Grasping Pot       Transporting Pot      Placing Pot


   Goal:
  Move pot
  to sink

  Result:
  Success

                Initialization        Grasping pot         Moving pot       Wedging pot in sink        Moved pot         Retracting

   Goal:
 Turn left
   knob
& open oven

  Result:
  Success
                Initialization     Turning left knob       Retracting          Grasping Oven         Opening Oven        Retracting



   Goal:
 Open oven

  Result:
  Failure

                Initialization       Grasping oven      Partially opening        Retracting        Attempt to reopen    Missed grasp



Figure 1: Multiple conditioned roll-outs of visual robot policies learned on our toy kitchen with only 4.5 hours
of human play interactions. Our model learns purely from image and proprioception without human labeling or
data curation. During evaluation, the policy can be conditioned either on a goal observation or a demonstration.
Note that the last three rows contain distractor objects in the environment that were never seen during training.

To answer this question, we turn towards transformer-based generative models that are commonplace
in text generation. Here, given a prompt, models like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) can generate text
that coherently follow or satisfy the prompt. However, directly applying such models to behavior
generation requires overcoming two significant challenges. First, unlike the discrete tokens used in
text generation, behavior generation will need models that can output continuous actions while also
modeling any multi-modality present in the underlying data. Second, unlike textual prompts that
serve as conditioning for text generation, behavior generation may not have the condition and the
operand be part of the same token set, and may instead require conditioning on future outcomes.
In this work, we present Conditional Behavior Transformers (C-BeT), a new model for learning
conditional behaviors from offline data. To produce a distribution over continuous actions instead of
discrete tokens, C-BeT augments standard text generation transformers with the action discretization
introduced in Behavior Transformers (BeT) (Shafiullah et al., 2022). Conditioning in C-BeT is
done by specifying desired future states as input similar to Play-Goal Conditioned Behavior Cloning
(Play-GCBC) (Lynch et al., 2019). By combining these two ideas, C-BeT is able to leverage the
multi-modal generation capabilities of transformer models with the future conditioning capabilities of
conditional policy learning. Importantly, C-BeT does not require any online environment interactions
during training, nor the specification of rewards or Q functions needed in offline RL.


                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We experimentally evaluate C-BeT on three simulated benchmarks (visual self-driving in
CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017), multi-modal block pushing (Florence et al., 2021), and simulated
kitchen (Gupta et al., 2019)), and on a real Franka robot trained with play data collected by human
volunteers. The main findings from these experiments can be summarized as:

    1. On future-conditioned tasks, C-BeT achieves significantly higher performance compared to
       prior work in learning from play.
    2. C-BeT demonstrates that competent visual policies for real-world tasks can be learned from
       fully offline multi-modal play data (rollouts visualized in Figure 1).

2     BACKGROUND AND P RELIMINARIES
Play-like data: Learning from Demonstrations (Argall et al., 2009) is one of the earliest frameworks
explored for behavior learning algorithms from offline data. Typically, the datasets used in these
frameworks have a built in assumption that the demonstrations are collected from an expert repeatedly
demonstrating a single task in exactly the same way. On the contrary, play datasets violate many of
such assumptions, like those of expertise of the demonstrator, and the unimodality of the task and the
demonstrations. Algorithms that learn from such datasets sometimes assume that the demonstrations
collected are from a rational agent with possibly some latent intent in their behavior (Lynch et al.,
2019). Note that, unlike standard offline-RL datasets (Fu et al., 2020), play-like behavior datasets
neither contain fully random behaviors, nor have rewards associated with the demonstrations.
Behavior Transformers (BeT): BeT (Shafiullah et al., 2022) is a multi-modal behavior cloning
model designed particularly for tackling play-like behavior datasets. BeT uses a GPT-like transformer
architecture to model the probability distribution of action given a sequence of states π(at | st−h:t )
from a given dataset. However, unlike previous behavior learning algorithms, BeT does not assume a
unimodal prior for the action distribution. Instead, it uses a k-means discretization to bin the actions
from the demonstration set into k bins, and then uses the bins to decompose each action into a discrete
and continuous component. This support for multi-modal action distributions make BeT particularly
suited for multi-modal, play-like behavior datasets where unimodal behavior cloning algorithms
fail. However, vanilla BeT only supports unconditonal behavior rollouts, which means that it is not
possible to choose a targeted mode of behavior during BeT policy execution.
Conditional behavior learning: Generally, the problem of behavior learning for an agent is con-
sidered the task of learning a policy π : O → A mapping from the environment observations to the
agent’s actions that elicit some desired behavior. Conditional behavior learning is concerned with
learning a policy π : O × G → A conditioned additionally on a secondary variable g sampled from
a distribution p(g). This condition variable could be specific environment states, latents (such as
one-hot vectors), or even image observations. The success of a conditioned policy can be evaluated
either through pre-specified reward functions, distance function between achieved
                                                                              P∞ outcome     g ′ and
                                                                                     t
specified outcome g, or by discounted visitation probability dπ(·|g) = Eτ ∼π [ t=0 γ δ(ϕ(ot ) = g)]
if a mapping ϕ between states and achieved outcome is defined (Eysenbach et al., 2022).
Goal Conditioned Behavior Cloning (GCBC): In GCBC (Lynch et al., 2019; Emmons et al., 2021),
the agent is presented with a dataset of (observation, action, goal) tuples (o, a, g), or sequences
of such tuples, and the objective of the agent is to learn a goal-conditioned behavior policy. The
simplest way to achieveQso is by training a policy π(· | o, g) that maximizes the probability of the seen
data π ∗ = arg maxπ (o,a,g) P[a ∼ π(· | o, g)]. Assuming a unimodal Gaussian distribution for
π(a | o, g) and a model parametrized    by θ, this comes down to finding the parameter θ minimizing
the MSE loss, θ∗ = arg minθ (o,a,g) ||a − π(o, g; θ)||2 . To make GCBC compatible with play data
                               P

that inherently does not have goal labels, goal relabeling from future states is often necessary. A
common form of data augmentation in training such models, useful when G ⊂ O, is hindsight data
relabeling (Andrychowicz et al., 2017), where the dataset {(o, a, g)} is augmented with {(ot , a, ot′ ) |
t′ > t} by relabeling any reached state in a future timestep as a goal state and adding it to the dataset.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     A PPROACH
Given a dataset {(o, a)} ∈ O × A of sequences                                             2
                                                                           1
of (observation, action) pairs from a play dataset,
our goal is to learn a behavior generation model
that is capable of handling multiple tasks and
                                                                                    3
multiple ways of accomplishing each task. At
the same time, we wish to be able to extract de-
sired behavior from the dataset in the form of a
policy through our model, or, in terms of genera-
tive models, “controllably generate” our desired
behavior (see Figure 2). Finally, in the process
of learning this controllable, conditional gener-     Figure 2: Conditional behavior learning from play
ative model, we wish to minimize the amount           demonstrations. Here, a policy conditioned on reaching
of additional human annotation or curation re-        ⃝1 or ⃝2 has only one possible course of action, but con-
quired in preparing the dataset. The method we        ditioned on reaching ⃝3 there are two reasonable paths.
develop to address these needs is called Condi-
tional Behavior Transformer.

3.1   C ONDITIONAL B EHAVIOR T RANSFORMERS (C-B E T)

Conditional task formulation: First, we formulate the task of learning from a play dataset as
learning a conditional behavior policy, i.e. given the current state, we need to model the distribution
of actions that can lead to particular future states. For simplicity, our formulation can be expressed as
π : O × O → D(A) where, given a current observation oc and a future observation og , our policy π
models the distribution of the possible actions that can take the agent from oc to og . Mathematically,
given a set of play trajectories T , we model the distribution π(a | oc , og ) ≜ Pτ ∈T (a | oc = τt , og =
τt′ , t′ > t). Next, to make our policy more robust since we operate in the partially observable setting,
we replace singular observations with a sequence of observations; namely replacing oc and og with
         (1:N )             (1:N )
ōc = oc        and ōg = og       for some integer N . Thus, the final task formulation becomes learning
a generative model π with:

                                                                                                  ′
             π a | o(1:N
                      c
                          ) (1:N )
                           , og        ≜ Pτ ∈T   a | o (1:N )
                                                       c      = τt:t+N , o(1:N )
                                                                          g      = τ t′ :t′ +N , t > t  (1)

Architecture selection: Note that the model for our task described in the previous paragraph is
necessarily multi-modal, since depending on the sequences ōc and ōg , there could be multiple
plausible sequences of actions with non-zero probability mass. As a result, we choose Behavior
Transformers (BeT) (Shafiullah et al., 2022) as our generative architecture base as it can learn action
generation with multiple modes. We modify the input to the BeT to be a concatenation of our future
conditional observation sequence and current observation sequence. We choose to concatenate the
inputs instead of stacking them, as this allows us to independently choose sequence lengths for the
current and future conditional observations. Since BeT is a sequence-to-sequence model, we only
consider the actions associated with the current observations as our actions. We show the detailed
architecture of our model in Figure 3.
Dataset preparation: To train a C-BeT model on our play dataset {(o, a)}, we will need to appropri-
ately prepare the dataset. We first convert the dataset to hold sequences of observations associated with
actions, {(ot:t+N , at:t+N )}. Then, during training time, we dynamically augment each pair with a se-
quence of future observations, functionally converting our dataset into {(ot:t+N , at:t+N , ot′ :t′ +N ′ )}
for some t′ > t, and treat the sequence ot′ :t′ +N ′ as ōg .
Training objective: We employ the same objective as BeT in training C-BeT. For each of the current
observation and future conditional pair, we compute the BeT loss (see appendix B for details) between
the ground truth actions and the predicted actions. We compute the focal loss (Lin et al., 2017) on the
predicted action bins, and the MT-loss (Girshick, 2015) on the predicted action offsets corresponding
to the action bins as described in BeT.
Test-time conditioning with C-BeT: During test time, we again concatenate our future conditional
sequence with our current observations, and sample actions from our model according to the BeT
framework. While in this work, we primarily condition C-BeT on future observations, we also study


                                                      4
        Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (A)Dataset
        (B)Training

                           CAT(                 ,                )                                     ̂
                                                                                                   ( a c:c+h)                                     ac:c+h


                                    oc:c+h            og:g+h′                                    Estimated
                                                                        Behavior                   action                BeT loss            Ground truth
                                  Current obs       Future obs         Transformer              distribution         (Focal + MT loss)          actions
        (C)Evaluation


                                                                                                                                                       ∼
                                       or                                   CAT(                   ,                 )                        ̂
                                                                                                                                          ( a c−h:c)         ac


                                                                                       oc−h:c              og:g+h′
                        Target frame            Target demonstration                                                      Behavior        Action           Sampled
                                                                                   Observations        Conditional       Transformer   distribution        action
    ￼
𝒟


        Figure 3: End-to-end training and evaluation of C-BeT. (A) Our dataset consists of play data in an environment,
        which may contain semi-optimal behavior, multi-modal demonstrations, and failures, and does not contain any
        annotations or task labels. (B) We train our C-BeT model by conditioning on current and future states using BeT
        (Section 2) (C) During evaluation, our algorithm can be conditioned by target observations or newly collected
        demonstrations to generate targeted behavior.
        other ways of training and conditioning it, such as binary latent vectors denoting the modes in a
        trajectory in our experiments, and compare its performance to observation-conditioned C-BeT (see
        Section 4.5).

        4                 C-B E T ON S IMULATED B ENCHMARKS
        In this section, we discuss our experiments in simulation that are designed to answer the following
        key questions: How well does C-BeT learn behaviors from play? How important is multi-modal
        action modeling? And finally, how does C-BeT compare to other forms of conditioning?

        4.1                BASELINES

        We compare with the following state-of-the-art methods in learning from reward-free offline data:

        • Goal Conditioned BC (GCBC): GCBC (Lynch et al., 2019; Emmons et al., 2021) learns a policy
          by optimizing the probability of seen actions given current and the end state in a trajectory.
        • Weighted Goal Conditioned Supervised Learning (WGCSL) (Yang et al., 2022): GCSL (Ghosh
          et al., 2019) is an online algorithm with multiple rounds of collecting online data, relabeling, and
          training a policy on that data using GCBC. WGCSL (Yang et al., 2022) improves GCSL by learning
          an additional value function used to weight the GCSL loss. We compare against an single-round,
          offline variant of WGCSL in this work.
        • Learning Motor Primitives from Play (Play-LMP): Play-LMP (Lynch et al., 2019) is a behavior
          generation algorithm that focuses on learning short (∼ 30 timesteps) motor primitives from play
          data. Play-LMP does so by using a variational-autoencoder (VAE) to encode action sequences into
          motor program latents and decoding actions from them.
        • Relay Imitation Learning (RIL): Relay Imitation Learning (Gupta et al., 2019) is a hierarchical
          imitation learning with a high level controller that generates short term target state given long term
          goals, and a low level controller that generates action given short term target.
        • Conditional Implicit Behavioral Cloning (C-IBC): Implicit behavioral cloning (Florence et al.,
          2021) learns an energy based model (EBM) E(a | o) over demos and during test samples action a
          given an observation o. We compare against a conditional IBC by training an EBM E(a | o, g).
        • Generalization Through Imitation (GTI): GTI (Mandlekar et al., 2020) encodes the goal condi-
          tion using a CVAE, and autoregressively rolls out action sequences given observation and goal-latent.
          We follow their architecture and forgo collecting new trajectories with an intermediate model since
          that does not fit an offline framework.
        • Offline Goal-Conditioned RL: While offline RL is generally incompatible with play data without
          rewards, recently some offline goal-conditioned RL algorithms achieved success by optimizing for


                                                                                5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

Table 2: Results of future-conditioned algorithms on a set of simulated environments. The numbers reported
for CARLA, BlockPush, and Kitchen are out of 1, 1, and 4 respectively, following Shafiullah et al. (2022). In
CARLA, success counts as reaching the location corresponding to the observation; for BlockPush, it is pushing
one or both blocks into the target squares; and for Kitchen, success corresponds to the number of conditioned
tasks, out of four, completed successfully.
                                                                                      C-BeT        C-BeT
            GCBC     WGCSL      Play-LMP     RIL   C-IBC    GTI    GoFAR     BeT
                                                                                    (unimodal)   (multimodal)
CARLA        0.04      0.02        0.0      0.59    0.65    0.74    0.72     0.31      0.62          0.98
BlockPush    0.06      0.10        0.02     0.07    0.01    0.04    0.04     0.34      0.35          0.90
Kitchen      0.74      1.17        0.04     0.39    0.13    1.61    1.24     1.77      2.74          2.80

  a proxy reward defined through state occupancy. Our baseline, GoFAR (Ma et al., 2022), is one
  such algorithm that learns a goal-conditioned value function and optimizes a policy to maximize it.
• Behavior Transformers (BeT): We include unconditional BeT (Sec. 2) in our baseline to un-
  derstand the improvements made by the C-BeT conditioning. In practice, it acts as a “random”
  baseline that performs the tasks without regard for the goal.
• Unimodal C-BeT: We use our method without the multi-modal head introduced in BeT. This also
  corresponds to a variant of Decision Transformer conditioning on outcomes instead of rewards.

Note that neither WGCSL nor GoFAR are directly compatible with image states and goals, since they
require a proxy reward function r : S × G → R. Thus, we had to design a proxy reward function on
the image representations, exp (−(1/4||g − s||)2 ) to apply them on image-based environments. For a
fair comparison, we also upgrade baseline Play-LMP, C-IBC, and GTI architectures by giving them
sequences of observations and retrofitting them with transformers whenever applicable.

4.2   S IMULATED E NVIRONMENTS AND DATASETS

We run our algorithms and baselines on a collection of simulated environments as a benchmark to
select the best algorithms to run on our real robotic setup. The simulated environments are selected
to cover a variety of properties that are necessary for the real world environment, such as pixel-based
observations, diverse modes in the play dataset, and complex action spaces (see Figure. 4).

1. CARLA self-driving: CARLA (Dosovitskiy et al., 2017) is a simulated self-driving environment
   created using Unreal Engine. In this environment, the observations are RGB pixel values of
   dimension (224, 224, 3), and actions are two-dimensional (accelerate/brake and steer). We use an
   environment with a fork in the road (see Figure 2) following two possible routes to the same goal,
   collecting 200 demonstrations in total. We condition on one of the two possible routes to the goal,
   and at the goal where choosing either of the two modes is valid.
2. Multi-modal block-pushing: We use the multi-modal block-pushing environment from Florence
   et al. (2021) for complicated multi-modal demonstrations. In this environment, an xArm robot
   pushes two blocks, red and green, into two square targets colored red and green. All positions
   are randomized with some noise at episode start. We use 1,000 demonstrations collected using a
   deterministic controller, and condition on just the future block positions on each baseline.
3. Franka relay kitchen: Originally introduced in Gupta et al. (2019), Relay Kitchen is a robotic
   environment in a simulated kitchen with seven possible tasks. A Franka Panda robot is used to
   manipulate the kitchen, and the associated dataset comes with 566 demonstrations collected by
   humans with VR controllers performing four of the seven tasks in some sequence.

4.3   H OW WELL DOES C-B E T LEARN BEHAVIORS FROM PLAY ?

On each of these environments, we train conditional behavior generation models and evaluate them
on a set of conditions sampled from the dataset. The success is defined by the model performing
the same tasks as conditioned by the future outcome. We see from Table. 2 that C-BeT performs
significantly better compared to the baselines on all three tasks. BeT, as our unconditioned “random”
baseline, shows the success rate of completing tasks unconditionally, and see that none of the baselines
surpasses it consistently. Out of the MLP-based baselines, WGCSL performs best in the state-based
tasks. However, GoFAR performs best on the CARLA vision based environment where the other
two MLP-based baselines fail almost completely. We note that Play-LMP performs poorly because
our tasks are long-horizon and quite far from its intended motor primitive regime, which may be
challenging for Play-LMP’s short-horizon auto-encoding architecture.


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.4   H OW IMPORTANT IS MULTI - MODAL ACTION MODELING ?

While we use a multi-modal behavior model in this work, it is not immediately obvious that it may be
necessary. Specifically, some previous outcome-conditioned policy learning works (Chen et al., 2021;
Emmons et al., 2021) implicitly assume that policies are unimodal once conditioned on an outcome.
In Table 2 the comparison between C-BeT and unimodal C-BeT shows that this assumption may not
be true for all environments, and all else being equal, having an explicitly multi-modal model helps
learning an outcome conditioned policy when there may be multiple ways to achieve an outcome.

4.5   H OW DOES C-B E T COMPARE TO OTHER FORMS OF CONDITIONING ?

We consider the question of how much comparative advantage           Table 3: Comparison between C-BeT
there is in getting human labels for our tasks. We do so             with no supervised labels and labels
by adding manual one-hot (CARLA, BlockPush) or binary                acquired with human supervision.
(Kitchen) labels to our tasks, and training and evaluating
                                                                                    No labels    Labels
C-BeT with those labels. As we see on Table 3, on the three
simulated environments, C-BeT conditioned on only future             CARLA             0.98         1.0
observations performs comparably to conditioning with human          BlockPush         0.90        0.89
labels.                                                              Kitchen           2.80        2.75


5     C-B E T ON R EAL -W ORLD ROBOTIC M ANIPULATION
We now discuss our robot experiments, which are geared towards understanding the usefulness of
C-BeT on real-world play data.

5.1   ROBOTIC E NVIRONMENT AND DATASET

Robot setup: Our environment consists of a Franka Emika Panda robot, similar to the simulated
Franka Kitchen environment, set up with a children’s toy kitchen set (see Figure 1). The toy kitchen
has an oven, a microwave, a pot, and two stove knobs that are relevant to our play dataset. The action
space in this environment contains the seven joint angle deltas normalized within the [−1, 1] range,
and a binary gripper control.
Play dataset: We collected 460 sequences totaling to 265 minutes (about 4.5 hours) of play data on
the toy kitchen with volunteers using a Vive VR controller to move the Franka. While collecting the
play data, we did not give the volunteers any explicit instructions about doing any particular tasks, or
number of tasks, beyond specifying the interactable items, and stipulating that the pot only goes on
the left stove or in the sink, to prevent dropping the pot and reaching an unresettable state. As the
observations, we save the RGB observations from two cameras on the left and right of the setup, as
well as the robot’s proprioceptive joint angles. Overall, the dataset contains 45 287 frames of play
interactions and their associated actions.
Representation learning To simplify the task of learning policies on image space, we decouple the
task of image representation learning from policy learning following Pari et al. (2021). For each
camera, we first fine-tune a pretrained ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) encoder on the acquired frames
with BYOL self-supervision (Grill et al., 2020). Then, during policy learning and evaluation, instead
of the image from the cameras, we pass the two 512-dimensional BYOL embeddings as part of
the observation. For the proprioceptive part of the observation, we repeat the (sin, cos) of seven
joint states 74 times to get a 1036-dimensional proprioceptive representation, making our overall
observation representation 2060-dimensional.

5.2   C ONDITIONAL B EHAVIOR G ENERATION ON R EAL ROBOT

Behavior generation on single tasks: Our first experiment in the real robot is about extracting
single-task policies from the play dataset. We define our tasks as manipulating the four types of
interactable objects one at a time: opening the oven door, opening the microwave door, moving the pot
from the stove to the sink, and rotating a knob 90 degrees to the right. We use appropriate conditioning
frames from our observation dataset, and start the robot from the neutral state to complete the four
tasks. The result of this experiment is presented in Table 4. We see that on single task conditionals,


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

Table 4: Single-task success rate in a real world kitchen with conditional models. We present the success rate
and number of trials on each task, with cumulative results presented on the last column.

                                      Knobs      Oven       Microwave      Pot     Cumulative
             GoFAR                     0/10      0/5           0/5        0/5          0/25
             Unconditional BeT         5/20      6/10         1/10        0/10        12/50
             Unimodal C-BeT            1/20      8/10         4/10        0/10        13/50
             Multimodal C-BeT          3/20      9/10         7/10        5/10        24/50

Table 5: Task success rate in a real world kitchen with conditional models evaluated on a long-horizon goal. We
present the success rate and number of trials on each task, with cumulative result presented on the last column.

                         Oven → Pot       Microwave → Oven           Pot → Microwave        Avg. Tasks/Run
Unconditional BeT         (6, 0)/10             (1, 6)/10                (0, 1)/10                 0.47
Unimodal C-BeT            (1, 1)/10             (2, 0)/10                (8, 0)/10                 0.37
Multimodal C-BeT          (5, 4)/10             (8, 8)/10                (4, 4)/10                  1.1

C-BeT is able to complete all tasks except the knobs consistently, outperforming all our baselines,
showing that C-BeT is able to extract single-task policies out of uncurated, real-world play data. We
discuss failures of C-BeT on the knob tasks in Section 5.3. While our GoFAR baseline was able to
move towards the task targets, it was unable to successfully grasp or interact with any of the target
objects. We believe it may be the case because unlike the robot experiment in Ma et al. (2022), we do
not have the underlying environment state, the tasks are much more complicated, and our dataset is
an order of magnitude smaller (400 K vs 45 K).
Behavior generation for longer horizons: Next, we ask how well our models work for longer-
horizon conditioning with multiple tasks. We choose play sequences from the dataset with multiple
tasks completed and use their associated states as the conditions for our models. In our roll-outs, we
calculate how many tasks completed in the original sequence were also completed in the conditional
roll-outs. We calculate this metric over 3 conditioning sequences, and report the results in Table 5.
We see that even without any high level controller, C-BeT is able to stitch together multiple tasks
from play demonstrations to complete long-horizon goals.
Generalization to prompt and environment perturbations: A major requirement from any robot
system deployed in the real world is to generalize to novel scenarios. We evaluate the generalizability
of our learned policies in two different ways. In the first set of experiments, we collect fresh
demonstrations that were not in the training set, and we condition our policies on such trajectories.
We find that across the different tasks, even with unseen conditionings, C-BeT retains 67% of the
single-task performance, with 16/50 task successes in total. In the second set of experiments, we add
environmental distractors in the setup (Figure 1, bottom three rows) and run the single- and multi-task
conditions on the modified environments. We see once again that the performance drops to around
67% of original with two distractors on the scene, but if we keep adding (four or more) distractors,
the robot is unable to complete any tasks.

5.3   A NALYSIS OF FAILURE M ODES

We see a few failure modes in our experiments that may provide additional insights into learning
from real-world play data. We discuss the most salient ones in this section.
Failure in knob operation in the real world: We see that in all of our real world experiments,
the accuracy in operating the knob is consistently lower than all other tasks. This is due to the
failure of the learned representations. Upon inspection of the dataset images’ nearest neighbors in
the representation space, we see that the BYOL-trained representation cannot identify the knob state
better than random chance: the returned nearest neighbor differs in knob status often. Since the
representation cannot identify the knob status properly, conditioning on it naturally fails.
Importance of a multi-modal policy architecture: One of our motivations behind incorporating
the BeT architecture in our work is its ability to learn multi-modal action distributions. In our
experiments, we show that for some single-task conditions such as opening the oven door, having
no multi-modality is sufficient (Table 4), but for more complicated tasks and learning from a more
interconnected form of play data, it is always the case that a multi-modal architecture prevents our
policies from collapsing to sub-optimal solutions (Table 5).


                                                        8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6    R ELATED W ORK

Outcome-conditioned behavior learning: Behavior learning conditioned on particular outcomes,
such as reward or goals, is a long studied problem (Kaelbling, 1993; Schaul et al., 2015; Veeriah et al.,
2018; Zhao et al., 2019). Compared to standard behavior learning, learning conditioned behavior
can generally be more demanding since the same model can be expected to learn a multitude of
behaviors depending on the outcome, which can make learning long-term behavior harder (Levy
et al., 2017; Nachum et al., 2018). As a result, a common line of work in outcome-conditioned
learning is to use some form of relabeling of demonstrations or experience buffer as a form of data
augmentation (Kaelbling, 1993; Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Ghosh et al., 2019; Goyal et al., 2022)
similar to what we do in the paper. As opposed to goal or state conditioned learning, which we focus
on in this paper, recently reward conditioned learning using a transformer (Chen et al., 2021) was
introduced. However, later work found that it may not work as expected in all environments (Paster
et al., 2022; Brandfonbrener et al., 2022) and large transformer models may not be necessary (Emmons
et al., 2021) for reward conditioned learning. In this work, we find that using transformers is crucial,
particularly when dealing with high dimensional visual observation and multi-modal actions.
Learning from play data: Our work is most closely related to previous works such as Lynch et al.
(2019); Gupta et al. (2019), which also focus on learning from play demonstrations that may not
be strictly optimal and uniformly curated for a single task. Learning policies capable of multiple
tasks from play data allows knowledge sharing, which is why it may be more efficient compared to
learning from demonstrations directly (Zhang et al., 2018; Rahmatizadeh et al., 2018; Duan et al.,
2017; Pari et al., 2021; Young et al., 2021). Gupta et al. (2022) attempts reset-free learning with play
data, but requires human annotation and instrumentation in the environment for goal labels.
Generative modeling of behavior: Our method of learning a generative model for behavior learning
follows a long line of work, including Inverse Reinforcement Learning or IRL (Russell, 1998; Ng
et al., 2000; Ho & Ermon, 2016), where given expert demonstrations, a model tries to construct
the reward function, which is then used to generate desirable behavior. Another class of algorithms
learn a generative action decoder (Pertsch et al., 2020a; Singh et al., 2020) from interaction data to
make downstream reinforcement learning faster and easier, nominally making multi-modal action
distribution easier. Finally, a class of algorithms, most notably Liu et al. (2020); Florence et al.
(2021); Kostrikov et al. (2021); Nachum & Yang (2021) do not directly learn a generative model, but
instead learn energy based models that need to be sampled to generate behavior, although they do not
primarily focus on goal-conditioning.
Transformers for behavior learning: Our work follows earlier notable works in using transformers
to learn a behavior model from an offline dataset, such as Chen et al. (2021); Janner et al. (2021);
Shafiullah et al. (2022). Our work is most closely related to Shafiullah et al. (2022) as we build on
their transformer architecture, while our unimodal baseline is a variant of Chen et al. (2021) that
learns outcome conditioned instead of reward conditioned policy. Beyond these, Dasari & Gupta
(2020); Mandi et al. (2021) summarizes historical visual context using transformers, and Clever et al.
(2021) relies on the long-term extrapolation abilities of transformers as sequence models. The goal of
C-BeT is orthogonal to these use cases, but can be combined with them for future applications.



7    D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS

In this work, we have presented C-BeT, a new approach for conditional behavior generation that
can learn from offline play data. Across a variety of benchmarks, both simulated and real, we find
that C-BeT significantly improves upon prior state-of-the-art work. However, we have noticed two
limitations in C-BeT, particularly for real-robot behavior learning. First, if the features provided to
C-BeT do not appropriately capture relevant objects in the scene, the robot execution often fails to
interact with that object in its environment. Second, some tasks, like opening the oven door, have
simpler underlying data that is not multimodal, which renders only meager gains with C-BeT. A
more detailed analysis of these limitations are presented in Section 5.3. We believe that future work
in visual representation learning can address poor environment features, while the collection of even
larger play datasets will provide more realistic offline data for large-scale behavior learning models.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We thank Sridhar Arunachalam, David Brandfonbrener, Irmak Guzey, Yixin Lin, Jyo Pari, Abitha
Thankaraj, and Austin Wang for their valuable feedback and discussions. This work was supported
by awards from Honda, Meta, Hyundai, Amazon, and ONR awards N00014-21-1-2758 and N00014-
22-1-2773.

R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. 3, 9

Brenna D Argall, Sonia Chernova, Manuela Veloso, and Brett Browning. A survey of robot learning
  from demonstration. Robotics and autonomous systems, 57(5):469–483, 2009. 3

David Brandfonbrener, Alberto Bietti, Jacob Buckman, Romain Laroche, and Joan Bruna. When does
  return-conditioned supervised learning work for offline reinforcement learning? arXiv preprint
  arXiv: Arxiv-2206.01079, 2022. 9

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020. 1, 2

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021. 1, 7, 9

Henry M Clever, Ankur Handa, Hammad Mazhar, Kevin Parker, Omer Shapira, Qian Wan, Yashraj
  Narang, Iretiayo Akinola, Maya Cakmak, and Dieter Fox. Assistive tele-op: Leveraging transform-
  ers to collect robotic task demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05129, 2021. 9

Sudeep Dasari and Abhinav Gupta. Transformers for one-shot visual imitation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.05970, 2020. 9

Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An
  open urban driving simulator. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 1–16. PMLR, 2017. 3, 6

Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly Stadie, OpenAI Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya
  Sutskever, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. One-shot imitation learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 30, 2017. 9

Scott Emmons, Benjamin Eysenbach, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Rvs: What is essential for
  offline rl via supervised learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10751, 2021. 3, 5, 7, 9

Benjamin Eysenbach, Tianjun Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Contrastive learning
  as goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2206.07568, 2022. 3

Pete Florence, Corey Lynch, Andy Zeng, Oscar Ramirez, Ayzaan Wahid, Laura Downs, Adrian
  Wong, Johnny Lee, Igor Mordatch, and Jonathan Tompson. Implicit behavioral cloning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2109.00137, 2021. 3, 5, 6, 9

Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4rl: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.07219, 2020. 3

Dibya Ghosh, Abhishek Gupta, Ashwin Reddy, Justin Fu, Coline Devin, Benjamin Eysenbach,
  and Sergey Levine. Learning to reach goals via iterated supervised learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1912.06088, 2019. 1, 5, 9

Ross Girshick. Fast r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
  pp. 1440–1448, 2015. 4, 13


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Anirudh Goyal, Abram Friesen, Andrea Banino, Theophane Weber, Nan Rosemary Ke, Adria Puig-
  domenech Badia, Arthur Guez, Mehdi Mirza, Peter C Humphreys, Ksenia Konyushova, et al.
  Retrieval-augmented reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 7740–7765. PMLR, 2022. 9
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:21271–21284, 2020. 7
Abhishek Gupta, Vikash Kumar, Corey Lynch, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Relay policy
  learning: Solving long-horizon tasks via imitation and reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.11956, 2019. 1, 3, 5, 6, 9
Abhishek Gupta, Corey Lynch, Brandon Kinman, Garrett Peake, Sergey Levine, and Karol Haus-
  man. Bootstrapped autonomous practicing via multi-task reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.15755, 2022. 9
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016. 7
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In Advances in neural
  information processing systems, volume 29, pp. 4565–4573, 2016. 9
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. 9
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In IN PROC. OF IJCAI-93, pp. 1094–1098.
  Morgan Kaufmann, 1993. 9
Ilya Kostrikov, Jonathan Tompson, Rob Fergus, and Ofir Nachum. Offline reinforcement learning
   with fisher divergence critic regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.08050, 2021. 9
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020. 1
Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level hierarchies
 with hindsight. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00948, 2017. 9
Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense object
  detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 2980–2988,
  2017. 4, 13
Minghuan Liu, Tairan He, Minkai Xu, and Weinan Zhang. Energy-based imitation learning. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2004.09395, 33, 2020. 9
Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, S. Levine, and Pierre
  Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. Corl, 2019. 1, 2, 3, 5, 9
Yecheng Jason Ma, Jason Yan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Osbert Bastani. How far i’ll go: Offline goal-
  conditioned reinforcement learning via f -advantage regression. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03023,
  2022. 1, 6, 8
Zhao Mandi, Fangchen Liu, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Towards more generalizable one-shot
  visual imitation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13423, 2021. 9
Ajay Mandlekar, Danfei Xu, Roberto Martín-Martín, Silvio Savarese, and Li Fei-Fei. Learning
  to Generalize Across Long-Horizon Tasks from Human Demonstrations. arXiv e-prints, art.
  arXiv:2003.06085, March 2020. 5
Ofir Nachum and Mengjiao Yang. Provable representation learning for imitation with contrastive
  fourier features. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.12272, 2021. 9


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018. 9
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart J Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In Icml,
 volume 1, pp. 663–670, 2000. 9
Jyothish Pari, Nur Muhammad, Sridhar Pandian Arunachalam, and Lerrel Pinto. The surprising
  effectiveness of representation learning for visual imitation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.01511,
  2021. 7, 9
Keiran Paster, Sheila McIlraith, and Jimmy Ba. You can’t count on luck: Why decision transformers
  fail in stochastic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2205.15967, 2022. 9
Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph J Lim. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned
  skill priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11944, 2020a. 9
Karl Pertsch, Youngwoon Lee, and Joseph J Lim. Accelerating reinforcement learning with learned
  skill priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11944, 2020b. 1
Rouhollah Rahmatizadeh, Pooya Abolghasemi, Ladislau Bölöni, and Sergey Levine. Vision-based
  multi-task manipulation for inexpensive robots using end-to-end learning from demonstration. In
  2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 3758–3765. IEEE,
  2018. 9
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022. 1
Stuart Russell. Learning agents for uncertain environments. In Proceedings of the eleventh annual
  conference on Computational learning theory, pp. 101–103, 1998. 9
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators.
  In Francis Bach and David Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 37 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1312–1320,
  Lille, France, 07–09 Jul 2015. PMLR. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/
  schaul15.html. 9
Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Zichen Jeff Cui, Ariuntuya Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
  transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.11251, 2022. 2, 3, 4, 6,
  9, 13, 14
Avi Singh, Huihan Liu, Gaoyue Zhou, Albert Yu, Nicholas Rhinehart, and Sergey Levine. Parrot:
  Data-driven behavioral priors for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.10024, 2020.
  1, 9
Vivek Veeriah, Junhyuk Oh, and Satinder Singh. Many-goals reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1806.09605, 2018. 9
Rui Yang, Yiming Lu, Wenzhe Li, Hao Sun, Meng Fang, Yali Du, Xiu Li, Lei Han, and Chongjie
  Zhang. Rethinking goal-conditioned supervised learning and its connection to offline rl. Iclr, 2022.
  5
Sarah Young, Jyothish Pari, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Playful interactions for representation
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2107.09046, 2021. 9
Tianhao Zhang, Zoe McCarthy, Owen Jow, Dennis Lee, Xi Chen, Ken Goldberg, and Pieter Abbeel.
  Deep imitation learning for complex manipulation tasks from virtual reality teleoperation. In 2018
  IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5628–5635. IEEE, 2018.
  9
Rui Zhao, Xudong Sun, and Volker Tresp. Maximum entropy-regularized multi-goal reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7553–7562. PMLR, 2019. 9


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A     S IMULATED E NVIRONMENT V ISUALIZATIONS


                  CARLA self driving                           BlockPush                 Franka Kitchen


Figure 4: Visualizations of simulated environments that we evaluate our methods on, from left to right: CARLA
self-driving (top down view and agent POV), BlockPush, and Franka Kitchen.



B     B EHAVIOR T RANSFORMERS
We use Behavior Transformers from Shafiullah et al. (2022) as our backbone architecture, building
our conditional algorithm on top of it. In this section, we describe the BeT architecture and the
training objective to help the readers understand the details of our algorithm.

B.1    B E T ARCHITECTURE

BeT uses a repurposed MinGPT architecture to model multi-modal behavior. It uses the MinGPT
trunk as a sequence-to-sequence model that tries to predict a sequence of actions at:t+h given a
sequence of states or observations ot:t+h . Beyond just prediction the actions, however, BeT tries to
model the multi-modal action distribtuion given the observations. To create a multi-modal model over
the continuous action distribution, BeT uses an action encoder-decoder architecture that can encode
each action vector into a discrete latent and a smaller-norm continuous offset. BeT does so by using
an offline action dataset to create a k-means model of the actions. Then, an action is encoded into its
associated bin out of the k-bins (binning), and a small continuous offset from the associated bin.
The BeT model, given a sequence of observations ot:t+h , predicts a k-dimensional multinomial
distribution over the k-bins, as well as a k × |A| dimensional matrix for offsets associated with each
action bins. Sampling from the BeT action distribution is done via sampling a discrete bin first, taking
its associated action offset, and then adding the bin center with the action offset.

B.2    B E T TRAINING OBJECTIVE

Given an observation o and its associated ground truth action a, we will now present the simplified
version of how the BeT loss is calculated.
Let us assume the BeT model prediction is π(o)d ∈ Rk , π(o)c ∈ Rk×|A| for the discrete and the
continuous parts of the predictions. Let us also assume that ⌊a⌋ is the discrete bin out of the k bins
that a belongs to, and ⟨a⟩ = a − BinCenter(⌊a⌋). Then, the BeT loss becomes
                           LBeT = Lf ocal (π(o)d , ⌊a⌋) + λ · LM T (⟨a⟩, π(o)c )
Where Lf ocal is the Focal loss (Lin et al., 2017), a special case of the negative log likelihood loss
defined as
                                 Lf ocal (pt ) = −(1 − pt )γ log(pt )
and LM T is the multi-task loss (Girshick, 2015) defined as
                                         k   X     k
                                    (j)
                 MT-Loss a, ⟨âi ⟩             =      I[⌊a⌋ = j] · ∥⟨a⟩ − ⟨â(j) ⟩∥22
                                            j=1
                                                      j=1


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
C.1   I MPLEMENTATION USED

In our work, we base our C-BeT implementation off of the official repo published at https:
//github.com/notmahi/bet. For the GCBC, WGCSL, and GoFAR baselines, we use the
official repo released by the GoFAR authors https://github.com/JasonMa2016/GoFAR/.

C.2   H YPERPARAMETERS LIST:

We present the C-BeT hyperparameters in Table 6 below, which were mostly using the default
hyperparameters in the original Shafiullah et al. (2022) paper:

                      Table 6: Environment-dependent hyperparameters in BeT.

                 Hyperparameter                CARLA       Block-push        Kitchen
                 Layers                           3             4               6
                 Attention heads                  4             4               6
                 Embedding width                256            72             120
                 Dropout probability             0.6           0.1             0.1
                 Context size                    10             5              10
                 Training epochs                 40           350              50
                 Batch size                     128            64              64
                 Number of bins k                32            24              64
                 Future conditional frames       10             3              10

The shared hyperparameters are in Table 7.

                          Table 7: Shared hyperparameters for BeT training

                                Name                      Value
                                Optimizer                 Adam
                                Learning rate              1e-4
                                Weight decay                0.1
                                Betas                   (0.9, 0.95)
                                Gradient clip norm          1.0


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    ROBOT E NVIRONMENT D EMONSTRATION T RAJECTORIES


              Figure 5: Sample demonstration trajectories for the real kitchen environment.


                                                   15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E       S IMULATED E NVIRONMENT ROLLOUT T RAJECTORIES
C-BeT
GCBC
GoFAR
WGCSL


Figure 6: Sample demonstration trajectories for the CARLA self driving environment, conditioning on going to
the right path.
C-BeT
GCBC
GoFAR
WGCSL


Figure 7: Sample demonstration trajectories for the multi-modal block pushing environment, conditioning on
pushing the green block to green square and red block to red square.
C-BeT
GCBC
GoFAR
WGCSL


Figure 8: Sample demonstration trajectories for the Franka Kitchen environment, conditioning on completing
the microwave, bottom knob, slide cabinet, hinge cabinet tasks.



                                                    16
