Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C HEAP TALK D ISCOVERY AND U TILIZATION
IN M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Yat Long Lo                                                          Christian Schroeder de Witt
 University of Oxford                                                 FLAIR, University of Oxford
 Dyson Robot Learning Lab                                             cs@robots.ox.ac.uk
 richie.lo@dyson.com

 Samuel Sokota                                             Jakob Foerster
 Carnegie Mellon University                                FLAIR, University of Oxford
 ssokota@andrew.cmu.edu                                    jakob.foerster@eng.ox.ac.uk

 Shimon Whiteson
 University of Oxford
 shimon.whiteson@cs.ox.ac.uk



                                            A BSTRACT

         By enabling agents to communicate, recent cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
         learning (MARL) methods have demonstrated better task performance and more
         coordinated behavior. Most existing approaches facilitate inter-agent communica-
         tion by allowing agents to send messages to each other through free communication
         channels, i.e., cheap talk channels. Current methods require these channels to be
         constantly accessible and known to the agents a priori. In this work, we lift these
         requirements such that the agents must discover the cheap talk channels and learn
         how to use them. Hence, the problem has two main parts: cheap talk discovery
         (CTD) and cheap talk utilization (CTU). We introduce a novel conceptual frame-
         work for both parts and develop a new algorithm based on mutual information
         maximization that outperforms existing algorithms in CTD/CTU settings. We also
         release a novel benchmark suite to stimulate future research in CTD/CTU.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Effective communication is essential for many multi-agent systems in the partially observable setting,
which is common in many real-world applications like elevator control (Crites & Barto, 1998) and
sensor networks (Fox et al., 2000). Communicating the right information at the right time becomes
crucial to completing tasks effectively. In the multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) setting,
communication often occurs on free channels known as cheap talk channels. The agents’ goal is to
learn an effective communication protocol via the channel. The transmitted messages can be either
discrete or continuous (Foerster et al., 2016).
Existing work often assumes the agents have prior knowledge (e.g., channel capacities and noise
level) about these channels. However, such assumptions do not always hold. Even if these channels’
existence can be assumed, they might not be persistent, i.e., available at every state. Consider the
real-world application of inter-satellite laser communication. In the case, communication channel is
only functional when satellites are within line of sight. This means positioning becomes essential
(Lakshmi et al., 2008). Thus, Without these assumptions, agents need the capability to discover where
to best communicate before learning a protocol in realistic MARL settings.
In this work, we investigate the setting where these assumptions on cheap talk channels are lifted.
Precisely, these channels are only effective in a subset of the state space. Hence, agents must discover
where these channels are before they can learn how to use them. We divide this problem into two
sequential steps: cheap talk discovery (CTD) and cheap talk utilization (CTU). The problem is a
strict generalization of the common setting used in the emergent communication literature with


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


less assumptions, which is more akin to real-world scenarios (see appendix A for more in-depth
discussions on the setting’s significance and use cases).


Figure 1: The two learning stages for CTD/CTU based on PBMaze. Stage (a): Discover the functional
phone booths; Stage (b): Form a protocol to use the phone booth and learn to interpret the messages
(left), and solve the task (right). The blue and red agents are the sender and the receiver respectively

This setting is particularly difficult as it suffers from the temporal credit assignment problem (Sutton,
1984) for communicative actions. Consider an example we call the phone booth maze (PBMaze), the
environment has a sender and a receiver, placed into two separate rooms. The receiver’s goal is to
escape from the correct exit out of two possible exits. Only the sender knows which one is the correct
exit. The sender’s goal is to communicate this information using functional phone booths.
This leads to two learning stages. Firstly, they need to learn to reach the booths. Then, the sender
has to learn to form a protocol, distinguishing different exit information while the receiver has
to learn to interpret the sender’s protocol by trying different exits. This makes credit assignment
particularly difficult as communicative actions do not lead to immediate rewards. Additionally,
having communicative actions that are only effective in a small subset of the state space further
makes it a challenging joint exploration problem, especially when communication is necessary for
task completion. Figure 1 provides a visual depiction of the two learning stages in this environment.
As a whole, our contributions are four-fold. Firstly, we provide a formulation of the CTD and CTU
problem. Secondly, we introduce a configurable environment to benchmark MARL algorithms
on the problem. Thirdly, we propose a method to solve the CTD and CTU problems based on
information theory and advances in MARL, including off-belief learning (Hu et al., 2021, OBL) and
differentiable inter-agent learning (Foerster et al., 2016, DIAL). Finally, we show that our proposed
approach empirically compares favourably to other MARL baselines, validate the importance of
specific components via ablation studies and illustrate how our method can act as a measure of
channel capacity to learn where best to communicate.

2    R ELATED W ORK
The use of mutual information (MI) has been explored in the MARL setting. Wang et al. (2019) pro-
pose a shaping reward based on MI between agents’ transitions to improve exploration, encouraging
visiting critical points where one can influence other agents. Our proposed method also has an MI
term for reward shaping. Their measure might behave similarly to ours but is harder to compute
and requires full environmental states during training. Sokota et al. (2022) propose a method to
discover implicit communication protocols using environment actions via minimum entropy cou-
pling, separating communicative and non-communicative decision-making. We propose a similar
problem decomposition by separating state and action spaces into two subsets based on whether
communication can occur or not. Unlike in Sokota et al. (2022), we focus on explicit communication


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where specialized channels for communication exist. Jaques et al. (2019) propose rewarding agents
for having causal influences over other agents’ policies using MI between agents’ actions. Jaques
et al. (2019) is the closest to our work but still assumes the omnipresence and prior knowledge of
communication channels.
Many recent papers investigate various aspects of communication in MARL. Foerster et al. (2016)
propose DIAL to learn how to communicate by allowing gradients to flow across agents. We use
DIAL as a component of our proposed framework. Sukhbaatar et al. (2016) propose CommNet to
learn how to communicate. Unlike DIAL, it uses mean-pooling to process messages and handle a
dynamic number of agents. Das et al. (2019) proposes a targeted communication architecture to
tackle the issue of what messages to send and who to send them to. Singh et al. (2018) propose a
gating mechanism to learn when to communicate, achieving better training efficiency scalability by
reducing redundant communication. Jiang & Lu (2018) proposes an attention mechanism to learn
when and who to communicate by dynamically forming communication groups. In our work, we
focus on the problem of discovering where to communicate, rather than how to communicate, who to
communicate, and when to communicate. Hence, our contributions are orthogonal to existing works.

3     BACKGROUND
Throughout this work, we consider decentralized partially observable Markov decision pro-
cesses (Dec-POMDPs) with N agents (Oliehoek & Amato, 2016) in the form of a tuple G =
⟨S, A, P, R, Z, Ω, n, γ⟩. s ∈ S is the true state of the environment. At each time step, each agent
i ∈ N chooses an action a ∈ Ai to form a joint action a ∈ A ≡ A1 ×A2 ...×AN . This leads to a tran-
sition on the environment according to the transition function P (s′ |s, a1 , ...aN ) : S × A × S → [0, 1].
All agents share the same reward function R(s, a) : S × A → R. γ ∈ [0, 1) is a discount factor. Each
agent i receives individual observations z ∈ Z based on the observation function Ωi (s) : S → Z.
The environment trajectory and the action-observation history                  (AOH) of an agent i are denoted
as τt = (s0 , a0 , ....st , at ) and τti = Ωi (s0 ), ai0 , ..., Ωi (st ), ait ∈ T ≡ (Z × A)∗ respectively. A
stochastic policy π(ai |τ i ) : T ×A → [0, 1] conditions on AOH. The joint policy π P       has a corresponding
                                                                                              ∞
action-value function Qπ (st , at ) = Est+1:∞ ,at+1:∞ [Rt |st , at ], where Rt =                    i
                                                                                              i=0 γ rt+i is the
discounted return. rt+i is the reward obtained at time t + i from the reward function R. The
distribution of states is commonly referred to as a belief Bπ (τ |τ i ) = P (τ |τ i , π).

3.1   O FF -B ELIEF L EARNING

OBL (Hu et al., 2021) is a recent method to learn policies that do not interpret the actions of other
agents and assumes other agents would do the same. Precisely, it induces agents to not reason about
each other’s private information and actions by conditioning their beliefs only on information revealed
by the environment and interpreting their actions as if they were performed by a random agent. This
is often desirable as making incorrect assumptions can cause coordination failure. Therefore, learning
a base policy that maximizes reward without any conventions is important, especially when agents
work with others who they have not met before, a problem known as zero-shot coordination (ZSC).
The OBL operator assumes all agents to be playing a common policy π0 up to τ i and π1 thereafter.
Then, an agent’s belief B, conditioned on their AOH can be computed as:
                                     Bπ0 (τ |τ i ) = P (τ |τ i , π0 )                        (1)
We denote the state-action value for playing π0 up to τ i and playing π1 thereafter to be Qπ0 →π1 (a|τ i ),
which is the expected return of sampling τ from Bπ0 (τ i ) with all players playing π1 starting from
the end of this trajectory. The counterfactual
                                  X             state-action value function is defined as follows:
              Qπ0 →π1 (a|τ i ) =        Bπ0 (τt |τti )[R(st , a) + T(τt+1 |τt )V π1 (τt+1 )].         (2)
                                       τt ,τt+1

To compute an OBL policy using value iteration methods, the Bellman equation for Qπ0 →π1 (τ i ) for
each agent i is expressed as follows:
       Qπ0 →π1 (at |τti ) =
                               ht+k−1
                                  X                   X                                      i  (3)
                   E                  R(st′ , at′ ) +              i
                                                        π1 (at+k |τt+k )Qπ0 →π1 (at+k |τt+k
                                                                                        i
                                                                                            )
        τt ∼Bπ0 (τti ),τt+k ∼(T,π1 )
                                        t′ =t             at+k


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Under this setting, the states reached by π1 may be reached at very low probabilities under π0 . The
variant learned-belief OBL (Hu et al., 2021, LB-OBL) addresses this by using an approximate belief
B̂π0 that takes τi as input and samples a trajectory from an approximation of P (τ |τ i , π0 ). Q-learning
is then performed with an altered target value. Particularly, a new τ ′ is resampled from B̂π0 (τti ).
                         i′
Next, a transition to τt+1    is simulated with other agents playing policy π1 . The bootstrapped value
                       i
is then maxa Q(a|τt+2      ). Hence, LB-OBL only involves fictitious transitions. The action ait ∼ π1
is applied to both the actual environment and a sampled fictitious state. The learning target then
becomes the sum of fictitious rewards rt′ , rt+1
                                              ′
                                                  and the fictitious bootstrapped value maxa Q(a|τt+2 i
                                                                                                         ).
We use exact belief models in this work to remove the influence of belief learning.

3.2   D IFFERENTIABLE I NTER -AGENT L EARNING

Foerster et al. (2016) propose DIAL to learn how to communicate. It allows agents to give each other
feedback about their communicative actions, by opening up communication channels for gradients to
flow through from one agent to another. Such richer feedback improves sample complexity with more
efficient discovery of protocols. During training, there are direct connections between one agent’s
network output and another agent’s input through communicative actions. Agents can then send
real-valued messages and are only restricted to discrete messages during execution. These real-valued
messages are generated from the networks, allowing end-to-end backpropagation across agents.
The proposed network is called C-net, an extension of deep Q-networks (Silver et al., 2016, DQN). It
has two set of outputs, namely the Q-values Q(·) of the environment actions Aenv and the real-valued
messages mat . The former performs actions selection while the latter is sent to another agent after the
discretize/regularize unit DRU (mat ) processes it. The DRU regularizes messages during learning,
DRU (mat ) = Logistic(N (mat , σ)), and discretizes them during execution, DRU (mat ) = 1{mat >
0}. σ is the standard deviation of the noise added to the cheap talk channel. The gradient term for m
is backpropagated to the sender based on the message recipient’s error. Hence, the sender can adjust
m to minimize the downstream loss. Note that we use the OBL loss here instead of DQN loss.


4     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We consider each agent’s action space A to be decomposable into two subspaces, namely, the
environment action space Aenv and communication action space Acomm . The former are actions
that only affect the environment state. The latter are actions that have no immediate effect on the
environment state or the reward received, but can alter other agents’ observations. Exemplifying with
PBMaze, Aenv for the sender are actions that move its locations like Up and Down, while Acomm
are actions that send messages to the receiver like Hint Up and Hint Down.
In this setting, agents do not inherently know where to best communicate and only a subset of states
allows communication. We refer to this subset as the communicative state space Scomm ∈ S:
Definition 4.1. The communicative state space Scomm of an environment is a subspace of its state
space S. Assume the environment is in a state sc ∈ Scomm , at least one agent in sc can modify
another agent’s observation by taking an action a ∈ Acomm .

Similarly, the communicative joint observation space Ocomm is defined as follows:
Definition 4.2. The communicative joint observation space Ocomm of an environment is a subspace
of its joint observation space O, defined as Ocomm = {Ω(sc )|sc ∈ Scomm }. Assume the environment
is in a state sc ∈ Scomm with a joint observation oc ∈ Ocomm , at least one agent, agent i ∈ N , can
modify another agent j ∈ N, j ̸= i’s observation, ot+1
                                                    j  by taking an action a ∈ Acomm .

With these definitions, the cheap talk discovery and utilization problem can be formalized as follows:
Definition 4.3. For a given s ∈ S, let M I(s) = i∼N j∼N,j̸=i I(Ai , Oj ) be a function that com-
                                                  P       P
putes the pairwise mutual information (PMI) of an agent’s P   actions and another agent’s       observations.
                                                                ∞     i

The inner term is defined in equation 5. Let ν(π) = Eπ          i=t γ   M I(st ) | τ t   , be the discounted
sum of PMI of a policy π ∈ Π, where Π is the set of all possible policies. Cheap talk discovery is the


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


problem of learning a policy πdiscover in which agents take actions in Aenv that maximizes ν(π). An
         ∗
optimal πdiscover satisfies the condition:
                            ∗
                         ν(πdiscover ) ≥ ν(π)                                 ∀π ∈ Π
Definition 4.4. Given a state st is in Scomm with a corresponding AOH τt at time t, cheap talk utiliza-
tion is the problem of learning a policy πutil in which agents take communicative Pactions in Acomm
                                                                                      ∞
to share information to improve task performance. For a policy π ∈ Π, Rtπ = Eπ             i
                                                                                      i=t γ rt+i | τt
                                                      ∗
is its expected return starting from st . An optimal πutil can then be defined as:
                  π∗
                Rt util ≥ Rtπ                       ∀π̸=πutil
                                                         ∗    π ∈ Π and ∀τt s.t. st ∈ Scomm

We reiterate that this is a challenging joint exploration problem, especially when communication is
necessary for task completion. Because agents need to stumble upon a state sc ∈ Scomm , which is
often a much smaller subspace than S, and there are no incentivizing signals to reach these states as
communicative actions Acomm do not lead to immediate rewards.
Thus, we hypothesize that this problem decomposition, i.e., first learn to discover the Scomm before
learning how to use the communicative channels, could ease this joint exploration problem’s severity.

5     M ETHODOLOGY
5.1     C HEAP TALK D ISCOVERY

Our proposed method has two components, namely, mutual information (MI) maximization and OBL
(Hu et al., 2021). The former induces agents to discover cheap talk channels based on MI. The latter
is our base learning algorithm with sound theoretical properties that are beneficial to the following
CTU step.

5.1.1    M UTUAL I NFORMATION M AXIMIZATION
Agents do not have immediate incentives to discover cheap talk channels. To do so, an agent has to
know where to send messages to other agents successfully (i.e., channels that can influence another
agent’s observations). Hence, we propose novel reward and loss functions based on MI. The proposed
reward function encourages greater mutual information (MI) between the sender’s (denoted as agent
1) actions A1 and the receiver’s (denoted as agent 2) observations O2 . It is expressed as:
                               R′ (st , at ) = R(st , at ) + βI(A1 , O2 ).                      (4)

where β is a hyperparameter. The first term is the task reward. The second term is the MI reward:

                          I(A1 , O2 ) =                log(p(a1 |o2 ) − log(p(a1 ))

                                                E                                                     (5)
                                             a1 ∼A1
                                              2   2
                                             o ∼O

We assume access to the environment simulator to estimate p(a1 |o2 ). The proposed reward function
can then be substituted in the update equation 3. To estimate p(a1 |o2 ), the term can be expanded to:
              I(A1 , O2 ) = H(A1 ) + H(O2 ) − H(A1 , O2 )
                             X                           X
                                   −p(a1 ) log(p(a1 )) +    −p(o2 ) log(p(o2 ))

                          =
                              a1 ∼A1                               o2 ∼O 2                            (6)
                                X
                                           −p(a1 , o2 ) log(p(a1 , o2 )

                          −
                             (a1 ,o2 )
                            ∼(A1 ,O 2 )


where p(o2 ) = a1 ∼A1 [p(a1 , o2 )] and p(a1 , o2 ) = p(o2 |a1 )p(a1 ). Note that this generalizes to any
                P
pair of agents in an environment irrespective of the receiver. Hence, we can apply this method to all
possible receivers by summing all I(A1 , Oi ), i ∈ N, i ̸= 1 to discover the cheap talk channels.
The MI reward term alone does not maximize I(A1 , O2 ). Specifically, for a given policy, since
the term is computed based on taking all the actions from a state, the MI reward for staying within


                                                         5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Scomm and for taking an action in Acomm are equal. Hence, a policy learned only with MI reward is
incentivized to reach Scomm without necessarily using communicative actions. Ideally, I(A1 , O2 ) is
maximized when a policy favors the communicative actions equally when in Scomm .
To learn a policy that does maximize I(A1 , O2 ), we propose an MI loss function, using the parame-
terized policy πθ . The additional term directly maximizes I(A1 , O2 ), which is maximized when the
policy takes actions in Acomm more. For each iteration i, the loss function is expressed as:
                                Li (θi ) = LOBL
                                            i   (θi ) − κI(A1 , O2 ; πθ )i                              (7)
where LOBL
        i    (θi ) (see Appendix B), I(A1 , O2 ; πθ )i and κ are OBL loss, MI loss at iteration i, and a
hyperparameter respectively. We add a minus sign so that minimizing the loss maximizes the MI
term. The combination of the MI reward and loss should allow the discovery of cheap talk channels
with greater MI. We denote our discovery method as cheap talk discovery learning (CTDL)

5.1.2    D ISCOVERING CHANNELS WITHOUT CONVENTIONS FORMATION
During discovery learning, agents should simply learn where the channels are without forming any
protocols (i.e., conventions) on how to use them. This is because the protocols formed would affect
the rewards received. To do so, we employ OBL as our base algorithm.
Particularly, it has appealing theoretical properties which are beneficial for this setting, as it theoreti-
cally guarantees to converge to a policy without any conventions (Hu et al., 2021). This means OBL
with CTDL would learn a policy that discovers the channels while not having a preference over any
communicative actions, which would allow more flexible adaptation when properties of channels
alter. Hence, though not explored here, better performance in ZSC can be expected.
For our example environment, the agent should prefer the actions Hint Up and Hint Down equally
after cheap talk discovery. If the agents are in a slightly different environment with the phone booths
sending negated versions of the messages an agent sends, a policy without conventions should adapt
quicker given that it has no preference over communicative actions.

5.2     C HEAP TALK U TILIZATION

With channels discovered, agents are ready to learn how to use them through protocol formation
(i.e., form a consensus of how messages are interpreted). Many off-the-shelf algorithms can be
used for CTU. Here, we use DIAL (Foerster et al., 2016), which has been shown to learn protocols
efficiently. Note that OBL will be replaced by independent Q-learning (Tan, 1993, IQL) updates to
allow protocol formation in CTU.
Given that the original DIAL requires feedforwarding through an episode’s full trajectory to maintain
the gradient chain, modifications to DIAL are needed to work in this setting for two reasons:
First, the base learning algorithm is an experience-replay-based method that learns from transition
batches, not trajectories. Second, unlike in the original DIAL which messages are sent in every step t,
the messages can only be sent successfully when the environment state is in Scomm . Hence, direct
gradient connections only happen occasionally in an episode.
To make DIAL compatible with this setting, we use a separate replay buffer to keeps track of the
transitions and only consider a trajectory when messages are sent successfully. The buffer stores
full episodes with flags indicating which transitions to allow direct gradient connections. We denote
our discovery method with DIAL as cheap talk discovery and utilization learning (CTDUL). The
transition from CTD to CTU is a task-dependent hyperparameter and is determined empirically.
Appendix C and D shows how gradients flow in CTDUL and the corresponding pseudocode.


6     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
As part of our contribution, we designed a configurable environment with discrete state and action
space - the phone booth maze to evaluate agents in the CTD/CTU setting, as described in Section 1.
To enable extensive investigations, the environment allows phone booths of configurable properties
including usage cost and noise level, and decoy booths that are not functional. The agents’ observation


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


contains view information of the room an agent is in and role-specific information (e.g. the sender and
receiver have goal information and communication token respectively). Agents have the environment
actions of UP, DOWN, LEFT, RIGHT, and NO-OP. There are two communicative actions, HINT-UP
and HINT-DOWN which only has an effect when agents are in the functional phone booths, updating
the receiver’s communication token to a fixed value. Rewards of 1.0 and -0.5 are given for choosing
a correct exit and an incorrect exit respectively with no reward given otherwise. By changing the
phone booths’ properties, we can vary their capacities, measured by the MI reward.The left of Figure
2 shows the MI of each location in the sender’s room in two different environment configurations, in
which one has only one functional booth and the other has three booths with one noisy booth. These
are computed based on equation 5 on all possible combinations of the sender and receiver locations.
We use two configurations of the environment for our experiments, which we name Single Phone
Booth Maze (SPBMaze) and Multiple Phone Booth Maze (MPBMaze). Please see Appendix E for
environment visualizations and design features, and Appendix H for environment parameters used.
Architecturally, we use the R2D2 architecture (Kapturowski et al., 2018) with a separate commu-
nication head like in C-Net (Foerster et al., 2016). For baselines, state-of-the-art methods are used
including IQL, OBL (Hu et al., 2021), QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018), MAA2C (Papoudakis et al., 2021)
and IQL with social influence reward (Jaques et al., 2019, SI).
We trained all methods for 12000 episodes (80000 episodes for CTU) and evaluated on test episodes
every 20 episodes by taking the corresponding greedy policy. Each algorithm reports averaged results
from 4 random seeds with standard error. We performed a hyperparameter sweep over common
hyperparameters, fixing them across all methods, and specific sweeps for method-specific parameters.
Please see Appendix F and G for training and hyperparameter details.



7     R ESULTS

7.1   D ISCOVERING CHEAP TALK CHANNELS


Figure 2: Left: MI reward for each location in the sender’s room of SPBMaze and MPBaze to show
phone booths of different properties. Values are computed by iterating over all possible receiver’s
position for each sender’s position. Senders start at positions with green borders. The position with
purple border is the costly phone booth which incurs a cost to use. The top phone booth in MPBaze
has a noise factor of 0.5, i.e., lower MI. Right: CTD performance for CTDL and baselines. The
horizontal grey line indicates the optimal number of step to reach the booth. For the ease of plotting,
when an agent cannot discover the booth, we set the step as the episode length.

To quantify the performance in CTD, we use the number of steps it takes for the sender to first reach
the functional phone booth in SPBMaze. The fewer the number of steps used, the better an algorithm
is at CTD. See Table 4 for detailed configuration of SPBMaze.
Figure 2 (Right) shows the performances of our proposed method CTDL and the baselines. CTDL,
using MI reward and loss, discovers the functional phone booth quickly in optimal number of steps
(as shown by the horizontal grey line). Meanwhile, without the proper incentives, all the baseline
methods cannot discover the functional phone booth within the episode limit.
Even though SI uses a reward term based on MI like ours (i.e., the influence an agent’s message
has on another agent’s action (Jaques et al., 2019)), it becomes insufficient to discover cheap talk


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


channels in this setting as the messages sent only has an effect in a small subset of the state space.
Note that without discovering the channels, agents will not be able to learn how to communicate.
Hence, we expect the baseline methods cannot leverage communication channels to solve tasks.


7.2   L EARNING POLICIES WITH MAXIMIZED MUTUAL INFORMATION


Figure 3: Algorithms’ sender policy when both agents are at the functional phone booth in SPBMaze.
CTDL learns a policy with the most MI by preferring communicative actions equally.
To assess whether an algorithm can learn policies that maximize MI (i.e., I(A1 , O2 )) in this setting,
we look at the sender’s policy when both agents are at the functional phone booth. To reiterate, such
policy uniformly prefers Acomm over Aenv when using a communication channel without forming
any protocol. Figure 3 shows different algorithms’ sender policy when in the functional phone booth.
We include two variants that receive a scalar intermediate reward (IR) when both agents are at
functional phone booths. As discussed in section 5.1.1, these reward shaping methods do not
maximize MI, although cheap talk channels are discovered. Instead, they learn to prefer actions that
keep them in Scomm which includes certain environment actions.
Contrarily, our proposed MI loss used in CTDL leads to polices with the most MI by preferring
Acomm (i.e., Hint-Up and Hint-Down) uniformly over Aenv . This explains why CTDL has the best
CTD performance as it directly maximizes PMI in Definition 4.3. Note that this uniformity over
Acomm also means no conventions are formed during discovery learning as they are preferred equally
under different goals (i.e. different correct exits in SPBMaze), demonstrating the effect of OBL.

7.3   U TILIZING CHEAP TALK CHANNELS


Figure 4: Left: CTU performance for CTDUL and baselines on SPBMaze. The vertical grey line
indicates the start of CTU learning for CTDUL. Right: Ablation experiment on SPBMaze for CTDUL.
The curves are smoothed by a factor of 0.99 with standard errors plotted as shaded areas.
Figure 4 (left) shows the overall task performance of the proposed CTDUL and baselines in solving
the SPBMaze. Being unable to communicate the goal information successfully, the receiver can only
guess by escaping randomly (i.e., achieving an expected reward of 0.25 = 1.0 × 0.5 + (−0.5) × 0.5).
Hence, all baselines converge to the suboptimal solution of random guessing.
From Figure 2 (right) and Figure 4 (left), we can infer that the senders in the baselines do not reach the
functional phone booth to communicate so no protocols can be formed. Centralized training baselines


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(e.g., QMIX, MAA2C), which are designed to assign credits better since they have centralized
components to learn better value functions using full state information, also converge to suboptimal
solutions. Their poor performances illustrate the difficulty of this joint exploration problem.
In contrast, our proposed method CTDUL obtains significantly higher rewards than random guessing
by employing DIAL to learn how to use the discovered channel. The grey vertical line is when DIAL
begins after discovery learning. Qualitatively, we observe how our method solves the problem in
which the receiver waits at the functional booth until receiving a message from the sender. Then,
it goes to the correct exit according to the protocol learned. The results show how our proposed
problem decomposition and MI maximization components make the difficult problem easier to solve.
Figure 4 (right) shows task performance on SPBMaze for our ablation study with CTDUL. Specifi-
cally, we look at the task performance when we individually remove components used, namely MI
maximization and DIAL. As we can see, nontrivial solutions can only be learned if both of them
are used. Removing one of them leads to the suboptimal solution of random guessing. Furthermore,
we observe significant performance dip when OBL is replaced with IQL, empirically supporting the
importance of not forming any conventions during CTD as pointed out in section 5.1.2.

7.4   M UTUAL INFORMATION AS A MEASURE OF CHANNEL CAPACITY


Figure 5: Bar plot of average number of booth visits of each phone booth type in MPBMaze with
varying noise factors for the noisy booth. The error bars are standard errors for the average number
of booth visits for each booth type.
We hypothesize that our proposed MI reward can be a pseudomeasure of channel capacity, a way to
discover where best to communicate when an environment has multiple channels. To verify, we run
baselines and our proposed method for CTD on MPBMaze which has three channels, namely, the
Perfect Booth, the Costly Booth, and the Noisy Booth. Note that a booth with noise has a probability
of dropping a message. See Table 4 in the Appendix for the detailed configuration of MPBMaze.
Figures 5 compare which booth the sender chooses to visit when different reward functions are used.
The optimal behavior is to visit the Perfect Booth the most as it has no noise and usage cost. All
algorithms learn to avoid the Costly Booth given its direct effect on the reward. Comparing methods
that use IR and MI rewards, the IR reward cannot distinguish between the Perfect Booth and the
Noisy Booth and consistently visit the Noisy Booth as visits to both booths are rewarded equally and
the Noisy Booth is closer to the sender.
On the contrary, the MI reward method is able to visit the Perfect Booth consistently as the MI reward
has an interpretation and measurement of noise and channel capacity (i.e., A channel with greater
noise would necessarily mean a lower expected MI reward). As the noise factor decreases, the two
booths become less distinguishable, which we observe a decreased in number of booth visits to the
perfect booth for the agent with MI reward when the noise factor is 0.1.

8     C ONCLUSION
In this work, we take away the common and arguably unrealistic assumptions in MARL that commu-
nication channels are known and persistently accessible to the agents. Under this setting, agents have


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to first discover where to best communicate before learning how to use the discovered channels. We
first provide a novel problem formulation for this setting denoted as the cheap talk discovery and
utilization problem. Then, based on this problem decomposition, we propose a method based on MI
maximization with OBL and DIAL to tackle this problem end-to-end. Experimentally, by evaluating
our framework against state-of-the-art baselines in our proposed environment suite, we show that
our framework can effectively discover communication channels and subsequently use them to solve
tasks, while all the baselines fail to do so. We also empirically attribute the framework’s success to
its key capabilities in learning policies with maximized MI and without convention formation during
CTD. Finally, we demonstrate how our MI metric can serve as a pseudomeasure for channel capacity,
to be used to learn where best to communicate. We hope this work can inspire investigation in more
realistic settings for communication like the one introduced here.

9   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Tarun Gupta for providing code implementations of RL environments for our reference
during the ideation phase of the project. We thank Michael Noukhovitch for helpful feedback.

R EFERENCES
Robert H Crites and Andrew G Barto. Elevator group control using multiple reinforcement learning
  agents. Machine learning, 33(2):235–262, 1998.
Abhishek Das, Théophile Gervet, Joshua Romoff, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Mike Rabbat, and Joelle
  Pineau. Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1538–1546. PMLR, 2019.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando De Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning
  to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Dieter Fox, Wolfram Burgard, Hannes Kruppa, and Sebastian Thrun. A probabilistic approach to
  collaborative multi-robot localization. Autonomous robots, 8(3):325–344, 2000.
Hengyuan Hu and Jakob N Foerster. Simplified action decoder for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Hengyuan Hu, Adam Lerer, Brandon Cui, Luis Pineda, Noam Brown, and Jakob Foerster. Off-belief
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4369–4379. PMLR, 2021.
Natasha Jaques, Angeliki Lazaridou, Edward Hughes, Caglar Gulcehre, Pedro Ortega, DJ Strouse,
  Joel Z Leibo, and Nando De Freitas. Social influence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3040–3049. PMLR,
  2019.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. Learning attentional communication for multi-agent cooperation.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Steven Kapturowski, Georg Ostrovski, John Quan, Remi Munos, and Will Dabney. Recurrent
  experience replay in distributed reinforcement learning. In International conference on learning
  representations, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
K Shantha Lakshmi, MP Senthil Kumar, and KVN Kavitha. Inter-satellite laser communication
  system. In 2008 International Conference on Computer and Communication Engineering, pp.
  978–983. IEEE, 2008.
Frans A Oliehoek and Christopher Amato. A concise introduction to decentralized POMDPs. Springer,
  2016.



                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, Lukas Schäfer, and Stefano V Albrecht. Benchmarking
  multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. In Thirty-fifth Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style,
  high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32:
  8026–8037, 2019.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR, 2018.
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche,
  Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering
  the game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Amanpreet Singh, Tushar Jain, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Learning when to communicate at
 scale in multiagent cooperative and competitive tasks. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2018.
Samuel Sokota, Christian Schroeder de Witt, Maximilian Igl, Luisa M Zintgraf, Philip Torr, Martin
  Strohmeier, J Zico Kolter, Shimon Whiteson, and Jakob Nicolaus Foerster. Communicating via
  markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML’22. JMLR.org, 2022.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Rob Fergus, et al. Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29:2244–2252, 2016.
Richard Stuart Sutton. Temporal credit assignment in reinforcement learning. PhD thesis, University
  of Massachusetts Amherst, 1984.
Ming Tan. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. In Proceedings
 of the tenth international conference on machine learning, pp. 330–337, 1993.
Tonghan Wang, Jianhao Wang, Yi Wu, and Chongjie Zhang. Influence-based multi-agent exploration.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Xihuai Wang, Zhicheng Zhang, and Weinan Zhang. Model-based multi-agent reinforcement learning:
  Recent progress and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10603, 2022.


A    P ROBLEM S IGNIFICANCE AND U SE C ASES
The full problem setting of solving Dec-POMDPs is NEXP-complete. As such, it is not reasonable
to expect a method that can solve large arbitrary Dec-POMDPs. To get around this, the “emergent
communication” literature usually focuses on a setting where there is a fixed communication channel
that is known a-priori.
We strictly generalise this setting by instead proposing a method that can first discover channels
within the environment and next utilise them. Clearly, this cannot cover all problem Dec-POMDPs
due to the constraints mentioned above but includes a broader set of potentially practically relevant
applications.
In terms of use cases, the problem applies whenever real-world communication through a medium
among agents is considered. Because more often than not, there will be some spatial constraints
on communication in realistic settings. Any kind of communication channel used in the real-world
(e.g., a radio link, cell phone signal), does not have perfect signal strength, and often transmission
errors could happen (e.g., noise). The signal strength varies a lot depending on your environment
and current surroundings (e.g, indoor vs outdoor, underwater, environment interference in certain
locations like behind a mountain). Hence, for communication to happen efficiently and successfully,
being able to learn where to communicate and learn where best to communicate is crucial which our
problem setting addresses.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Even in communication without an explicit medium, say if a robot wants to signal to another one
with lights but they need a line of sight, communication becomes spatially constrained. We believe
these examples illustrate how important this problem setting is when considering communication
learning in more realistic environments.
Furthermore, the setting also sheds light to a more complete picture of capacity-constrained com-
munication. As illustrated in our experiments with noisy channels, our mutual information reward
provides a pseudomeasure of capacity. The investigation provides a path forward regarding capacity-
constrained communication, by establishing two levels of capacity constraints - i.e., capacity con-
strained by the environment/physical space, size of Scomm , and the capacity for individual channels.
Our method provides the first attempt to tackle both types of capacity constraints - learning where to
communicate and learning where best to communicate.

B    OBL LOSS
As in Hu et al. (2021), for a given trajectory τ sampled from replay buffer, LOBL is expressed as
TD-error:

                                   T                                               i2
                                1 Xh ′      ′                 ′
                LOBL (θ|τ ) =         rt + rt+1 + max Qθ̂ (a|τt+2 ) − Qθ (at |τt )                (8)
                                2 t=1              a


where Qθ̂ is the target network. As τt′ contains fictitious transitions, we can not pass the whole
sequence to RNN like in normal Q-learning. Thus, we precompute the target G′t = rt′ + rt+1      ′
                                                                                                    +
              ′
maxa Qθ̂ (a|τt+2 ) during rollouts and store the sequence of targets along with the real trajectory τ
into the replay buffer.

C    G RADIENT CHAIN OF THE PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE


Figure 6: How gradients flow through our proposed architecture, with reference to Foerster et al.
(2016)


D    P SEUDOCODE OF THE PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
Algorithm 1 outlines the pseudocode of the proposed architecture to tackle the cheap talk discovery
and utilization problem.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for our proposed method
  for each agent do
    Initialize replay memory for OBL DOBL with capacity N
    Initialize replay memory for DIAL DDIAL with capacity N
    Initialize action value function Q with random weights θ, using architecture C-Net based on
    R2D2
    Initialize target action value function Q̂ with random weights θ− = θ , using architecture C-Net
    based on R2D2
    Initialize Num_Discovery_Episode
    Initialize Discovery_Stage as True
  end for
  for e = 1, Max_Episode do
    Initialize s
    repeat
       for each agent do
          Select a from o based on policy derived from Q, e.g. ϵ-greedy policy or stochastic OBL
          policy
          Take action a to observe reward r and next state o′
          Take action a in Pseudo-Environment to perform OBL sampling with mutual information
          computation
          Store the transition into DOBL
          if High mutual information is observed then
             Store trajectory into DDIAL
          end if
          Sample random minimatch of transitions from DOBL
          Sample random minimatch of transitions from DDIAL
          if Discovery_Stage then
             Perform a gradient descent step on LOBL  i   (θi ) − κI(A1 , O2 ; πθ )i with respect to the
             network weights θ
          else
             Perform a gradient descent step on (yi − Q(o, a; θi−1 ))2 for DIAL with respect to the
             network weights θ
             Perform a gradient descent step on LIQLi   (θi ) with respect to the network weights θ
          end if
          Every C steps, set Q̂ = Q
       end for
    until s = sterminal
    if e ≥ Num_Discovery_Episode then
       Set Discovery_Stage as False
    end if
  end for


E    E NVIRONMENT D ESIGN
Figure 7 visualizes two instances of the environment used in our experiments. Red cables indicate
connectivity with dashed ones indicating the existence of noise. The yellow booth here indicates that
it is a costlier booth to use.
For observations, each consists of a tensor of 3 channels plus some role-specific information. The
channels are the wall channel, phone booth channel, and the agent channel, which are essentially
binary grid encoding of each position for the existence of wall, phone booth, and the agent respectively.
For role-specific information, the sender has an additional 2-bit encoding vector as goal information.
Specifically, if the receiver should go up, the sender would get a vector of [1 0]. If the receiver
should go down, the sender would get [0 1] instead. For the receiver, if the sender performs a
HINT-UP with both of them at the functional booths, it would be -1. On the other hand, if the sender
performs a HINT-DOWN, it would be 1. Many aspects of this environment are configurable to allow
extensive investigation and exploration of different algorithms, some key adjustable features are
highlighted in table E.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Figure 7: Two instances of the PBMaze with different configurations used in the experiments


F     N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE AND T RAINING
Instead of using convolutional layers as in Kapturowski et al. (2018), we use fully-connected neural
networks with a recurrent component as our neural network model. Hence, we flatten the observation
from the environment into a vector by first fattening the 3-channel tensor and then concatenate it with
the role-based information (i.e., goal encoding or communication token). Precisely, the input is first
processed by an LSTM layer to handle partial observability. Then, it is followed by a two-layer and
two-headed fully-connected neural network of hidden size 128. The two heads are used to compute
the action-value function and the advantage function respectively. All neural network components
are implemented using the neural network library PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), with the weights
initialized using Xavier initialization. In terms of training, we use the Adam optimizer to train our
models (Kingma & Ba, 2014). Training was done in an internal cluster with a mix of GTX 1080 and
RTX 2080 GPUs.

G     H YPERPARAMETERS S ETTING
This section covers details in setting hyperparameters for various methods used in this work. They are
covered in two separate sections depending on whether a parameter is common to all used methods
or not.

G.1    C OMMON PARAMETERS

To determine the best parameters that are common to all the methods used, we performed a hypa-
rameter sweep over some key common parameters. Specifically, the search was performed on the
learning rate and target network update frequency in the lists of [0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001] and
[50, 100, 200, 500]. The results are averaged over 3 random seeds, each trained for 25000 episodes.
The best set of parameters for learning rate and target network update frequency are 0.0001 and 100,
respectively. Other common parameters are set to values in table G.1.

G.2    M ETHOD -S PECIFIC PARAMETERS

Method-specific parameters are set to values in table 3.

H     E NVIRONMENT PARAMETERS
Parameters of the environments used in the experiments are summarized in Table 4.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Configurable Description
    parame-
    ter
    lengths      the length of each of the agent’s rooms. The longer it is, the harder the exploration becomes.
    starting     the starting location of each of the agents.
    points
    correct re- The reward that is given when the receiver exits from the correct door.
    ward
    wrong re- The reward that is given when the receiver exits from the wrong door.
    ward
    use inter- If set as true, it gives an intermediate reward for if both agents are at the functional booths,
    mediate      used for debugging purposes.
    reward
    episode      Episode length, meaning the episode terminates if it reaches this number of steps.
    limit
    booth       Among functional phone booths, they are configurable in two major ways, namely, cost
    types        and noise. The former refers to the cost of using the booth and the latter is modeled as the
                 probability of a phone booth dropping a message.
    booth lo- Locations of functional booths.
    cations
    number      The number of decoy booths in the sender’s room. Decoy booths refer to booths that are
    of decoy not functional and not connected to the booth in the receiver’s room. They appear as booths
    booths       in the agent’s observation (i.e., the booth channel).
    booth        If set true, the decoy phone booths’ locations are reinitialized whenever the environment is
    reinitial-   reset for the next episode, making the problem more difficult.
    ization
    use          If set true, the environment would compute the mutual information reward, used in the
    mutual in- proposed method.
    formation
    reward
    use          If set true, the environment would return the necessary information (i.e., tensor masks for
    mutual in- each term in equation 6 to compute the mutual information loss in a batch-based manner.
    formation
    loss

                            Table 1: Configurable parameters for the PBMaze

                                      Hyperparameter         Value
                                      Discount Factor γ      0.99
                                      Batch Size             32
                                      Replay Buffer Size     10000
                                      Temperature            1.0
                                      Non-Linearity          ReLU

                          Table 2: Common parameters used across algorithms


I     L IMITATIONS
While our proposed framework provides a promising approach to learn where to communicate (i.e.,
CTD/CTU) by first discovering cheap talk channels and subsequently learning how to use them, it is
important to be aware of the assumptions and limitations of the framework for future work.
To begin with, our approach assumes access to an environment simulator and a (perfect) belief
to perform MI computation and OBL respectively. While there are recent approaches in learning
environment models (Wang et al., 2022) and belief models (Hu & Foerster, 2019), how well these
learned components work with each other remains unexplored. Advances in these areas would
improve the overall robustness of our proposed framework.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             IQL            IQL + IR      OBL          CTDL/CTDUL
                                                                QMIX              MAA2C        SI
 Starting ϵ 1.0             1.0           N/A          N/A     1.0                1.0          1.0
 ϵ Decay 0.00001            0.00001       N/A          N/A      0.00001           0.00001      0.00001
 Step
 Minimum 0.1                0.1           N/A          N/A           0.1          0.1          0.1
 ϵ
 Initial Ex- 1000           1000          1000         1000         1000          1000         1000
 ploration
 Step
 IR          N/A            1.0           N/A          N/A           N/A          N/A          N/A
 α Entropy N/A              N/A           N/A          0.0           N/A          N/A          N/A
 Factor
 β Mutual N/A               N/A           N/A          2.0           N/A          N/A          N/A
 Infor-
 mation
 Reward
 Factor
 κ Mutual N/A               N/A           N/A          1.0           N/A          N/A          N/A
 Informa-
 tion Loss
 Factor
 learning    N/A            N/A           N/A          N/A           0.0005       0.0001       N/A
 rate
 critic      N/A            N/A           N/A          N/A           N/A          0.0001       N/A
 learning
 rate
 critic hid- N/A            N/A           N/A          N/A           N/A          32           N/A
 den size
 hypernetworkN/A            N/A           N/A          N/A           64           N/A          N/A
 hidden
 size
 number      N/A            N/A           N/A          N/A          1             N/A          N/A
 of hyper
 layers
 social in- N/A             N/A           N/A          N/A           N/A          N/A          5.0
 fluence re-
 ward coef-
 ficient
 temperature 1.0            1.0           0.1          0.1          1.0           1.0          1.0

                                  Table 3: Method-specific parameters


Another crucial assumption made is the direct and immediate causal relationship between a commu-
nicative action and a receiver’s observation which might be less reliable in the real-world setting. For
instance, there will be delay and transmission time when sending messages. In more visually-rich
and open-ended settings, there could also be many confounding changes in the receiver’s observation
when communication actions are taken. In these cases, further advances are needed to correctly
assign credits to communicative actions when computing MI.
Last but not least, the transition from CTD to CTU is determined empirically from experiments. A
more principled approach to automate this decision would make method more robust. For instance,
based on Definition 4.3, a method could be developed to indicate whether an agent has been able to
discover a channel consistently (i.e., a discovery policy with maximized PMI). Once a threshold is
reached, it can move on to the utilization stage.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  SPBMaze                           MPBMaze
    lengths (sender’s room, re- (8, 4)                              (5, 3)
    ceiver’s room)
    starting points (sender’s co- ((4, 1), (2, 1))                  ((3, 1), (1, 1))
    ordinates, receiver’s coordi-
    nates)
    correct reward                1.0                               1.0
    wrong reward                  -0.5                              -0.5
    episode limit                 20                                20
    booth types                   1 functional booth, 0 cost to     functional phone booths. The
                                  use and 0 noise factor            first one has a cost of 0.4 and
                                                                    0 noise factor. The second one
                                                                    has 0 cost and 0 noise factor.
                                                                    The third one has 0 cost and
                                                                    x ∈ [0.1, 0.3, 0.5] as noise
                                                                    factor across 3 sets of exper-
                                                                    iments
    number of decoy booths         2                                0
    booth reinitialization         False                            False

      Table 4: Table for environment configurations of each environment used in the experiments


J     B ROADER I MPACT
With the rapid progress in MARL and multi-agent learning systems in general, we confidently expect
that more multi-agent learning systems will be deployed in the real world in which communication
will play an integral part to their successes. Our formulation and method for learning where to
communicate would lead to more robust communication and subsequently more coordinated behavior
among agents by equipping them with the ability to discover the best and most reliable places to
communicate. This is essential in such real-world applications when the reliability of communication
often varies by locations and situations.
By increasing the applicability of multi-agent learning systems, our work may exacerbate some risks
of deploying machine learning systems like increasing unemployment (e.g., replacing warehouse
workers with a fully autonomous warehouse) and advancing automated weaponry. Particularly to our
method, by equipping systems with the ability to discover where to communicate, it could encourage
adversarial attacks to deployed machine learning systems through communication which would lead
to unintended and potentially harmful actions and disrupt learned communication protocols.

K      F UTURE W ORK
For future work, we are interested in testing our framework in more complex settings and address
some limitations discussed in Appendix I. For instance, the ability to discover communication
channels can be formulated as skills and organized in a hierarchical manner to solve harder tasks. It
would also be insightful to benchmark different algorithms for cheap talk utilization in this setting.


                                                 17
