Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D EEP T RANSFORMER Q-N ETWORKS FOR PARTIALLY
O BSERVABLE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         Real-world reinforcement learning tasks often involve some form of partial observ-
         ability where the observations only give a partial or noisy view of the true state
         of the world. Such tasks typically require some form of memory, where the agent
         has access to multiple past observations, in order to perform well. One popular
         way to incorporate memory is by using a recurrent neural network to access the
         agent’s history. However, recurrent neural networks in reinforcement learning are
         often fragile and difficult to train and sometimes fail completely as a result. In this
         work, we propose Deep Transformer Q-Networks (DTQN), a novel architecture
         utilizing transformers and self-attention to encode an agent’s history. DTQN is
         designed modularly, and we compare results against several modifications to our
         base model. Our experiments demonstrate that our approach can solve partially
         observable tasks faster and more stably than previous recurrent approaches.


1    I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, deep neural networks have become the computational backbone of reinforcement
learning, achieving strong performance across a wide array of difficult tasks including games (Mnih
et al., 2015; Silver et al., 2016) and robotics (Levine et al., 2018; Gao et al., 2020). In particular, Deep
Q-Networks (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015) revolutionized the field of deep RL by achieving super-human
performance on Atari 2600 games in the Atari Learning Environment (Bellemare et al., 2013). Since
then, several advancements have been proposed to improve DQN (Hessel et al., 2018), and deep RL
has been shown to excel in continuous control tasks as well (Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al.,
2018).
However, most Deep RL methods assume the agent is operating within a fully observable environment;
that is, one in which the agent has access to the environment’s full state information. But this
assumption does not hold for many realistic domains due to components such as noisy sensors,
occluded images, or additional unknown agents. These domains are partially observable, and pose
a much bigger challenge for RL compared to the standard fully observable setting. Indeed, naïve
methods often fail to learn in partially observable environments without additional architectural or
training support (Pinto et al., 2017; Igl et al., 2018; Ma et al., 2020).
To solve partially observable domains, RL agents may need to remember (some or possibly all)
previous observations (Kaelbling et al., 1998). As a result, RL methods typically add some sort of
memory component, allowing them to store or refer back to recent observations in order to make
more informed decisions. The current state-of-the-art approaches integrate recurrent neural networks,
like LSTMs (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997) or GRUs (Cho et al., 2014), in conjunction with
fully observable Deep RL architectures to process an agent’s history (Ni et al., 2021). But recurrent
neural networks (RNNs) can be fragile and difficult to train, often requiring complicated “warm-up”
strategies to initialize its hidden state at the start of each training batch (Lample & Chaplot, 2017).
Conversely, the Transformer has been shown to model sequences much better than RNNs and is
ubiquitous in natural language processing (NLP) (Devlin et al., 2018) and increasingly common in
computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020).
Therefore, we propose Deep Transformer Q-Network (DTQN), a novel architecture using self-
attention to solve partially observable RL domains. DTQN leverages a transformer decoder architec-
ture with learned positional encodings to represent an agent’s history and accurately predict Q-values
at each timestep. Rather than a standard approach that trains on a single next step for a given history,


                                                     1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we propose a training regime called intermediate Q-value prediction, which allows us to train DTQN
on the Q-values generated for each timestep in the agent’s observation history and provide more
robust learning. DTQN encodes an agent’s history more effectively than recurrent methods, which
we show empirically across several challenging partially observable environments. We evaluate and
analyze several architectural components, including: gated skip connections (Parisotto et al., 2020),
positional encodings, identity map reordering (Parisotto et al., 2020), and intermediate value predic-
tion (Al-Rfou et al., 2019). Our results provide strong evidence that our approach can successfully
represent agents’ histories in partially observable domains. We visualize attention weights showing
DTQN learns an understanding of the domains as it works to solve tasks.

2     BACKGROUND

When an environment does not emit its full state to the agent, the problem can be modeled as a Partially
Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP) Kaelbling et al. (1998). A POMDP is formally
described as the 6-tuple (S, A, T , R, ⌦, O). S, A, and ⌦ represent the environment’s set of states,
actions, and observations, respectively. T is the state transition function T (s, a, s0 ) = P (s0 |s, a),
denoting the probability of transitioning from state s to state s0 given action a. R describes the reward
function R : S ⇥ A ! R; that is, the resultant scalar reward emitted by the environment for an
agent that was in some state s 2 S and took some action a 2 A. And O is the observation function
O(s0 , a, o) = P (o|s0 , a), the probability of observing o when action a is taken resulting in state s0 .
At each time step, t, the agent is in the environment’s state st 2 S, takes action at 2 A, manipulates
the environment’s state to some st+1 2 S based on the transition probability     ⇥ P T (s   , at , st+1 ) and
                                                                                           t⇤
receives a reward, rt = R(st , at ). The goal of the agent is to maximize E          t
                                                                                       t
                                                                                         r t , its expected
discounted return for some discount factor 2 [0, 1) (Sutton & Barto, 2018).
Because agents in POMDPs do not have access to the environment’s full state information, they
must rely on the observations ot 2 ⌦ which relate to the state via the observation function,
O(st+1 , at , ot ) = P (ot |st+1 , at ). In general, agents acting in partially observable space can-
not simply use observations as a proxy for state, since several states may be aliased into the
same observation. Instead, they often consider some form of their full history of information,
ht = {(o0 , a0 ), (o1 , a1 ), ..., (ot 1 , at 1 )}. Because the history grows indefinitely as the agent pro-
ceeds in a trajectory, various ways of encoding the history exist. Previous work has truncated the
history to make it a fixed length (Zhu et al., 2017) or used an agent’s belief, which represents the
estimate of the current state (Kaelbling et al., 1998). Since the deep learning revolution, others have
used forms of recurrency, such as LSTMs and GRUs, to encode the history (Hausknecht & Stone,
2015; Yang & Nguyen, 2021).

2.1   D EEP RECURRENT Q- NETWORKS

Q-Learning (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) aims to learn a function Q : S ⇥ A ! R which represents
the value of each state-action pair in an MDP. Given a state s, action a, reward r, next state s0 , and
learning rate ↵, the Q-function is updated with the equation
                        Q(s, a) := Q(s, a) + ↵(r + max
                                                    0
                                                       Q(s0 , a0 )        Q(s, a))                       (1)
                                                         a 2A

In more challenging domains, however, the state-action space of the environment is often too large to
be able to learn an exact Q-value for each state-action pair. Instead of learning a tabular Q-function,
DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) learns an approximate Q-function featuring strong generalization capabilities
over similar states and actions. DQN is trained to minimize the Mean Squared Bellman Error
                                         ⇥                                       2⇤
                    L(✓) = E(s,a,r,s0 )⇠D r + max0
                                                     Q(s0 , a0 ; ✓0 ) Q(s, a; ✓)                    (2)
                                                   a 2A

where transition tuples of states, actions, rewards, and future states (s, a, r, s0 ) are sampled uniformly
from a replay buffer, D, of past experiences while training. The target r + maxa0 2A Q(s0 , a0 ; ✓0 )
invokes DQN’s target network (parameterized by ✓0 ), which lags behind the main network (parame-
terized by ✓) to produce more stable updates.
However, in partially observable domains, DQN may not learn a good policy by simply replacing the
network’s input from states to observations (i.e., an agent can often perform better by remembering


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Architectural diagram of DTQN. Each observation in the history is embedded independently,
and Q-values are generated for each observation sub-history. Only the last set of Q-values are used to
select the next action, but the other Q-values can be utilized for training.



some history). To address this challenge, Deep Recurrent Q-Networks (DRQN) (Hausknecht &
Stone, 2015) incorporated histories into the Q-function by way of a long short-term memory (LSTM)
layer (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997). In DRQN’s training procedure, the sampled states are
replaced with histories ht:t+k = {ot , ot+1 , ..., ot+k } from timestep t to step t + k, sampled randomly
within each episode. The hidden state of the LSTM is zeroed at the start of each update.


2.2   T RANSFORMER DECODERS

The transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017), originally introduced for natural language
processing, stacks blocks of attention layers (Bahdanau et al., 2014) and is typically used to model
sequential data. Intuitively, the transformer’s attention module receives as input a sequence of tokens
(e.g., a sequence of observations in an episode) and the model learns to place stronger weights or more
attention on the most important tokens. For more details about the attention module in transformers,
refer to Appendix A.3.
While the original transformer architecture formed an encoder-decoder structure, recent works often
use either the encoder (Devlin et al., 2018) or the decoder (Radford et al., 2018). The key difference
between the two is that the decoder applies a causal masking to the attention layer; that is, the ith
token cannot attend to tokens which come later in the sequence. In general, the transformer decoder
has been shown to perform better on generative tasks like next token prediction, while the transformer
encoder is able to learn richer representations and excels on tasks such as language understanding.
DTQN utilizes the transformer decoder structure. Given a tensor of shape (B, C, D), where B is
the batch size, C is the context length, and D is the model’s dimensionality size, the transformer
decoder layer returns a tensor of the same shape, enabling us to stack layers on top of each other. The
last transformer layer’s output can then be projected to the desired shape, or sent as input to another
network. To ensure the raw inputs are of the correct shape, we often prepend a feature extraction step,
such as a lookup embedding for text or integers, a multilayer perceptron for vectors, or convolutional
neural network for images.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3    R ELATED WORK

Since its inception, several works have built upon DRQN. For example, DRQN was shown to beat
human test subjects on the challenging 3D VizDoom video game environment (Kempka et al., 2016)
when augmented with game feature information (Lample & Chaplot, 2017). Action-based DRQN
(ADRQN) (Zhu et al., 2017) conditioned the network on the agent’s full history rather than just its
observation history. Deep Distributed Recurrent Q-Networks (DDRQN) (Foerster et al., 2016) extends
DRQN into the multi-agent reinforcement learning setting. Like ADRQN, DDRQN conditioned on
actions, but also shared weights between each agent, all while forgoing each agent’s replay buffer to
sample from.
The concept of attention is also well-studied in the reinforcement learning setting. The most closely
related work to ours using attention in deep Q-learning is Deep Attention Recurrent Q-Network
(DARQN) (Sorokin et al., 2015), which used attention to aid an LSTM’s representation of the agent’s
history. Similarly, visual attention has been added to DRQN-like architectures in an effort towards
creating more interpretable reinforcement learning algorithms (Mott et al., 2019). Unlike our work,
which uses self-attention such that agent’s history forms the queries, keys, and values, these works
use the recurrent network’s last output state to form the queries, and the environment’s most recent
observation forms the keys and values. In the multi-agent setting, Multi-Actor-Attention-Critic (Iqbal
& Sha, 2019) created an attention module in which each agent’s query is their own observation,
and the keys and values are formed by the other agents’ observations. Finally, the Simple Neural
AttentIve Learner (SNAIL) (Mishra et al., 2017) used attention to develop a meta-learning agent
capable of transferring its skills to similar but different environments.
The use of transformers in reinforcement learning has become more popular within the last few
years. In the offline reinforcement learning setting, Decision Transformer (Chen et al., 2021) and
Trajectory Transformer (Janner et al., 2021) concurrently proposed the idea of using transformer
decoders for sequence modeling, surpassing the current offline RL state of the art. Online Decision
Transformer (Zheng et al., 2022) extended Decision Transformer (Chen et al., 2021) by treating the
offline training as a pre-training step, and fine-tuned the transformer in the online setting for even
better performance. FlexiBiT (Carroll et al., 2022) trained a transformer encoder to learn a variety
of inference tasks, such as behavioural cloning, forward and backward modeling, and inferring an
agent’s history given its current state. Contrary to our work, which is trained completely online using
reinforcement learning, these works are specialized to take advantage of an offline RL dataset, and
train their agents in a supervised way (Schmidhuber, 2019). Other methods use transformers to learn
from scratch in the online RL setting, like GTrXL (Parisotto et al., 2020), which modifies the ordering
of components within the transformer block, and introduces a new gating mechanism to replace
the residual skip connections. We compare the effects of these modifications to our architecture.
Lightweight transformers have shown strong performance in text adventure games (Xu et al., 2020),
and the transformer encoder was applied to video games (Upadhyay et al., 2019). In contrast to
these works, we utilize a multi-layer transformer decoder architecture. Vision transformers have been
used in conjuction with DQN to stabilize Q-learning with data augmentation, replacing the standard
convolutional neural networks (Hansen et al., 2021). The self-attention block in their work attends to
features within a single observation whereas ours attends throughout the agent’s history.


4    D EEP TRANSFORMER Q- NETWORK ARCHITECTURE

Transformers seem like a natural fit to represent histories in POMDPs, but there are several open
questions regarding how to use them best in deep RL. In particular, it is unclear what form of
transformer to use, how to integrate it into deep RL methods and how they should be trained. We
chose to build DTQN using a transformer decoder structure incorporating learned position encodings,
and train on the Q-values generated for each timestep in the agent’s observation history. DTQN takes
as input the agent’s previous k observations, ht:t+k = {ot , ot+1 , ..., ot+k 1 }, linearly projects each
observation into the dimensionality of the model, and adds positional encodings to add information
about the absolute temporal location of each observation. The embedded history is then passed
through N transformer layers, and finally projected to the action space of the environment (see
Figure 1 and Algorithm 1). DTQN outputs a set of Q-values relating to each observation in the input.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 DTQN
  function F ORWARD PASS(ht:t+k = {ot , ot+1 , ..., ot+k 1 }))
     E 0 = Embedding(ht:t+k ) + P os
     for Layer L = 1, ..., N do
         QL 1 = E L 1 WLQ 1 , K L 1 = E L 1 WLK 1 , V L 1 = E L 1 WLV 1
                                      L                          L
         E L = LayerNormL   1 (Combine1 (MultiHeadAttention (Q
                                                                      L 1
                                                                          , K L 1 , V L 1 ), E L 1 ))
                             L         L       L
         E  L
                 LayerNorm2 (Combine2 (FFN (E ), E ))
                                                   L       L

     end for
     Output       FFNN (E N )                                          . Project output to action space
  end function
  function T RAIN
     Sample a minibatch of contexts (ht:t+k , at:t+k , rt:t+k , ht+1:t+k+1 ) from replay buffer D
     for i = 1, ..., k do
                          ⇥                                                                       2⇤
         Li (✓) = E(.)⇠D rt+i 1 + maxa0 2A Q(ht+1:t+i+1 , a0 ; ✓0 ) Q(ht:t+i , at+i 1 ; ✓)
     end for
  end function
  function U PDATE P
                        k
     ✓     ✓ ↵r✓ i=1 Li (✓)
  end function


While we only use the Q-values from the most recent observation during execution, we train the
network using all generated Q-values, even those relating to the observations at the beginning of the
subhistory using the loss function in Algorithm 1. This training regime challenges the network to
predict the Q-values in situations where it has little to no context, and produces a more robust agent.
The remainder of this section expands on each contribution of the DTQN architecture.

4.1   O BSERVATION EMBEDDINGS AND POSITIONAL ENCODINGS

Before the observation history is passed to DTQN’s transformer layers, each observation in the agent’s
most recent k observations, ht:t+k , is linearly projected to the dimensionality of the transformer
via a learned observation embedding (see Figure 1). After embedding, we add a learned positional
encoding to each observation based on its position in the observation history. This result, which we
call E 0 in Algorithm 1, is the input to the first transformer layer in DTQN.
Position encodings are common practice in transformers, especially for NLP tasks, where they
are well studied (Wang & Chen, 2020). However, the importance of position is less clear in the
reinforcement learning setting. In some control tasks, the temporal position of an observation may
not have any effect on its importance or meaning to solve the task. For instance, the importance of
the priest observation in the classic HeavenHell domain (Bonet, 1998) is not dependent on when the
observation occurs in the episode. On the other hand, domains with more dynamic state transitions
may benefit greatly from the positional information. For this reason, we choose to learn our positional
encodings as it gives the agent the most flexibility in terms of how it chooses to use them. We ablate
this choice by comparing our learned positional encodings to sinusoidal positional encodings (used
in the original transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)) as well as not using any positional encodings in
section 5.4.

4.2   T RANSFORMER DECODER STRUCTURE

Like the original GPT architecture (Radford et al., 2018), each transformer layer in DTQN features
two submodules: masked multi-headed self-attention and a position-wise feedforward network. As
described in Algorithm 1, first we project the output of the previous layer, E L 1 to the queries, Q,
keys, K, and values, V , through the weight matrices W Q , W K , and W V , respectively. After each
submodule, that submodule’s input and output are combined (see the “Combine” step in Figure 1)
followed by a LayerNorm (Ba et al., 2016). Finally, after the last transformer layer, we project the
final embedding (E N in Algorithm 1) to the action space of our environment to represent the Q-value
for each action.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            (a) Hallway                   (b) Heaven hell             (c) Gridverse memory 5x5


      (d) Gridverse memory 7x7       (e) Gridverse memory 9x9        (f) Gridverse four rooms 7x7


            (g) Car flag                                                  (h) Memory cards

Figure 2: Results showing the success rate of DTQN against baselines. DTQN is shown in blue, a
simple attention network (ATTN) shown in brown, Deep Recurrent Q-Network (DRQN) (Hausknecht
& Stone, 2015) is shown in orange, and Deep Q-Network (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015) is shown in
purple. Lines show the mean and shaded regions represent standard error across 5 random seeds.
DTQN excels both in terms of learning speed as well as final performance, clearly outperforming the
baselines on nearly all domains. Refer to section 5.2 for discussion of results.


DTQN uses a residual skip connection (He et al., 2016) to combine the two streams, matching the
original transformer, in favor of other choices of combination layers such as the GRU gating combi-
nation layer Parisotto et al. (2020). Another contested decision is the position of LayerNorm with
respect to each submodule; the original transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) and original GPT (Rad-
ford et al., 2018) apply LayerNorm after the combine step whereas other works have moved the
LayerNorm to immediately before the submodule (Radford et al., 2019; Parisotto et al., 2020; Xu
et al., 2020). DTQN applies the LayerNorm after the combine step, a choice we found to be simple
while also demonstrating strong empirical performance. We ablate our choices of network with the
aforementioned variants in section 5.3.

4.3     I NTERMEDIATE Q- VALUE PREDICTION

DTQN outputs a set of Q-values for each timestep in the agent’s observation history. During
evaluation, DTQN selects the action with the highest Q-value from the last timestep in its history.
It would therefore be straightforward to train DTQN using just the last timestep’s Q-values, since
those have the most context to work with and are the most informed to select the optimal action.
This regime, however, is very wasteful, as only a fraction of the generated Q-values actually get
used for training. Instead, we train DTQN using all generated Q-values. Originally used in the NLP


                                                6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


setting where each position was tasked with predicting the next character and formed an auxiliary
loss (Al-Rfou et al., 2019), we adapt this training regime to the reinforcement learning setting, as
shown in Algorithm 1. Note that the for loop depicted in Algorithm 1 can be done in one forward
pass of the network because of the causally-masked self-attention mechanism.
We ablate training based on all Q-values with training only on the last timestep’s Q-values in
section 5.5, and show the performance gains in Table 1.


5     E XPERIMENTS

Our experimental evaluation is designed to compare DTQN not only to previous Q-network baselines,
but also to ablate our own method with other architectural choices. We evaluate these methods
on a range of challenging domains featuring partial observations and requiring memory to solve
them. We baseline DTQN against Deep Recurrent Q-Networks (DRQN) (Hausknecht & Stone,
2015) to show the transformer is a more effective history representation module than RNNs, Deep
Q-Networks (DQN) (Mnih et al., 2015) to demonstrate the need for memory to solve the task
consistently, and against an attention baseline (called “ATTN” in Figure 2) to show the benefits of our
architectural choices. ATTN, like the transformer, has observation and position embeddings, attention
and feedforward network modules, but does not have LayerNorm or skip connections, and does not
stack multiple blocks.

5.1   D OMAINS

We conduct our experiments on 4 different en-
vironment sets designed to challenge DTQN in
different ways: classic POMDPs, gym-gridverse
(GV) (Baisero & Katt, 2021), car flag (Nguyen,
2021), and memory cards. Hallway (Littman
et al., 1995) and HeavenHell (Bonet, 1998) are
classic navigation POMDPs requiring the agent
to take and remember several information gath-
ering steps before it can consistently achieve its
goal. Gym-Gridverse offers procedurally gen-
erated gridworlds containing difficult partially
observable tasks. The agent’s field of view is
restricted such that it can only see the cells in (a) Gridverse Memory             (b) Gridverse Memory
a 2 ⇥ 3 grid in front of it (see Figure 3), which 7x7                              Four Rooms 7x7
introduces state aliasing and forces the agent
to gather localizing information before it can Figure 3: Gym-Gridverse Memory domains. The
successfully solve the task. We evaluate our top row depicts the state while the bottom row
agents in gridverse environments “Memory” and shows the agent’s current observation. The colored
“Memory Four Rooms”, which require the agent beacon informs the agent which flag to reach.
to first find the colored information beacons, and
then go to the flag whose color matches the beacon. The colors of the flags and beacons are initialized
randomly and, in Memory-Four-Rooms, the locations of the flag and beacons are also initialized
randomly, increasing the environment’s difficulty. Example screenshots of the gridverse domains are
shown in Figure 3. Car Flag features a car on a 1D line, where the car must first drive to an oracle
flag to learn which direction the finish line is. Memory cards is a novel domain designed to test how
much information an agent can memorize. Based on the popular children’s memory card game, 5
pairs of cards are hidden to the agent, with one card revealed at each timestep and the agent must
guess the position of that card’s pair. We chose this set of domains to be representative of challenging
partially observable problems. For more information regarding the domains, please see Appendix B.

5.2   BASELINE COMPARISON

Our evaluation against baselines is shown in Figure 2. Each learning curve shows the success rate
of the agent in the environment, where the line is the mean across 5 random seeds, and the shaded
region represents standard error. We search across hyperparameters of interest, and select the best


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


performing hyperparameter set, prioritizing consistency across domains. For specific hyperparameters
and training details, refer to Appendix A.
The results in Figure 2 show DTQN outperforms the baselines in terms of learning speed and final
performance on nearly all domains. ATTN learns quickly, but rarely reaches optimal performance,
and often becomes unstable. DRQN, featuring an LSTM as its memory module, often performs
well in our set of domains, but learns slower than DTQN, and is in general less stable. Sometimes,
especially in the gridverse memory domains, DRQN’s performance plummets shortly after it begins
to learn. It then struggles to regain its initial performance gains, taking as many as one million
timesteps in the Gridverse memory 7x7 domain to improve its success rate. DQN, designed for MDPs
and without any form of memory in its architecture, fails to achieve higher than 50% success rate on
any of our domains, exemplifying the difficulty of the domains and the importance of using memory
to solve them. These results highlight the effectiveness of DTQN in solving a range of POMDPs.

5.3   GRU- GATES AND IDENTITY MAP REORDERING

In this section, we compare DTQN with different forms of the “Combine“ step (see Figure 1) as
well as different positions of LayerNorm. DTQN’s combine step is a residual skip connection,
and the LayerNorm occurs after both the attention and the feedforward submodules. In contrast,
GTrXL (Parisotto et al., 2020) introduced GRU-like gating in the combine step, and identity map
reordering, which moves the LayerNorms directly in front of the masked multi self attention and
feedforward sections. We compare our DTQN with residual skip connection to a version of DTQN
which uses GRU-like gating, a version of DTQN which uses identity map reordering, and a version
which uses both GRU-like gating and identity map reordering. When both GRU gates and the
identity map reordering is used, the architecture resembles GTrXL. However, we do not use the
TransformerXL (Dai et al., 2019) as in GTrXL, therefore we are not comparing to an exact replica.
The results for this ablation are shown in Table 1. DTQN performs competitively with the ablated
versions. The variant with only identity map reordering performs significantly worse than the other
versions, and the version with both identity map reordering and GRU-like gating performs worst on
hallway. Both DTQN and the GRU-like gating variant perform competitively on all three domains we
tested. Although we do not use the TransformerXL in our experiments, we would expect to see the
same relative performance across if we replaced our transformer decoder with the TransformerXL.
A comparison of different transformer backbones, such as Big Bird (Zaheer et al., 2020), sparse
transformers (Child et al., 2019), or the TransformerXL would be interesting future study.

5.4   P OSITIONAL ENCODINGS

DTQN uses learned positional encodings to allow the network to adapt to different domains. Partially
observable domains will exhibit a broad range of temporal sensitivity, and we want to provide DTQN
the flexibility to learn encodings to match its domain. In this section, we compare the use of learned
positional encodings with the sinusoidal encodings in the original transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
as well as no positional encodings. The results for this comparison are shown in Table 1. In the
memory cards domain, the variant of DTQN without positional encodings performs significantly
worse than both our learned encodings as well as the sinusoidal encodings. However, in the gridverse
memory task and hallway, the three styles of positional encodings perform comparably. We analyze
the resulting learned positional encodings from our trained DTQN agents across various domains in
Appendix E.

5.5   I NTERMEDIATE Q- VALUE PREDICTION

DTQN predicts and trains on the Q-values generated for each timestep in the agent’s observation
history. During evaluation, however, we only consider the last timestep’s Q-values when determining
which action to take. We could, therefore, train in the same way, only training with the last timesteps’
Q-values. We compare these two training regimes, and the results for this are shown in Table 1.
Our results show the variant trained without intermediate Q-values suffers a significant performance
decrease. In the memory cards case, DTQN excels and solves the task with nearly 90% success rate,
but the variant without intermediate Q-value prediction can barely solve the task 10% of the time. By
training on all generated Q-values, we produce a more robust and effective agent.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Ablations. We report the final success rate for each variant, averaged across 5 seeds, with
standard error.

                                                GV memory 7x7     Memory cards      Hallway    Average
                            DTQN (ours)             75.2 ± 7.2      89.8 ± 1.9    98.3 ± 1.0     87.77
                            Gate and identity       80.3 ± 6.4      90.8 ± 3.0     67.5 ± 10     79.53
    Transformer structure
                            Gate only               78.3 ± 4.4      88.9 ± 1.2       100 ± 0     89.07
                            Identity only           65.3 ± 6.7      88.5 ± 1.8     69.8 ± 10      74.5
                            Learned (ours)          75.2 ± 7.2      89.8 ± 1.9    98.3 ± 1.0     87.77
    Positional encodings    Sinusoidal              83.1 ± 5.0      85.5 ± 1.9      92 ± 3.9     86.87
                            None                    85.5 ± 3.7      70.8 ± 2.8      99 ± 0.4      85.1
    Intermediate Q-value    DTQN (ours)              75.2 ± 7.2      89.8 ± 1.9   98.3 ± 1.0     87.77
         prediction         None                    56.27 ± 14        9.0 ± 2.2   92.8 ± 0.7     52.69


6      D ISCUSSION
DTQN outperforms or is competitive with our
baselines in terms of learning speed and final
performance on all our domains. One additional
advantage of transformers is the ability to visu-
alize self-attention weights as a form of inter-
preting the model. Intuitively, the self-attention
mechanism allows the agent to prioritize obser-
vations in its history which provide it with the
most information useful in solving its task. The
causal masking ensures the agent cannot attend
to observations in its future, resembling how
the agent will need to perform during execution.
While the use of attention weights as a tool for
explainability is still being studied (Jain & Wal-
lace, 2019; Wiegreffe & Pinter, 2019), it does
allow us to observe which observations the agent
finds most valuable in its history. In Figure 4,
we visualize a trained DTQN agent’s attention Figure 4: Attention bars for gridverse memory 7x7.
weights from a trajectory in gridverse memory Bars go from left to right, and observations go top
7x7. Crucially, the observation including the to bottom (i.e. the second observation attended
green beacon (circle with X, magnified on right) to the first and second observation). Attention
is strongly attended to by all future observations, weights below 0.2 have been removed for visibility.
indicating the DTQN agent has correctly learned which observations are important in solving the task.
When the agent sees the green flag (magnified on left), it attends to the observation with green beacon
to ensure it selects the correct flag. We provide additional attention visualizations in Appendix D

7      C ONCLUSION
In this work we introduce Deep Transformer Q-Networks, a novel architecture for solving challenging
partially observable domains with reinforcement learning. DTQN incorporates the transformer
decoder, which excels in generating Q-values for each timestep of the agent’s observation history. We
train the model on all generated Q-values, enabling an efficient training regime and faster learning.
DTQN also utilizes learned positional encodings, empowering the model to learn domain-specific
encodings which match the temporal dependencies of the environment. We explore and ablate several
architectural structures, and find our choices either outperform or are at least competitive with all
tested variants. Finally, we provide a modular code implementation of DTQN that is easy to extend
and modify, which we hope the research community will be able to use as we expect our approach
to serve as the basis and benchmark for future transformer-based methods in partially observable
reinforcement learning.



                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Rami Al-Rfou, Dokook Choe, Noah Constant, Mandy Guo, and Llion Jones. Character-level language modeling
  with deeper self-attention. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 33, pp.
  3159–3166, 2019.

Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450,
   2016.

Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to
  align and translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.

Andrea Baisero and Sammie Katt. gym-gridverse: Gridworld domains for fully and partially observable
  reinforcement learning. https://github.com/abaisero/gym-gridverse, 2021.

Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environment: An
 evaluation platform for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 47:253–279, 2013.

Blai Bonet. Solving large pomdps using real time dynamic programming. In In Proc. AAAI Fall Symp. on
  POMDPs, 1998.

Micah Carroll, Jessy Lin, Orr Paradise, Raluca Georgescu, Mingfei Sun, David Bignell, Stephanie Milani,
  Katja Hofmann, Matthew Hausknecht, Anca Dragan, et al. Towards flexible inference in sequential decision
  problems via bidirectional transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.13326, 2022.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel, Aravind
   Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. Advances
   in neural information processing systems, 34, 2021.

Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, and Ilya Sutskever. Generating long sequences with sparse transformers.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.

Kyunghyun Cho, Bart Van Merriënboer, Dzmitry Bahdanau, and Yoshua Bengio. On the properties of neural
  machine translation: Encoder-decoder approaches. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1259, 2014.

Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Transformer-xl:
  Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.02860, 2019.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
   transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner,
  Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image is worth 16x16 words:
  Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.

Jakob N Foerster, Yannis M Assael, Nando de Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning to communicate to solve
   riddles with deep distributed recurrent q-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.02672, 2016.

Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods.
  In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1587–1596. PMLR, 2018.

Wenbo Gao, Laura Graesser, Krzysztof Choromanski, Xingyou Song, Nevena Lazic, Pannag Sanketi, Vikas
  Sindhwani, and Navdeep Jaitly. Robotic table tennis with model-free reinforcement learning. In 2020
 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5556–5563. IEEE, 2020.

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash Kumar,
  Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, et al. Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.

Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Stabilizing deep q-learning with convnets and vision transformers
  under data augmentation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Matthew Hausknecht and Peter Stone. Deep recurrent q-learning for partially observable mdps. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1507.06527, 2015.

Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 770–778, 2016.


                                                      10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado Van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan Horgan,
 Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining improvements in deep reinforcement
 learning. In Thirty-second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, 2018.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–1780,
  1997.
Maximilian Igl, Luisa Zintgraf, Tuan Anh Le, Frank Wood, and Shimon Whiteson. Deep variational rein-
 forcement learning for pomdps. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2117–2126. PMLR,
 2018.
Shariq Iqbal and Fei Sha. Actor-attention-critic for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2961–2970. PMLR, 2019.
Sarthak Jain and Byron C Wallace. Attention is not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10186, 2019.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence modeling
  problem. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34, 2021.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling, Michael L Littman, and Anthony R Cassandra. Planning and acting in partially observable
  stochastic domains. Artificial intelligence, 101(1-2):99–134, 1998.
Michał Kempka, Marek Wydmuch, Grzegorz Runc, Jakub Toczek, and Wojciech Jaśkowski. Vizdoom: A doom-
  based ai research platform for visual reinforcement learning. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computational
  Intelligence and Games (CIG), pp. 1–8, 2016. doi:10.1109/CIG.2016.7860433.
Guillaume Lample and Devendra Singh Chaplot. Playing fps games with deep reinforcement learning. In
  Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2017.
Sergey Levine, Peter Pastor, Alex Krizhevsky, Julian Ibarz, and Deirdre Quillen. Learning hand-eye coordination
  for robotic grasping with deep learning and large-scale data collection. The International journal of robotics
  research, 37(4-5):421–436, 2018.
Michael L. Littman, Anthony R. Cassandra, and Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning policies for partially observable
  environments: Scaling up, 1995.
Xiao Ma, Peter Karkus, David Hsu, Wee Sun Lee, and Nan Ye. Discriminative particle filter reinforcement
  learning for complex partial observations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.09884, 2020.
Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1707.03141, 2017.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare, Alex
  Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep
  reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Alexander Mott, Daniel Zoran, Mike Chrzanowski, Daan Wierstra, and Danilo Jimenez Rezende. Towards
  interpretable reinforcement learning using attention augmented agents. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Hai Nguyen. Pomdp robot domains. https://github.com/hai-h-nguyen/pomdp-domains, 2021.
Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Recurrent model-free rl can be a strong baseline
   for many pomdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05038, 2021.
Emilio Parisotto, Francis Song, Jack Rae, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Siddhant Jayakumar, Max Jaderberg,
  Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Aidan Clark, Seb Noury, et al. Stabilizing transformers for reinforcement learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7487–7498. PMLR, 2020.
Lerrel Pinto, Marcin Andrychowicz, Peter Welinder, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Asymmetric actor
  critic for image-based robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06542, 2017.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language understanding by
  generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language models are
  unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Juergen Schmidhuber. Reinforcement learning upside down: Don’t predict rewards–just map them to actions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02875, 2019.


                                                      11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George Van Den Driessche, Julian
  Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, et al. Mastering the game of go with
  deep neural networks and tree search. nature, 529(7587):484–489, 2016.
Ivan Sorokin, Alexey Seleznev, Mikhail Pavlov, Aleksandr Fedorov, and Anastasiia Ignateva. Deep attention
   recurrent q-network. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.01693, 2015.

Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press, second
  edition, 2018. URL http://incompleteideas.net/book/the-book-2nd.html.

Uddeshya Upadhyay, Nikunj Shah, Sucheta Ravikanti, and Mayanka Medhe. Transformer based reinforcement
  learning for games. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03918, 2019.

Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-learning. In
  Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, volume 30, 2016.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp.
  5998–6008, 2017.

Yu-An Wang and Yun-Nung Chen. What do position embeddings learn? an empirical study of pre-trained
  language model positional encoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04903, 2020.
Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. In Machine Learning, pp. 279–292, 1992.

Sarah Wiegreffe and Yuval Pinter. Attention is not not explanation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.04626, 2019.

Yunqiu Xu, Ling Chen, Meng Fang, Yang Wang, and Chengqi Zhang. Deep reinforcement learning with
  transformers for text adventure games. In 2020 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG), pp. 65–72. IEEE, 2020.
Zhihan Yang and Hai Huu Nguyen. Recurrent off-policy baselines for memory-based continuous control. In
  Deep RL Workshop NeurIPS 2021, 2021.

Manzil Zaheer, Guru Guruganesh, Kumar Avinava Dubey, Joshua Ainslie, Chris Alberti, Santiago Ontanon,
 Philip Pham, Anirudh Ravula, Qifan Wang, Li Yang, et al. Big bird: Transformers for longer sequences.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:17283–17297, 2020.

Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Aditya Grover. Online decision transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05607,
  2022.

Pengfei Zhu, Xin Li, Pascal Poupart, and Guanghui Miao. On improving deep reinforcement learning for
  pomdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.07978, 2017.


                                                    12
