Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P RETRAINING THE V ISION T RANSFORMER USING SELF -
SUPERVISED METHODS FOR VISION BASED D EEP R EIN -
FORCEMENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The Vision Transformer architecture has shown to be competitive in the computer
         vision (CV) space where it has dethroned convolution-based networks in several
         benchmarks. Nevertheless, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) remain the pref-
         erential architecture for the representation module in Reinforcement Learning. In
         this work, we study pretraining a Vision Transformer using several state-of-the-art
         self-supervised methods and assess data-efficiency gains from this training frame-
         work. We propose a new self-supervised learning method called TOV-VICReg
         that extends VICReg to better capture temporal relations between observations by
         adding a temporal order verification task. Furthermore, we evaluate the resultant
         encoders with Atari games in a sample-efficiency regime. Our results show that
         the vision transformer, when pretrained with TOV-VICReg, outperforms the other
         self-supervised methods but still struggles to overcome a CNN. Nevertheless, we
         were able to outperform a CNN in two of the ten games where we perform a 100k
         steps evaluation. Ultimately, we believe that such approaches in Deep Reinforce-
         ment Learning (DRL) might be the key to achieving new levels of performance as
         seen in natural language processing and computer vision.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Despite the successes of deep reinforcement learning agents in the last decade, these still require
a large amount of data or interactions to learn good policies. This data inefficiency makes current
methods difficult to apply to environments where interactions are more expensive or data is scarce,
which is the case in many real-world applications. In environments where the agent doesn’t have
full access to the current state (partially observable environments), this problem becomes even
more prominent, since the agent not only needs to learn the state-to-action mapping but also a state
representation function that tries to be informative about a state given an observation. In contrast,
humans, when learning a new task, already have a well-developed visual system and a good model
of the world which are components that allow us to easily learn new tasks. Previous works have
tried to tackle the sample inefficiency problem by using auxiliary learning tasks (Schwarzer et al.,
2021b; Stooke et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2020), that try to help the network’s encoder to learn good
representations of the observations given by the environments. These tasks can be supervised or
unsupervised and can happen during a pretraining phase or a reinforcement learning (RL) phase in a
joint-learning or decoupled-learning scheme.
In recent years, self-supervised learning has shown to be very useful in computer vision, the increasing
interest in this area has resulted in the appearance of new and improved methods that train a network
to learn important features from the data using only the data itself as supervision. A common
approach to evaluating such methods is to train a network composed of the pretrained encoder,
with the parameters frozen, paired with a linear layer in popular datasets, like ImageNet. These
evaluations have shown that these methods can achieve high scores in different benchmarks, which
shows how well the current state-of-the-art methods are able to encode useful information from the
given images without being task-specific. Additionally, it has been shown that pretraining a network
using self-supervised learning (or unsupervised) adds robustness to the network and gives better
generalization capabilities (Erhan et al., 2010).


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Also recently, a new architecture for vision-based tasks called the Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovit-
skiy et al., 2020) has shown impressive results in several benchmarks without using any convolutions.
This architecture presents much weaker inductive biases when compared to a CNN, which can result
in lower data efficiency. But the Vision Transformer, unlike the CNNs, can capture relations between
parts of an image (patches) that are far apart from each other, thus deriving global information that
can help the model perform better in certain tasks. Furthermore, when the model is pretrained, using
supervised or self-supervised learning, it manages to surpass the best convolution-based models in
terms of task performance. Nonetheless, and despite these successes in computer vision these results
are yet to be seen in reinforcement learning.
Motivated by the potential of the Vision Transformer, in particular when paired with a pretraining
phase, and the increasing interest in self-supervised tasks for DRL, we study pretraining ViT using
state-of-the-art (SOTA) self-supervised learning methods and use it as the representation module in a
Deep RL algorithm. Consequently, we propose extending VICReg (Variance Invariance Covariance
Regularization) (Bardes et al., 2022) with a temporal order verification task (Misra et al., 2016) to
help the model better capture the temporal relations between consecutive observations. We named
this approach Temporal Order Verification-VICReg or in short TOV-VICReg. While we could have
adapted any of the other methods, we opted for VICReg due to its computational performance,
simplicity, and good results in early experiments and metrics such as the ones presented in Section 7.
After our empirical results in the Atari games, we present a small study of the pretrained encoders
using several metrics to understand if they suffer from any representational collapse and also analyse
the learned representations using similarity matrices and attention maps.
Our main contributions are:

       • We propose a new self-supervised learning method which extends VICReg to capture the
         temporal relations between consecutive frames through a temporal order verification task, in
         Section 4.
       • We pretrain a Vision Transformer using several SOTA self-supervised methods and our
         proposed method, and study them through metrics (Section 7), visualizations (Section 8) and
         fine-tuning in reinforcement learning ( Section 6), where we show that temporal relations
         learned by the model pretrained with our method contribute to a relevant increase in data
         efficiency.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Pretraining representations Previous work, similarly to our approach, has explored pretraining
representations using self-supervised methods which led to great data-efficiency improvements in the
fine-tuning phase (Schwarzer et al., 2021b; Zhan et al., 2020) or superior results in evaluation tasks,
like AtariARI (Anand et al., 2020). Others have pretrained representations using RL algorithms, like
DQN, and transfer those learned representations to a new learning task (Wang et al., 2022).

Temporal Relations Other works have explored learning representations that have temporal in-
formation encoded. ATC (Augmented Temporal Contrast) (Stooke et al., 2021) trains an encoder
to compute temporally consistent representations using contrastive learning, and the ST-DIM (Spa-
tioTemporal DeepInfoMax) (Anand et al., 2020) captures spatial-temporal information by maximizing
the mutual information between features of two consecutive observations.

Joint learning In recent years, adding an auxiliary loss to the RL loss, usually called joint learning,
has become a common approach by many proposed methods. Curl (Srinivas et al., 2020) adds a
contrastive loss using a siamese network with a momentum encoder. Another work studies different
joint-learning frameworks using different self-supervised methods (Li et al., 2022). SPR (Schwarzer
et al., 2021a) uses an auxiliary task that consists of training the encoder followed by an RNN to
predict the encoder representation k steps into the future. PSEs (Agarwal et al., 2021a) combines a
policy similarity metric (PSM), that measures the similarity of states in terms of the behaviour of
the policy in those states, and a contrastive task for the embeddings (CME) that helps to learn more
robust representations. PBL (Guo et al., 2020) learns representations through an interdependence
between an encoder, that is trained to be informative about the history that led to that observation,
and an RNN that is trained to predict the representations of future observations. Proto-RL (Yarats


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2021) uses an auxiliary self-supervised objective to learn representations and prototypes (Caron
et al., 2020), and uses the learned prototypes to compute intrinsic rewards which will push the agent
to explore the environment.

Augmentations While we only use augmentations in the pre-training phase, their use during
reinforcement learning has also been studied. Methods like DrQ (Kostrikov et al., 2021) and RAD
(Laskin et al., 2020) pair an RL algorithm, like SAC, with image augmentations to improve data
efficiency and generalization of the algorithms.

Vision Transformer for vision-based Deep RL Recent works, also compare the Vision Trans-
former to convolution-based architectures with a similar number of parameters and show that ViT is
very data inefficient even when paired with an auxiliary task (Tao et al., 2022).

Self-Supervised learning for image sequences Multiple works propose simple pretext tasks to
train encoders to capture information from image sequences. These pretexts tasks can be playback
speed classification (Yao et al., 2020), a temporal order classification (Misra et al., 2016; Lee et al.,
2017; Xu et al., 2019), a jigsaw game (Ahsan et al., 2019) or a masked modelling task (Sun et al.,
2019). A different approach consists of using contrastive learning. In this category, we can find
methods that maximise the similarity between image sequences (Feichtenhofer et al., 2021), use
autoregressive models to predict frames multiple steps in the future Lorre et al. (2020), and maximize
the similarity between temporally adjacent frames (Knights et al., 2021).


3     BACKGROUND

3.1     V ISION T RANSFORMER

ViT (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020) is a model, for image classification tasks, that doesn’t rely on CNNs
using only attention. The model wraps the encoder of a Transformer, uses patches of the input
image as tokens and adds a classification token which after the computation will serve as the image
representation. When compared to CNNs, ViT presents weaker image-specific inductive biases which
can impact the sample-efficiency of the model during learning (d’Ascoli et al., 2021), however, it
has been shown that with enough data the image-specific inductive biases become less important
(Dosovitskiy et al., 2020). Moreover, ViT can capture relations between patches that are far apart
from each other, thus deriving global information that can help the model perform better in certain
tasks

3.2     R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

The problem of an agent learning to solve a task in a certain environment can be defined as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP). A MDP M is defined by the tuple ⟨S, A, R, T ⟩, where S is the set of
states, A the set of actions, R the reward function, and T the transition function. At each timestep the
agent is in a state s ∈ S and takes an action a ∈ A. Upon performing the action the agent receives
from the environment a reward r ∈ R and a new state s′ ∈ S which is determined by the transition
function T (s′ , s, a). The MDP assumes that the Markov property holds in the environment, i.e. the
state transitions are independent and the agent only needs to know the current state to perform an
action P (at |x0 , x1 ...xt ) = P (at |xt ). For the agent to decide what action to take it uses a policy
function π, which gives a distribution over actions given a state, π(at |st ). This policy is evaluated
using the function V π (s), which estimates the expected total discounted reward of an agent in a state
s and which follows a policy π.

3.2.1    DQN AND R AINBOW

DQN (Mnih et al., 2013) is a value-based method and uses a network with parameters ϕ that
given a state s outputs a prediction of the distribution of Q values over actions, Qϕ (s, a). The
network learns the Q function by minimizing the mean squared error: (y − Qϕ (s, a))2 , where
y = r + γ maxa′ Qϕ (s′ , a′ ), as shown in Algorithm 1 at the Appendix.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Several works followed the DQN algorithm which introduced changes to improve performance.
Rainbow (Hessel et al., 2017) combines six improvements, Double Q-Learning (van Hasselt et al.,
2016), Prioritized Replay (Schaul et al., 2016), Dueling Networks (Wang et al., 2016), Multi-step
Learning (Sutton & Barto, 2018), Distributional RL (Bellemare et al., 2017), and Noisy Nets
(Fortunato et al., 2018) resulting in a more stable and sample efficient algorithm.

3.3   S ELF -S UPERVISED METHODS

Recent self-supervised methods for vision tasks can be put in two main categories: contrastive and
non-contrastive.
In contrastive learning, methods like MoCo (He et al., 2020) or SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a) learn
using a loss function that pulls the positive samples together and pushes the negative samples apart.
These methods usually require very large batch sizes or auxiliary structures that allow for more
negative samples. MoCo, in particular, has three iterations v1 (He et al., 2020), v2 (Chen et al., 2020b),
and v3(Chen et al., 2021). In this work, we consider the more recent version (v3). This version uses a
siamese network, where in one path the augmented samples (queries) are computed by an encoder fθ
(backbone) and a projector gϕ , and in the other the samples (keys) by a momentum-encoder fθ ′ and
a projector gϕ . The loss function is the InfoNCE loss, with temperature, of the dot product of the
queries with the keys.
On the other hand, non-contrastive methods don’t rely on the notion of positive and negative samples
which results in a vast number of different approaches. DINO (Caron et al., 2021) consists of a siamese
network where each path is fed with a random augmentation of the input and where the encoders learn
to minimize the cross-entropy between their normalized output probability distributions, computed
using a softmax with temperature scaling. The teacher encoder is updated using an exponential
moving average of the student encoder parameters and in its computation path is used an additional
centring operation that contributes to an asymmetry that helps the method avoid collapse. Unlike,
most methods, DINO creates more than 2 augmentations of the same source. More precisely it creates
a set of views composed of two global views and several local views. All views are computed by the
student network while only the global views are computed by the teacher network, which pushes the
student to create a local-to-global correspondence.
VICReg, on the other hand, tries to learn representations invariant to augmentations by minimizing
the L2 distance while maintaining some variance in the representation features and decorrelating
features. A more detailed explanation of the method will be presented in Section 4.
For this study we selected DINO, MoCo, and VICReg since they are currently considered state-of-
the-art, their official implementations are available in PyTorch, and each represents a different type of
approach.


4     TOV-VICR EG

VICReg is a non-contrastive method that trains a network to be invariant to augmentations applied
to the inputs while avoiding a trivial solution with the help of two additional losses, called variance
and covariance, that act as regularizers over the embeddings. While VICReg is agnostic concerning
the architectures used and even the weight sharing, in this work we consider the version where
paths are symmetric, the weights are shared, and each path is composed of an encoder (also called
backbone) and an expander. The expander increases the dimension of the representation vector in a
non-linear way allowing the covariance loss to reduce dependencies and not only correlations of the
representation vector. In addition, the expander also removes information that is not common to both
representations.
VICReg uses three loss functions: invariance is the mean of square distance between each pair of
embeddings from the same original image, as shown in Equation 1, where Z, and Z ′ are two sets of
embeddings, of size N , that result from computing two different augmentations of N sources, and
zj denotes the j-th embedding in the set; variance is a hinge loss that computes, over the batch, the
standard deviation of the variables in the embedding vector and pushes that value to be above a certain
threshold, as shown in Equation 2, where d denotes the number of dimensions of the embedding
vector, and Z j is the set of the j-th variables in the set of embedding Z; covariance is a function


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that computes the sum of the squared off-diagonal coefficients of a covariance matrix computed over
a batch of embeddings, as shown in Equation 3, to decorrelate the variables from the embedding.
While the invariance loss function tries to make the model invariant to augmentations, i.e. output the
same representation vector, the other two functions regularize the method by pushing the variables
of the embedding vector to vary above a certain threshold and decorrelating the variables in each
embedding vector.

                                                          N
                                                    1 X          2
                                     i(Z, Z ′ ) =       zj − zj′ 2                                     (1)
                                                    N j

                                             d
                                         1X            p
                               v(Z) =        max(0, γ − V ar(Z j ))                                    (2)
                                         d j


                                                 1X         2
                                       c(Z) =       [Cov(Z)]i,j                                        (3)
                                                 d
                                                    i̸=j


TOV-VICReg or Temporal-Order-Verification-VICReg extends VICReg to better capture the tem-
poral relations between consecutive observations and consequently encode extra information that
can be useful in the deep reinforcement learning phase. To achieve that we add a new temporal
order verification task, as seen in Shuffle-and-Learn (Misra et al., 2016), that consists of a binary
classification task where a linear layer learns to predict if three given representation vectors are in the
correct order or not. Like the other losses, we also employ a coefficient for the temporal loss and in
most of our experiments, the value is 0.1. Figure 1 visually illustrates TOV-VICReg.


                                 Figure 1: TOV-VICReg architecture

At each step we sample 3 consecutive observations, {xt−1 , xt , xt+1 }, xt is processed by two
different augmentations, and like VICReg these are the augmentations used in BYOL (Grill et al.,
2020), while xt−1 and xt+1 are processed by two simple augmentations composed of a color jitter
and a random grayscale. The xt augmentations are computed by the VICReg computation path and
the resultant embeddings are used for the loss functions, i.e. variance, invariance, and covariance. In
the temporal order verification task we encode the augmentation of xt−1 and xt+1 , and concatenate
those two representations with one of the representations of xt , in our case we used the one that was
augmented without solarize, obtaining the vector {yt−1 , yt , yt+1 }. At last, we randomly permute the
order of the representations in the vector and feed the resultant concatenated vector to a linear layer
with a single output node that predicts if the given concatenated vector has the representations in
the right order or not. The temporal loss used to optimize the model for this task is a Binary Cross
Entropy loss. TOV-VICReg’s pseudocode can be found in Appendix D.


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5     P RE -T RAINING M ETHODOLOGY

We pretrained four encoders, one using our proposed method TOV-VICReg and three using state-of-
the-art self-supervised methods: MoCov3 (Chen et al., 2021), DINO (Caron et al., 2021) and VICReg
(Bardes et al., 2022). For this study, the encoder used is a Vision Transformer, more precisely the
ViT tiny with a patch size of 8. We chose this patch size based on experiments that show that this
value performed well in terms of data-efficiency when compared to 6, 10, and 12 without being too
computationally intensive (Appendix B). Moreover, the implementation we use is an adaptation of
the timm library (Wightman, 2019) implementation, which can be found in the source code of the
DINO method. The dataset used is a set of observations from 10 of the 26 games in the Atari 100k
benchmark, all available in the DQN Replay Dataset (Agarwal et al., 2020). For each game, we use
three checkpoints with a size of one hundred thousand data points (observations), which makes up a
total of three million data points (~55 hours). The pretraining phase is 10 epochs with two warmup
epochs. We used the official code bases of all the self-supervised methods and tried to change the
least amount of hyperparameters. Appendix H contains the tables with the hyperparameters used for
each method.


6     DATA -E FFICIENCY

To test the pretrained Vision Transformers in reinforcement learning and compare data-efficiency
gains, we trained in the 10 games used for pre-training for 100k steps using the Rainbow algorithm
(Hessel et al., 2017), with the DER (van Hasselt et al., 2019) hyperparameters. The only difference
between the agents at the start is the representation module. We chose two networks to compare
against, the Nature CNN (Mnih et al., 2015), and a ResNet with an amount of parameters similar
to ViT tiny (Appendix C) (Schwarzer et al., 2021b) that has a size roughly similar to the ViT tiny.
Moreover, we use a learning rate two orders of magnitude smaller for the encoder (1 × 10−6 ), which
previous works and experiments performed by us show to be beneficial (Schwarzer et al., 2021b).
In this section, to report our results we follow the rliable (Agarwal et al., 2021b) evaluation framework,
where the scores of all games are normalized and treated as one single task.

6.1   R ESULTS

Figure 2 shows the aggregate metrics of seven different encoders on 10 Atari games with training
runs of 100k steps. The first four (ViT+<method>) are ViT tiny models pretrained with four different
self-supervised methods, while the last three (ViT, ResNet, and Nature CNN) are randomly initialized
models. Starting with the randomly initialized models we can assess that the Nature CNN and
the ResNet are the most sample efficient models, with ViT far behind. Regarding the pretrained
models, ViT, when pretrained with our method, performs better than the other models and the
non-pretrained ViT in all metrics. It is worth noting that we report a higher variance in the results
of our proposed method when compared to the remaining methods and non-pretrained models.
ViT+TOV-VICReg when compared to Nature CNN, which has far fewer parameters, and ResNet,
with a similar number of parameters seems to closely match their sample-efficiency performance
(Appendix Table 7). Furthermore, the difference between the non-pretrained ViT and ViT pretrained
with TOV-VICReg shows that a good self-supervised method that explores temporal relations and
3 million data points can help close the sample-efficiency gap while remaining a more complex
and capable model. Regarding the remaining self-supervised methods, MoCo seems to perform
considerably well obtaining even a median very similar to TOV-VICReg and is then followed by
DINO and VICReg, respectively. All pretrained ViTs show an improvement in comparison to the
non-pretrained ViT.


7     M ETRICS

A significant phenomenon when doing self-supervised training is the collapse of the representations,
which can be seen in three forms: representational collapse, dimensional collapse, and informational
collapse. Representational collapse refers to the features of the representation vector collapsing
to a single value for every input, meaning the variance of the features is zero, or close to zero. In


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: The eval runs across the different games are normalized and treated as a single task. The
IQM corresponds to the Inter-Quartile Mean among all the runs, where the top and bottom 25% are
discarded and the mean is calculated over the remaining 50%. The Optimality Gap refers to the
number of runs that fail to surpass the human average score, i.e. 1.0.


dimensional collapse, the representations don’t use the full representation space, which can be mea-
sured by calculating the singular values of the covariance matrix calculated over the representations.
Informational collapse defines the case where the features of the representation vector are correlated
and therefore are representing the same information.

Dimensional Collapse All methods seem to avoid dimensional collapse, i.e. most dimensions have
a singular value larger than zero, as observed in Figure 3. However, we notice that some methods
make better use of the space available since they present higher singular values. TOV-VICReg, in
particular, seems to excel in this metric, even improving the results obtained by VICReg. It is worth
noting that both VICReg and TOV-VICReg employ a covariance loss that helps decorrelate the
embedding variables which may be contributing positively to these results. Furthermore, we used
a covariance coefficient of 10 for TOV-VICReg and 1 for VICReg a change that according to our
experiments culminates in the increase here observed.


Figure 3: Logarithm of the singular values of the representation vector’s covariance matrix sorted by
value.


Representational Collapse Results in the first row of Table 1 show the computed standard deviation
of the representation vector over a batch of thousands of data points. DINO, VICReg and TOV-
VICReg show a value well above zero, meaning that none of the methods suffered from representation
collapse during training. On the other hand, MoCo shows a much smaller value of 0.178, which is
still, is far from a complete collapse. Both VICReg and TOV-VICReg use a hinge loss that pushes
the representation vector to have a standard deviation of 1 or above. While VICReg slowly converges
to this value our method converges to roughly 1.65, which might be the result of adding a temporal
order verification task.

Informational Collapse We report in the second row of Table 1, the comparison of the average
correlation coefficients of the representation vectors. TOV-VICReg performs better than the other
methods, including VICReg, which present very similar coefficients. Like in the dimensional collapse,
this result is in part due to the higher covariance coefficient used in TOV-VICReg which by design


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Metric         DINO      MoCo       VICReg      TOV-VICReg
                    Std            0.979     0.178      1.003       1.648
                    Corr. Coef.    0.1764    0.1538     0.1531      0.0780

    Table 1: Average standard deviation and correlation coefficient of the representation vector


helps the model to decorrelate the representation’s features. Increasing the coefficient in VICReg
results in a lower correlation coefficient as well, but is still higher than TOV-VICReg.

8   R EPRESENTATIONS
In this section, we present different visualizations to better understand the representations learned by
each of the methods. Our goal with the following visualizations is to help us better understand the
learned representations and give some intuitions about their properties.

Cosine similarity Figure 4 presents a similarity matrix of the representations where we can
observe that TOV-VICReg can better distinguish between observations of different games but also
observations from the same game, as shown in Figure 5. MoCo, on the other hand, seems to make a
good distinction between observations from the same game. However, we can observe in the colour
bar that all the representations are very similar to each other, which corroborates the results obtained
in Section 7. Oppositely, VICReg and DINO manage to spread representations more, as we can see
in the colour bars, but, the yellow squares in the diagonal show that the representations from the
same game are more similar to each other which is corroborated by Figure 5. Given the empirical
results, we believe that this capacity to distinguish observations from the same game might be a good
indicator.


Figure 4: Similarity matrices of the representations computed by MoCo, DINO, VICReg, and TOV-
VICReg respectively. There are a total of 64 data points, from 4 different games: Alien, Breakout,
MsPacman, and Pong, where from 0-15 are from Alien, 16-31 are from Breakout and so forth.


Figure 5: Similarity matrices of the representations computed by MoCo, DINO, VICReg, and TOV-
VICReg respectively, of observations from MsPacman.


Attention visualisation The research work that proposes DINO shows that the Vision Transformer
is able to attend to important parts of the input after training using DINO. Inspired by these results,
we try to make the same evaluation for the several self-supervised methods we are studying, including
TOV-VICReg, and try to understand if any of the encoders can attend to interesting parts of the input.


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Figure 6, we can see the results of all methods for an observation from the game of Pong, where
each method produces three attention maps, one for each self-attention head of the last block of the
Vision Transformer. All pretrained ViT seem to attend at some level to important game features like
the ball and the paddles. However, TOV-VICReg is the only method that doesn’t spread the attention
to other parts of the frame that we don’t consider important to describe the current state of the
game. When comparing to VICReg’s attention maps we believe that the temporal order verification
task greatly helped the attention of the model. In more visually complex games, e.g. Freeway or
MsPacman, these attention maps start to be more difficult to analyse but it is still possible to discern
some important features.


Figure 6: Attention maps produced by the pretrained ViTs. We fed a pretrained ViT with an
observation from the game Pong and obtained the attention maps from the three heads in the last
block.


9    D ISCUSSION & C ONCLUSION

In this work, we presented a study of ViT for vision-based deep reinforcement learning using
self-supervised pretraining, and proposed a self-supervised method that extends VICReg to better
capture temporal relations between consecutive observations. Our results showed that the agent
using a Vision Transformer that was pretrained with our method manages to surpass all other Vision
Transformers, pretrained and non-pretrained, in sample efficiency and also achieves results very close
to convolution-based models with far fewer parameters. These results reinforce the importance of
encoding temporal relations between observations in the representation model, as shown by previous
works, and also show that even vision models with weaker inductive biases and more parameters,
when well pretrained, can achieve similar results in sample efficiency. Furthermore, we show several
metrics, evaluation tasks and visualizations which can be of great value for future work.
The ability to use larger models, with millions of parameters, that are as sample efficient as some
of the most popular CNN-based models (like Nature CNN or Impala ResNet), with thousands of
parameters, is very important since it opens the door to using Deep RL in even more complex
problems where smaller models tend to struggle to perform, without losing sample-efficiency. In
this work, we try to advance the knowledge by studying the pretrain of a vision transformer using
self-supervised methods. This approach has seen successes in natural language processing (Devlin
et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020), and computer vision (Radford et al., 2021) and we believe that
similar approaches in RL have the potential to unlock new levels of performance never achieved
before (Baker et al., 2022).


R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Dale Schuurmans, and Mohammad Norouzi. An Optimistic Perspective on Offline
  Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1907.04543, June 2020.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rishabh Agarwal, Marlos C. Machado, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Marc G. Bellemare. Contrastive Be-
  havioral Similarity Embeddings for Generalization in Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2101.05265,
  March 2021a.
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep Reinforcement Learning at the Edge of the Statistical Precipice. In Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 2021b.
Unaiza Ahsan, Rishi Madhok, and Irfan Essa. Video jigsaw: Unsupervised learning of spatiotemporal
  context for video action recognition. In 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
 Vision (WACV), pp. 179–189. IEEE, 2019.
Ankesh Anand, Evan Racah, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and R. Devon
  Hjelm. Unsupervised State Representation Learning in Atari. Technical Report arXiv:1906.08226,
  arXiv, November 2020.
Bowen Baker, Ilge Akkaya, Peter Zhokhov, Joost Huizinga, Jie Tang, Adrien Ecoffet, Brandon
  Houghton, Raul Sampedro, and Jeff Clune. Video PreTraining (VPT): Learning to Act by Watching
  Unlabeled Online Videos. arXiv:2206.11795, June 2022.
Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann Lecun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regulariza-
  tion for self-supervised learning. In ICLR 2022-10th International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2022.
Marc G. Bellemare, Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
 learning. In Doina Precup and Yee Whye Teh (eds.), Proceedings of the 34th International
 Conference on Machine Learning, volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
 449–458, 06–11 Aug 2017.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. OpenAI Gym. arXiv:1606.01540, June 2016.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised Learning of Visual Features by Contrasting Cluster Assignments. In Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 9912–9924, 2020.
Mathilde Caron, Hugo Touvron, Ishan Misra, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Piotr Bojanowski, and
 Armand Joulin. Emerging Properties in Self-Supervised Vision Transformers. In Proceedings of
 the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 9650–9660, 2021.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A Simple Framework
  for Contrastive Learning of Visual Representations. In Proceedings of the 37th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1597–1607, November 2020a.
Xinlei Chen, Haoqi Fan, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. Improved Baselines with Momentum
  Contrastive Learning. arXiv:2003.04297, March 2020b.
Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An Empirical Study of Training Self-Supervised Vision
  Transformers. arXiv:2104.02057, August 2021.
Stéphane d’Ascoli, Hugo Touvron, Matthew Leavitt, Ari Morcos, Giulio Biroli, and Levent
  Sagun. ConViT: Improving Vision Transformers with Soft Convolutional Inductive Biases.
  arXiv:2103.10697, June 2021.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of Deep
  Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. arXiv:1810.04805, May 2019.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
  and Neil Houlsby. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, September 2020.

Dumitru Erhan, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and Pascal Vincent. Why Does Unsupervised
  Pre-training Help Deep Learning? In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on
 Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 201–208, March 2010.

Christoph Feichtenhofer, Haoqi Fan, Bo Xiong, Ross Girshick, and Kaiming He. A large-scale
  study on unsupervised spatiotemporal representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3299–3309, 2021.

Meire Fortunato, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Bilal Piot, Jacob Menick, Matteo Hessel, Ian Osband,
 Alex Graves, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Demis Hassabis, Olivier Pietquin, Charles Blundell,
 and Shane Legg. Noisy Networks For Exploration. February 2018.

Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi
  Azar, Bilal Piot, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Rémi Munos, and Michal Valko. Bootstrap your own latent:
  A new approach to self-supervised Learning. arXiv:2006.07733, September 2020.

Daniel Guo, Bernardo Avila Pires, Bilal Piot, Jean-bastien Grill, Florent Altché, Rémi Munos,
  and Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar. Bootstrap Latent-Predictive Representations for Multitask
  Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2004.14646, April 2020.

Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum Contrast for
  Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.

Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney, Dan
 Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining Improvements in
 Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1710.02298, October 2017.

Joshua Knights, Ben Harwood, Daniel Ward, Anthony Vanderkop, Olivia Mackenzie-Ross, and
  Peyman Moghadam. Temporally coherent embeddings for self-supervised video representation
  learning. In 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 8914–8921.
  IEEE, 2021.

Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image Augmentation Is All You Need: Regularizing
   Deep Reinforcement Learning from Pixels. arXiv:2004.13649, March 2021.

Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement Learning with Augmented Data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 volume 33, pp. 19884–19895, 2020.

Hsin-Ying Lee, Jia-Bin Huang, Maneesh Singh, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. Unsupervised representation
  learning by sorting sequences. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
  vision, pp. 667–676, 2017.

Xiang Li, Jinghuan Shang, Srijan Das, and Michael S. Ryoo. Does Self-supervised Learning Really
  Improve Reinforcement Learning from Pixels? arXiv:2206.05266, June 2022.

Guillaume Lorre, Jaonary Rabarisoa, Astrid Orcesi, Samia Ainouz, and Stephane Canu. Temporal
  contrastive pretraining for video action recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter
  conference on applications of computer vision, pp. 662–670, 2020.

Ishan Misra, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Martial Hebert. Shuffle and Learn: Unsupervised Learning
   Using Temporal Order Verification. In Bastian Leibe, Jiri Matas, Nicu Sebe, and Max Welling
  (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2016, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 527–544, Cham,
   2016.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:1312.5602,
  December 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K. Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra,
  Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518(7540):529–533, February 2015.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya Sutskever.
  Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. In Proceedings of the
  38th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8748–8763, July 2021.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized Experience Replay. In
  ICLR (Poster), January 2016.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R. Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bachman.
 Data-Efficient Reinforcement Learning with Self-Predictive Representations. arXiv:2007.05929,
 May 2021a.
Max Schwarzer, Nitarshan Rajkumar, Michael Noukhovitch, Ankesh Anand, Laurent Charlin, R De-
 von Hjelm, Philip Bachman, and Aaron C Courville. Pretraining Representations for Data-Efficient
 Reinforcement Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pp.
 12686–12699, 2021b.
Aravind Srinivas, Michael Laskin, and Pieter Abbeel. CURL: Contrastive Unsupervised Representa-
  tions for Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2004.04136, September 2020.
Adam Stooke, Kimin Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. Decoupling Representation Learning
  from Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 9870–9879, July 2021.
Chen Sun, Austin Myers, Carl Vondrick, Kevin Murphy, and Cordelia Schmid. Videobert: A
  joint model for video and language representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 7464–7473, 2019.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning, second edition: An Introduction.
  November 2018.
Tianxin Tao, Daniele Reda, and Michiel van de Panne. Evaluating Vision Transformer Methods for
  Deep Reinforcement Learning from Pixels. arXiv:2204.04905, May 2022.
Hado van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep Reinforcement Learning with Double
  Q-Learning. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, March 2016.
Hado P van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel, and John Aslanides. When to use parametric models in
  reinforcement learning? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32, 2019.
Han Wang, Erfan Miahi, Martha White, Marlos C. Machado, Zaheer Abbas, Raksha Kumaraswamy,
  Vincent Liu, and Adam White. Investigating the Properties of Neural Network Representations in
  Reinforcement Learning. arXiv:2203.15955, March 2022.
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando Freitas. Dueling
  Network Architectures for Deep Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of The 33rd International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1995–2003, June 2016.
Ross Wightman.  Pytorch image models.                 https://github.com/rwightman/
  pytorch-image-models, 2019.
Dejing Xu, Jun Xiao, Zhou Zhao, Jian Shao, Di Xie, and Yueting Zhuang. Self-supervised spatiotem-
  poral learning via video clip order prediction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10334–10343, 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yuan Yao, Chang Liu, Dezhao Luo, Yu Zhou, and Qixiang Ye. Video playback rate perception
  for self-supervised spatio-temporal representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 6548–6557, 2020.
Denis Yarats, Rob Fergus, Alessandro Lazaric, and Lerrel Pinto. Reinforcement Learning with
  Prototypical Representations. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 11920–11931, July 2021.
Albert Zhan, Philip Zhao, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Michael Laskin. A Framework for Efficient
  Robotic Manipulation. arXiv:2012.07975, December 2020.


                                                13
