Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F LUID L AB : A D IFFERENTIABLE E NVIRONMENT FOR
B ENCHMARKING C OMPLEX F LUID M ANIPULATION
 Zhou Xian                     Bo Zhu                              Zhenjia Xu
 CMU                           Dartmouth College                   Columbia University
 zhouxian@cmu.edu              bo.zhu@dartmouth.edu                xuzhenjia@cs.columbia.edu


 Hsiao-Yu Tung                        Antonio Torralba                       Katerina Fragkiadaki
 MIT                                  MIT                                    CMU
 hytung@mit.edu                       torralba@mit.edu                       katef@cs.cmu.edu


 Chuang Gan
 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
 ganchuang@csail.mit.edu



                                            A BSTRACT
         Humans manipulate various kinds of fluids in their everyday life: creating latte
         art, scooping floating objects from water, rolling an ice cream cone, etc. Us-
         ing robots to augment or replace human labors in these daily settings remain as
         a challenging task due to the multifaceted complexities of fluids. Previous re-
         search in robotic fluid manipulation mostly consider fluids governed by an ideal,
         Newtonian model in simple task settings (e.g., pouring water into a container).
         However, the vast majority of real-world fluid systems manifest their complexi-
         ties in terms of the fluid’s complex material behaviors (e.g., elastoplastic defor-
         mation) and multi-component interactions (e.g. coffee and frothed milk when
         making latte art), both of which were well beyond the scope of the current litera-
         ture. To evaluate robot learning algorithms on understanding and interacting with
         such complex fluid systems, a comprehensive virtual platform with versatile simu-
         lation capabilities and well-established tasks is needed. In this work, we introduce
         FluidLab, a simulation environment with a diverse set of manipulation tasks in-
         volving complex fluid dynamics. These tasks address interactions between solid
         and fluid as well as among multiple fluids. At the heart of our platform is a fully
         differentiable physics simulator, FluidEngine, providing GPU-accelerated simu-
         lations and gradient calculations for various material types and their couplings,
         extending the scope of the existing differentiable simulation engines. We identify
         several challenges for fluid manipulation learning by evaluating a set of reinforce-
         ment learning and trajectory optimization methods on our platform. To address
         these challenges, we propose several domain-specific optimization schemes cou-
         pled with differentiable physics, which are empirically shown to be effective in
         tackling optimization problems featured by fluid system’s non-convex and non-
         smooth properties. Furthermore, we demonstrate reasonable sim-to-real transfer
         by deploying optimized trajectories in real-world settings. FluidLab is publicly
         available at: https://fluidlab2023.github.io.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Imagine you are fishing on the lakeside. Your hat falls into the water and starts to float out of reach.
In order to get it back, you use your hands to paddle the water gently, generating a current that
pulls the the hat back into reach. In this scenario, the water functions as a transmitting medium
for momentum exchange to accomplish the manipulation task. In fact, from creating latte art to
making ice creams, humans frequently interact with different types of fluids everyday (Figure 1).
However, performing these tasks are still beyond the reach of today’s robotic systems due to three
major challenges. First, fluid systems exhibit a wide range of material models (e.g., air, liquid,


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: We encounter various manipulation tasks involving fluids in everyday life. Left: real-world
scenarios including making latte art, making ice creams and designing air ventilation systems. Right:
simulation tasks in FluidLab involving latte art, ice-creams and indoor air circulation.

granular flow, etc. (Bridson, 2015)) that are difficult to simulate within a unified framework. Second,
describing the state of a fluid system under manipulation requires a high dimensional state space (Lin
et al., 2020). Third, the nonlinear dynamics of different coupling models pose unique challenges to
efficient solution search in the state space (Schenck & Fox, 2018). For example, although water and
smoke face the same computational challenges in solving fluid equations, manipulating these two
mediums in different physical contexts requires different strategies.
Prior works in robotic manipulation covering fluids mostly adopt relatively simple task settings, and
usually consider tasks with a single-phase fluid, such as pouring water (Schenck & Fox, 2018; Lin
et al., 2020; Sermanet et al., 2018) or scooping objects from water (Seita et al., 2022; Antonova
et al., 2022). In this work, we aim to study the problem of complex fluid manipulation with more
challenging task settings and complex goal configurations.
Since virtual environments have played an instrumental role in benchmarking and developing robot
learning algorithms (Brockman et al., 2016; Kolve et al., 2017; Xiang et al., 2020), it is desirable
to have a virtual platform providing a versatile set of fluid manipulation tasks. In this work, we
propose FluidLab, a new simulation environment to pave the way for robotic learning of complex
fluid manipulation skills that could be useful for real-world applications. FluidLab provides a new
set of manipulation tasks that are inspired by scenarios encountered in our daily life, and consider
both interactions within multiple fluids (e.g., coffee and frothed milk), as well as the coupling be-
tween fluids and solids. Building such an environment poses a major challenge to the simulation
capability: fluids encountered in our life consist of a wide spectrum of materials with different prop-
erties; in addition, simulating these tasks also requires modeling interactions with other non-fluid
materials. For example, coffee is a type of (mostly inviscid) Newtonian liquid; frothed milk be-
haves as viscous Newtonian liquid (i.e., with a constant viscosity that does not change with stress)
(Figure 1, R-A), while ice cream is a type of non-Newtonian fluid (in particular, a shear-thinning
fluid with its viscosity decreasing as the local stress increasing) (Figure 1, R-B); when stirring a
cup of coffee, we use a rigid stick to manipulate the coffee (Figure 1, R-A). However, there still
lacks a simulation engine in the research community that supports such a wide variety of materials
and couplings between them. Therefore, we developed a new physics engine, named FluidEngine,
to support simulating the tasks proposed in FluidLab. FluidEngine is a general-purpose physics
simulator that supports modeling solid, liquid and gas, covering materials including elastic, plastic
and rigid objects, Newtonian and non-Newtonian liquids, as well as smoke and air. FluidEngine
is developed using Taichi (Hu et al., 2019b), a domain-specific language embedded in Python, and
supports massive parallelism on GPUs. In addition, it is implemented in a fully differentiable man-
ner, providing useful gradient information for downstream optimization tasks. FluidEngine follows
the OpenAI Gym API (Brockman et al., 2016) and also comes with a user-friendly Python interface
for building custom environments. We also provide a GPU-accelerated renderer developed with
OpenGL, supporting realistic image rendering in real-time.
We evaluate state-of-the-art Reinforcement Learning algorithms and trajectory optimization meth-
ods in FluidLab, and highlight major challenges with existing methods for solving the proposed
tasks. In addition, since differentiable physics has proved useful in many rigid-body and soft-body
robotic tasks (Xu et al., 2021; Lin et al., 2022a; Xu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022), it is desirable
to extend it to fluid manipulation tasks. However, supporting such a wide spectrum of materials
present in FluidLab in a differentiable way is extremely challenging, and optimization using the
gradients is also difficult due to the highly non-smooth optimization landscapes of the proposed
tasks. We propose several optimization schemes that are generally applicable to the context of flu-
ids, making our simulation fully differentiable and providing useful directions to utilize gradients


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for downstream optimizations tasks. We demonstrate that our proposed techniques, coupled with
differentiable physics, could be effective in solving a set of challenging tasks, even in those with
highly turbulent fluid (e.g., inviscid air flow). In addition, we demonstrate that the trajectories op-
timized in simulation are able to perform reasonably well in several example tasks, when directly
deployed in real-world settings. We summarize our main contributions as follows:

• We propose FluidLab, a set of standardized manipulation tasks to help comprehensively study
  complex fluid manipulation with challenging task settings and potential real-world applications.
• We present FluidEngine, the underlying physics engine of FluidLab that models various material
  types required in FluidLab’s tasks. To the best of our knowledge, it is the first-of-its-kind physics
  engine that supports such a wide spectrum of materials and couplings between them, while also
  being fully differentiable.
• We benchmark existing RL and optimization algorithms, highlighting challenges for existing
  methods, and propose optimization schemes that make differentiable physics useful in solving
  a set of challenging tasks in both simulation and real world. We hope FluidLab could benefit
  future research in developing better methods for solving complex fluid manipulation tasks.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Robotic manipulation of rigid bodies, soft bodies and fluids Robotic manipulation has been ex-
tensively studied over the past decades, while most of previous works concern tasks settings with
mainly rigid objects (Xian et al., 2017; Suárez-Ruiz et al., 2018; Tung et al., 2020; Zeng et al.,
2020; Chen et al., 2022). In recent years, there has been a rising interest in manipulation problems
concerning systems with deformable objects, including elastic objects such as cloth (Liang et al.,
2019; Wu et al., 2019; Lin et al., 2022b), as well as plastic objects like plasticine (Huang et al.,
2021). Some of them also study manipulation problems involving fluids, but mainly consider rela-
tively simple problems settings such as robotic pouring (Sieb et al., 2020; Narasimhan et al., 2022)
or scooping (Antonova et al., 2022), and mostly deal with only water (Schenck & Fox, 2018; Ma
et al., 2018; Seita et al., 2022; Antonova et al., 2022). In this work, we aim to study a compre-
hensive set of manipulation tasks involving different fluid types with various properties. It is also
worth mentioning that aside from the robotics community, a vast literature has been devoted to fluid
control in computer graphics (Hu et al., 2019a; Zhu et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2013), with their focus
on artistic visual effects yet neglecting the physical feasibility (e.g., arbitrary control forces can be
added to deform a fluid body into a target shape). In contrast to them, we study fluid manipulation
from a realistic robotics perspective, where fluids are manipulated with an embodied robotic agent.
Simulation environments for robotic policy learning In recent years, simulation environments
and standardized benchmarks have significantly facilitated research in robotics and policy learning.
However, most of them (Brockman et al., 2016; Kolve et al., 2017; Xiang et al., 2020) use either
PyBullet (Coumans & Bai, 2016) or MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) as their underlying physics
engines, which only supports rigid-body simulation. Recently, environments supporting soft-body
manipulation, such as SAPIEN (Xiang et al., 2020), TDW (Gan et al., 2020) and SoftGym (Lin
et al., 2020) adopted Nvidia FleX (Macklin et al., 2014) engine to simulate deformable objects and
fluids. However, FleX lacks support for simulating plastic materials or air, doesn’t provide gradient
information, and its underlying Position-Based Dynamics (PBD) solver has been considered not
physically accurate enough to produce faithful interactions between solids and fluids.
Differentiable physics simulation Machine Learning with differentiable physics has gained in-
creasing attention recently. One line of research focuses on learning physics models with neural net-
works (Li et al., 2018; Pfaff et al., 2020; Xian et al., 2021), which are intrinsically differentiable and
could be used for downstream planning and optimization. Learning these models assumes ground-
truth physics data provided by simulators, hasn’t proved to be capable of simulating a wide range of
materials, and could suffer from out-of-domain generalization gap (Sanchez-Gonzalez et al., 2020).
Another approach is to implement physics simulations in a differentiable manner, usually with au-
tomatic differentiation tools (Hu et al., 2019a; de Avila Belbute-Peres et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2022;
Huang et al., 2021), and the gradient information provided by these simulations has shown to be
helpful in control and manipulation tasks concerning rigid and soft bodies (Xu et al., 2021; Lin
et al., 2022a; Xu et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023). On a related note, Taichi (Hu et al.,
2019b) and Nvidia Warp (Macklin, 2022) are two recently proposed domain-specific programming
language for GPU-accelerated simulation. FluidLab is implemented using Taichi.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     F LUID E NGINE
3.1    S YSTEM OVERVIEW
FluidEngine is developed in Python and Taichi, and provides a set of user-friendly APIs for building
simulation environments. At a higher level, it follows the standard OpenAI Gym API and is com-
patible with standard reinforcement learning and optimization algorithms. Each environment cre-
ated using FluidEngine consists of five components: i) a robotic agent equipped with user-defined
end-effector(s); ii) objects imported from external meshes and represented as signed distance fields
(SDFs); iii) objects created either using shape primitives or external meshes, represented as par-
ticles; iv) gas fields (including a velocity field and other advected quantity fields such as smoke
density and temperature) for simulating gaseous phenomena on Eulerian grids; and v) a set of user-
defined geometric boundaries in support of sparse computations. After adding these components,
a complete environment is built and enables inter-component communications for simulation. We
encourage readers to refer to our project site for visualizations of a diverse set of scenes simulated
with FluidEngine.
3.2    M ATERIAL M ODELS
FluidEngine supports various types of materials, mainly falling under three categories: solid, liquid
and gas. For solid materials, we support rigid, elastic and plastic objects. For liquid, we support both
Newtonian and non-Newtonian liquids. Both solid and liquid materials are represented as particles,
simulated using the Moving Least Squares Material Point Method (MLS-MPM) (Hu et al., 2018),
which is a hybrid Lagrangian-Eulerian method that uses particles and grids to model continuum
materials. For gas such as smoke or air, we simulate them as incompressible fluid on a Cartersian
grid using the advection-projection scheme (Stam, 1999).
Elastic, plastic, and liquid Both elastic and plastic materials are simulated following the original
MLS-MPM formulation (Hu et al., 2018). For both materials, we compute the updated deforma-
tion gradient, internal force, and material stress in the particle-to-grid (P2G) step, and then enforce
boundary conditions in grid operations. Corotated constitutive models are used for both materials.
For plastic material, we additionally adopt the Box yield criterion (Stomakhin et al., 2013) to up-
date deformations. We refer readers to the original MPM papers (Hu et al., 2018; Stomakhin et al.,
2013) for more details. Both viscous and non-viscous liquids are also modeled using the corotated
models, and we additionally reset the deformation gradients to diagonal matrices at each step. For
non-Newtonian liquids such as ice cream, we model them using the elastoplastic continuum model
with its plastic component treated by the von Mises yield criterion (following Huang et al. (2021)).
Rigid body Two types of geometric representations are used to support rigid bodies in FluidEngine.
The first one is represented by particles. We simulate rigid objects by treating them as elastic ob-
jects first using MLS-MPM, then we compute an object-level transformation matrix and enforce the
rigidity constraint. Another type of rigid object is represented using signed distance fields (SDFs),
usually generated by importing external meshes. This representation is more computation-efficient
since it computes its dynamics as a whole, generally used for physically big meshes.
Gas We develop a grid-based incompressible fluid simulator following (Stam, 1999) to model
gaseous phenomena such as air and smoke. A particle-based method is not well suited in these
cases due to its (weakly) compressible limit.
Inter-material coupling MPM naturally supports coupling between different materials and parti-
cles, computed in the grid operations. For interactions (collision contact) between mesh-based ob-
jects and particle-based materials, we represent meshes as time-varying SDFs and model the contact
by computing surface normals of SDFs and applying Coulomb friction (Stomakhin et al., 2013). For
interaction between mesh-based objects and the gas field, we treat grid cells occupied by meshes as
the boundaries of the gas field, and impose boundary conditions in the grid operations. Coupling be-
tween gas and particle-based materials is also implemented at the grid level, by computing a impact
on the gas field based on the particle velocity field.

3.3    D IFFERENTIABILITY AND R ENDERING

FluidEngine is implemented based on Taichi’s autodiff system to compute gradients for simple op-
erations. We further implement our own gradient computations for complex operations such as SVD
and the projection step in the gas simulation, and efficient gradient-checkpointing to allow gradient


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


flow over long temporal horizons, unconstrained by GPU memory size. FludiEngine also comes
with a real-time OpenGL-based renderer. More details are in Appendix A.
3.4 C OMPARISON WITH OTHER SIMULATION ENVIRONMENTS

                                                Solid                      Liquid           Gas
       Simulators     Differentiable
                                       Rigid   Elastic   Plastic   Newt.     Non-Newt.   Air / Smoke
        PyBullet                        ✓        ✓
        MuJoCo                          ✓
          FleX                          ✓        ✓                  ✓                       ✓✗B
        SoftGym                         ✓        ✓                  ✓
      PlasticineLab        ✓✗A          ✓                  ✓
        SAPIEN                          ✓        ✓                  ✓
          TDW                           ✓        ✓                  ✓
         DEDO                           ✓        ✓
         DiffSim           ✓            ✓        ✓         ✓
         DiSECt            ✓            ✓        ✓         ✓
        FluidLab           ✓            ✓        ✓         ✓        ✓               ✓        ✓

Table 1: Comparison with other popular simulators. A Plasticine lab offers differentiable simula-
tion, but doesn’t provide gradient checkpointing, hence only supporting gradient flow over relatively
short horizons. B FleX demonstrates the capability of smoke simulation in their demo video, but this
feature and smoke rendering are not available in their released codebase.
There exist many simulation engines and environments for robotics research, and here we compare
FluidLab and FluidEngine with some popular ones among them, including PyBullet (Coumans &
Bai, 2016), MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012), FleX (Macklin et al., 2014), SoftGym (Lin et al., 2020),
PlasticineLab (Huang et al., 2021), SAPIEN (Xiang et al., 2020), TDW (Gan et al., 2020), DiffSim
(Qiao et al., 2020), DiSECt (Heiden et al., 2021), and DEDO (Antonova et al., 2021). Table 1 shows
a comparison in terms of differentiability and supported material types. FluidLab covers a wider
range of materials compared to existing environments. In addition, many of these environments
rely on physics engines written in C++, and some are not open-sourced (such as FleX), making
interpretability and extensibility a major hurdle, while FluidLab is developed in Python and Taichi,
enjoying both GPU-acceleration and user-extensibility. In order to validate the accuracy and relia-
bility of FluidEngine, we conducted a number of validation simulations, as shown in Appendix E.
We also present a list of detailed comparisons with relevant differentiable simulators in Appendix F.

4     F LUID L AB M ANIPULATION TASKS

FluidLab presents a collection of complex fluid manipulation tasks with different fluid materials and
their interactions with other objects. In general, we observe that manipulations tasks involving fluids
can be categorized into two main groups: i) where fluid functions as a transmitting media and is used
to manipulate other objects which are otherwise unreachable, and ii) where fluid is the manipulation
target and the goal is to move or deform the fluid volume to a desired configuration. We present
a suite of 10 different tasks in FluidLab, as shown in Figure 2, where in each task an agent needs
to manipulate or interact with the fluids in the scene to reach a specific goal configuration, falling
under the aforementioned two categories.

4.1    TASK D ETAILS
FluidLab contains the following 10 different manipulation tasks presented in Figure 2, all of which
are motivated by real-world scenarios where an agent interacts with certain types of fluids. We
additionally discuss the reasoning behind the choices of our task selections in Appendix G.
Fined Grained Pouring A glass filled with two types of non-Newtonian liquid with different densi-
ties, colored as blue and white respectively. The task is to pour the light blue liquid out of the glass
while retaining as much white heavy liquid as possible.
Gathering (Easy & Hard) An agent equipped with a rigid spatula is able to paddle the water in a
tank, but its motion is restricted within the green area. The goal is to make water currents so that
the two floating objects will be gathered towards the marked goal location. The easy setting has a


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: 10 Fluid manipulation tasks proposed in FluidLab. In each task, 1 depicts the initial
condition and 2 shows a desired goal configuration. Both top and side views are shown for Pouring.
relatively open space, while in the hard setting the spatial configuration is more complex and the
two objects need to move in different directions.
Transporting A water jet bot is required to move an object of interest to a pre-determined goal
location. The agent is only allowed to move within the green area, and thus can only transport the
object using the water it injects.
Mixing Given a cube of sugar put in a cup of coffee, the agent needs to plan generate sequence of
stirring action to mix the sugar particles with the coffee in the shortest period of time.
Latte Art (Pouring & Stirring) We consider two types of latte art making tasks: the first one is
making latte art via pouring, where an agent pours milk into a cup of coffee to form a certain pattern;
the second one is via stirring, where a layer of viscous frothed milk covers a cup of coffee, and the
agent needs to manipulate a rigid stick to stir in the cup to reach a specified goal pattern.
Ice Cream (Static & Dynamic) This task involves policy learning concerning a non-Newtonian
fluid – ice cream. We consider two settings here. The first one is a relatively simple and static
setting, where we control an ice cream emitter that moves freely in space and emits ice cream into
a cone and form a desired spiral shape. The second setting is more dynamic, where ice cream is
squeezed out from a machine and an agent controls the biscuit cone. During the process, the agent
needs to reason about the dynamics of the icecream and its interaction with the cone since the ice
cream moves together with the cone due to friction.
Air Circulation The agent controls the orientation of an air conditioner (denoted in green in the
figure) which produces cool air (colored in blue) in a house with multiple rooms, initially filled with
warm air (colored in orange), and the goal is to cool down only the upper left and the right room,
while maintaining the original temperature in the lower left room. Completing this challenging task
requires fine-grained control and reasoning over the motion of the cooling air.
4.2   TASK AND ACTION REPRESENTATIONS
We model each task as a finite-horizon Markov Decision Process (MDP). An MDP consists of a state
space S, an action space A, a transition function T : S × A → S, and a reward function associated
with each transition step R : S × A × S → R. The transition function is determined by the physics
simulation in FluidLab. We discuss the loss and reward for each task used for experiments in Section
5. The goal of the agent in the environment is to find a policy π(a|s) that produces action sequences
to maximize the expected total return Eπ [ΣTt=0 γ t R(st , at )], where γ ∈ (0, 1) denotes the discount
factor and T is the horizon of the environment.
State, Observation, and Action Space We represent MPM-based materials with a particle-based
representation, using a Np × dp state matrix, where Np is the number of all particles in the system,
and dp = 6 contains the position and velocity information of each particle. To represent the gas
field, which is simulated using a grid-based representation, we use another Nc × dc matrix to store
information of all grid cells, where Nc is the number of cells in the grid, and dc is a task-dependent
vector. In the air circulation task, dc = 4 contains the velocity (a 3-vector) and temperature (a
scalar) of each cell. In addition, the state also includes the 6D pose and velocity (translational and
rotational) information of the end-effector of the robotic agent in the scene. All the tasks use an
MPM grid of size 643 , with around 100,000 particles, and a 1283 grid for gas simulation. The
full action space of FluidLab is a 6-vector, containing both translational and angular velocity of the


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


agent’s end-effector. For more details of our task settings, their simulations, and the input to RL
policies, please refer to Appendix B.1.
5     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate model-free RL algorithms, sampling-based optimization methods as well as trajectory
optimization using differentiable physics coupled with our proposed optimization techniques in Flu-
idLab. We discuss our optimization techniques and result findings in this Section. For detailed loss
and reward design, please refer to Appendix B.2.

5.1   T ECHNIQUES AND O PTIMIZATION S CHEMES U SING D IFFERENTIABLE P HYSICS

Differentiable simulation provides useful gradient information that can be leveraged for policy op-
timization. However, oftentimes the dynamics function could both be highly non-smooth (e.g. in
case of a contact collision, where the gradient is hard to obtain), and exhibit a complex optimization
landscape where the optimizer can easily get trapped in local minima. We discuss a few techniques
and optimization schemes used in our experiments here for obtaining more informative gradients
and leveraging them more effectively in the context of fluid manipulation.
Soft Contact Model In our simulation, the contact between particle-based fluid bodies and SDF-
based rigid objects occurs in the grid operations. Such contact induces drastic state changes during
the classical MPM process. We adopt a softened contact model in our simulation: we consider
contact occurs when the particles and the rigid objects are within a certain distance threshold ϵ, and
compute an after-collision velocity vc . Afterwards, we blend this velocity with the original velocity
of the objects using a distance-based blending factor α, given by vnew = αvc + (1 − α)voriginal ,
where α = min{exp(−d), 1)} and d is the distance between the two objects. This provides a
smoothed contact zone and thus offers smoothed gradient information during contact.
Temporally Expanding Optimization Region During gradient-based trajectory optimization, if
we consider the full loss computed using the whole trajectory with respect to a certain goal con-
figuration, the whole optimization landscape could be highly nonconvex and results in unstable
optimization. In our experiments, we warm start our optimization with a restricted temporal re-
gion of the trajectory and keeps expanding this region steadily whenever a stabilized optimization
spot is reached for the current region. This greatly helps stabilize the optimization process using
differentiable physics and produces better empirical results, as we show in Section 5.2.
Gradient Sharing within Fluid Bodies Many optimization scenarios involving fluids could be
highly non-convex. Consider a simple pouring task where the goal is to pour all the water from
a mug, with the loss defined as the distance between the ground floor and all the water particles.
During the exploration phase, if a water particle was never poured out of the mug, it is trapped in a
local minimum and the loss gradient won’t be able to guide towards a successful pouring. Thanks
to the continuity of fluid materials, we are able to share gradients between adjacent particles in a
fluid body and use those informative gradients to guide other particles. Such gradient sharing can be
achieved by updating the gradient on each particle via accumulating neighboring particle gradients
             ∂L                    ∂L
as follows: ∂q i
                 = Σj w(Lj , dij ) ∂q j
                                        , where j iterates over all neighboring particles of i, q represents
particle properties such as velocity or position, and w is a kernel function conditioned on both the
distance between i and j and the loss of particle j, assigning a higher weight to neighboring particles
who incurred a lower loss at the previous iteration. Note that in practice, such gradient sharing
requires nearest neighbour search for all particles at each timestep, which could be computationally
slow. Therefore, we employ an additional attraction loss to approximate gradient sharing, where
particles that incurred a lower loss at the previous iteration will attract other particles around it:
Latt = Σi Σj w(Lj , dij )∥pi − pj ∥.

5.2   M ETHOD E VALUATION WITH F LUID L AB TASKS

We evaluate our proposed optimization schemes coupled with differentiable physics (DP), model-
free RL algorithms including Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) and Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017), CMA-ES (Hansen & Ostermeier, 2001), a sampling-
based trajectory optimization method, as well as PODS (Mora et al., 2021) an method combines
RL and differentiable simulation (see Appendix C for a discussion). We use the open source imple-
mentation (Raffin et al., 2021) for PPO and SAC, and pycma (Hansen et al., 2019) for CMA-ES.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Figure 3: Reward learning curve for all evaluated methods in each task.
           Task    Latte Art (Pour.)   LatteArt (Stir.)   Ice Cream (Sta.)   Ice Cream (Dyn.)    Transporting
           SAC      -1417.6 ± 37.4     555.4 ± 22.8        -1450.7 ± 14.2     -509.6 ± 30.9     2050.6 ± 450.7
           PPO     -1078.3 ± 187.4     585.3 ± 21.7       -1250.6 ± 563.8    -424.0 ± 110.5      1104.6 ± 99.7
          CMA-ES    279.9 ± 124.1      745.2 ± 22.1        69.5 ± 140.1       131.4 ± 100.5     1694.5 ± 463.6
           PODS      872.3 ± 17.6      454.6 ± 73.5        251.7 ± 43.1       -203.6 ± 78.1     2120.2 ± 296.1
           DP-H      998.7 ± 0.5        830.1 ± 7.2        295.1 ± 14.2       -162.9 ± 30.5      1443.9 ± 78.6
            DP       999.3 ± 0.7       995.4.6 ± 1.68      474.6 ± 21.4       1469.4 ± 28.8     1471.1 ± 127.7

           Task        Mixing             Pouring         Gathering (Easy)   Gathering (Hard)   Air Circulation
           SAC      1523.2 ± 389.4      374.5 ± 7.3         130.2 ± 2.4        477.2 ± 9.7      4430.2 ± 264.7
           PPO      1728.3 ± 159.4     -324.3 ± 50.3        129.7 ± 1.2       -138.9 ± 67.3     4282.2 ± 610.9
          CMA-ES    3875.2 ± 143.2     57.1 ± 169.7         143.1 ± 1.4       687.2 ± 80.1      3917.3 ± 385.3
           PODS     4742.3 ± 187.6     284.1 ± 84.9         129.5 ± 1.7       413.4 ± 71.6      3557.8 ± 364.2
           DP-H     5974.0 ± 198.8      88.3 ± 9.1          116.9 ± 0.3       566.9 ± 30.4      5046.3 ± 23.7
            DP       7648.4 ± 47.0     603.4 ± 29.7         151.5 ± 0.3        946.8 ± 5.1      5043.3 ± 21.2

  Table 2: The final accumulated reward and the standard deviation for each evaluated method.

Additionally, we choose to optimize for periodic policies for the two Gathering tasks and the Mixing
task, where the whole task horizon is evenly divided into multiple periods, and each period contains
an optimizable action trajectory followed by a reseting action moving the end-effector back to a
neutral position. We use the same accumulated reward to evaluate all the methods. Additionally,
we include the performance of an oracle policy controlled by a human operator as a reference. The
reward learning curves are shown in Figure 3, and we report the final performance of all methods
upon convergence in Table 2. Please refer to our project page for more qualitative results.
Model-free RL Algorithms RL algorithms demonstrate reasonable learning behaviors in tasks with
relatively small observation spaces, such as Transporting (where only a subset of water particles are
present in the scene at each step) and Air Circulation. However, in environments such as Latte
Art, Mixing, and Ice Cream, RL methods struggle to generate a reasonable policy. We suspect that
this is because 1) the high-dimensional space used to describe the fluid system, which is hard for RL
algorithms to abstract away useful information about the system within limited exploration iterations
and training budget, making it less sample efficient than DP, and 2) the non-linear dynamics of
the complex fluids such as viscous frothed milk and the non-Newtonian ice creams, as well as
their interactions with other solid materials, make policy search of RL policies based on sampled
actions extremely difficult since randomly sampled actions and rewards are not informative enough
in conveying contact and deformation information about the fluid systems.
Sampling-based trajectory optimization CMA-ES does reasonably well in many tasks with simple
spatial configuration as goals. However, it struggles in fine-grained shape matching tasks (e.g. Ice
Cream) and fine-grained control tasks (e.g. pouring). This is because CMA-ES searches for action
sequences via trajectory sampling, and thus cannot handle delicate interactions well.
Differentiable physics-based trajectory optimization In most of the tasks, the gradients provided
by our differentiable simulation are able to guide trajectory optimization towards a good optimiza-
tion spot, resulting in near-oracle performance. It also demonstrates better sample-efficiency than


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


other methods in most tasks. We additionally compare with a hard version of differentiable physics
(DP-H), which uses the gradient to optimize trajectory, but without using the optimization tech-
niques proposed in Section 5.1. DP-H does similarly well on tasks with relatively simple settings,
but fails to produce good trajectories in scenarios with interactions between fluids and other mate-
rials bodies, as well as in tasks with more complex and non-convex optimization landscapes, such
as Pouring with fine-grained control objective. The experimental results demonstrate that the gradi-
ent information provided by our differentiable simulator, coupled with the optimization schemes we
proposed, provides informative optimization information when dealing with complex fluid systems.
Sim-to-real transfer We additionally evaluate the optimized trajectories in a real-world robotic
setup and show that the learned trajectories can perform the desired tasks reasonably well qualita-
tively in the real world. See Appendix D for more details.

5.3   D ISCUSSIONS & P OTENTIAL F UTURE R ESEARCH D IRECTIONS

In our experiments above, we evaluated a range of policy learning and trajectory optimization meth-
ods. Our results show that when coupled with our proposed optimization scheme, differentiable
physics can provide useful gradient information to guide trajectory optimization, and show reason-
able performance in a range of complex fluid manipulation task settings, even in those with fine-
grained shape matching goals and highly unstable fluid systems such as air flow. Meanwhile, our
results suggested a number of major challenges in solving complex fluid manipulation tasks. First
of all, the model free RL methods and also the method combining RL and differentiable simulation
for policy learning struggle to produce competitive results. We believe one main reason for this is
it’s difficult for the policy to informatively interpret the high-dimensional state of the complex fluid
systems. It’s worth investigating what would be an efficient representation for learning such closed-
loop policies: point cloud-based representation or image input could be a good starting point, and
more abstract representations with semantic understanding of the material properties and appear-
ances are also worth studying. Second, one clear goal is to combine our optimization scheme with
policy learning, and to distill optimized trajectories using differentiable physics into more general
close-loop control policies. Thirdly, although our current task selections cover a range of different
scenarios and materials, they are still relatively short-horizon, in the sense that there’s usually only
a single action mode. It would be very interesting to extend task design to more realistic latte-art
making, which requires action switching between both pouring and stirring. One promising direc-
tion is to learn a more abstract dynamics model of the fluid system and use it for long-horizon action
planning and skill selection. Also, our current latte art tasks rely on dense reward signal computed
from a temporal trajectory of goal patterns, and a more abstract and learned dynamics model would
probably allow optimization using a static goal pattern. Last but not least, our real world experiments
show that there’s still a perceivable gap between our simulated material behavior and the real world
environments. Improving both simulation performance and close-loop policy learning are needed to
enable robots to perform better in more complex tasks, such as more realistic latte art making.

6     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

We presented FluidLab, a virtual environment that covers a versatile collection of complex fluid
manipulation tasks inspired by real-world scenarios. We also introduced FluidEngine, a backend
physics engine that can support simulating a wide range of materials with distinct properties, and
also being fully differentiable. The proposed tasks enabled us to study manipulation problems with
fluids comprehensively, and shed light on challenges of existing methods, and the potential of utiliz-
ing differentiable physics as an effective tool for trajectory optimization in the context of complex
fluid manipulation. One future direction is to extend towards more realistic problem setups using
visual input, and to distill policy optimized using differentiable physics into neural-network based
policies (Lin et al., 2022a; Xu et al., 2023), or use gradients provided by differentiable simulation
to guide policy learning (Xu et al., 2022). Furthermore, since MPM was originally proposed, re-
searchers have been using it to simulate various realistic materials with intricate properties, such as
snow, sand, mud, and granular materials. These more sophisticated materials can be seamlessly inte-
grated into the MPM simulation pipeline in FluidLab, and will be helpful for studying manipulation
tasks dealing with more diverse set of materials. We believe our standardized task suite and the gen-
eral purpose simulation capability of FluidLab will benefit future research in robotic manipulation
involving fluids and other deformable materials.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Qi Wu for helping with conducting the real-world ice cream experiments,
Pengsheng Guo for helping with implementing the volumetric smoke renderer, and Jiangshan Tian
for teaching the authors everything about making latte art. We would also like to thank Zhiao Huang,
Xuan Li, and Tsun-Hsuan Wang for their constructive suggestions during the project development.
This material is based upon work supported by MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Sony AI, a DARPA Young
Investigator Award, an NSF CAREER award, an AFOSR Young Investigator Award, DARPA Ma-
chine Common Sense, National Science Foundation under Grant No. 1919647, 2106733, 2144806,
and 2153560, and gift funding from MERL, Cisco, and Amazon.

R EFERENCES
Rika Antonova, Peiyang Shi, Hang Yin, Zehang Weng, and Danica Kragic Jensfelt. Dynamic envi-
  ronments with deformable objects. In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021. 5
Rika Antonova, Jingyun Yang, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, and Jeannette Bohg. Rethink-
  ing optimization with differentiable simulation from a global perspective. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.00167, 2022. 2, 3
Deniz A. Bezgin, Aaron B. Buhendwa, and Nikolaus A. Adams. Jax-fluids: A fully-differentiable
  high-order computational fluid dynamics solver for compressible two-phase flows. Computer
  Physics Communications, pp. 108527, 2022. ISSN 0010-4655. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.
  2022.108527. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0010465522002466. 18
Robert Bridson. Fluid simulation for computer graphics. AK Peters/CRC Press, 2015. 2
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016. 2, 3
Tao Chen, Jie Xu, and Pulkit Agrawal. A system for general in-hand object re-orientation. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 297–307. PMLR, 2022. 3
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games,
  robotics and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016. 3, 5
Filipe de Avila Belbute-Peres, Kevin Smith, Kelsey Allen, Josh Tenenbaum, and J Zico Kolter. End-
   to-end differentiable physics for learning and control. Advances in neural information processing
   systems, 31, 2018. 3
Chuang Gan, Jeremy Schwartz, Seth Alter, Martin Schrimpf, James Traer, Julian De Freitas, Jonas
  Kubilius, Abhishek Bhandwaldar, Nick Haber, Megumi Sano, et al. Threedworld: A platform for
  interactive multi-modal physical simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04954, 2020. 3, 5
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 1861–1870. PMLR, 2018. 7
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Completely derandomized self-adaptation in evolution
  strategies. Evolutionary computation, 9(2):159–195, 2001. 7
Nikolaus Hansen, Youhei Akimoto, and Petr Baudis. CMA-ES/pycma on Github. Zen-
  odo, DOI:10.5281/zenodo.2559634, February 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
  zenodo.2559634. 7
Eric Heiden, Miles Macklin, Yashraj Narang, Dieter Fox, Animesh Garg, and Fabio Ramos.
  Disect: A differentiable simulation engine for autonomous robotic cutting. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2105.12244, 2021. 5, 18
Philipp Holl, Vladlen Koltun, and Nils Thuerey. Learning to control pdes with differentiable physics.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.07457, 2020. 18


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yuanming Hu, Yu Fang, Ziheng Ge, Ziyin Qu, Yixin Zhu, Andre Pradhana, and Chenfanfu Jiang. A
  moving least squares material point method with displacement discontinuity and two-way rigid
  body coupling. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4):1–14, 2018. 4

Yuanming Hu, Luke Anderson, Tzu-Mao Li, Qi Sun, Nathan Carr, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, and
  Frédo Durand. Difftaichi: Differentiable programming for physical simulation. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.00935, 2019a. 3

Yuanming Hu, Tzu-Mao Li, Luke Anderson, Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, and Frédo Durand. Taichi: a
  language for high-performance computation on spatially sparse data structures. ACM Transac-
  tions on Graphics (TOG), 38(6):1–16, 2019b. 2, 3

Zhiao Huang, Yuanming Hu, Tao Du, Siyuan Zhou, Hao Su, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan.
  Plasticinelab: A soft-body manipulation benchmark with differentiable physics. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.03311, 2021. 3, 4, 5

Eric Kolve, Roozbeh Mottaghi, Winson Han, Eli VanderBilt, Luca Weihs, Alvaro Herrasti, Daniel
  Gordon, Yuke Zhu, Abhinav Gupta, and Ali Farhadi. Ai2-thor: An interactive 3d environment for
  visual ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.05474, 2017. 2, 3

Sizhe Li, Zhiao Huang, Tao Du, Hao Su, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan. Contact points dis-
  covery for soft-body manipulations with differentiable physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02835,
  2022. 2, 3

Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, Russ Tedrake, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Learning par-
  ticle dynamics for manipulating rigid bodies, deformable objects, and fluids. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1810.01566, 2018. 3

Junbang Liang, Ming Lin, and Vladlen Koltun. Differentiable cloth simulation for inverse problems.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019. 3

Xingyu Lin, Yufei Wang, Jake Olkin, and David Held. Softgym: Benchmarking deep reinforcement
  learning for deformable object manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.07215, 2020. 2, 3, 5

Xingyu Lin, Zhiao Huang, Yunzhu Li, Joshua B Tenenbaum, David Held, and Chuang Gan. Diff-
  skill: Skill abstraction from differentiable physics for deformable object manipulations with tools.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.17275, 2022a. 2, 3, 9

Xingyu Lin, Yufei Wang, Zixuan Huang, and David Held. Learning visible connectivity dynamics
  for cloth smoothing. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 256–266. PMLR, 2022b. 3

Pingchuan Ma, Yunsheng Tian, Zherong Pan, Bo Ren, and Dinesh Manocha. Fluid directed rigid
  body control using deep reinforcement learning. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4):
  1–11, 2018. 3

Miles Macklin. Warp: A high-performance python framework for gpu simulation and graphics.
 https://github.com/nvidia/warp, March 2022. NVIDIA GPU Technology Confer-
 ence (GTC). 3

Miles Macklin, Matthias Müller, Nuttapong Chentanez, and Tae-Yong Kim. Unified particle physics
 for real-time applications. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 33(4):1–12, 2014. 3, 5

Miguel Angel Zamora Mora, Momchil Peychev, Sehoon Ha, Martin Vechev, and Stelian Coros.
 Pods: Policy optimization via differentiable simulation. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 7805–7817. PMLR, 2021. 7

Gautham Narasimhan, Kai Zhang, Ben Eisner, Xingyu Lin, and David Held. Self-supervised trans-
  parent liquid segmentation for robotic pouring. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4555–4561. IEEE, 2022. 3

Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter W Battaglia. Learning mesh-
  based simulation with graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03409, 2020. 3


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yi-Ling Qiao, Junbang Liang, Vladlen Koltun, and Ming C Lin. Scalable differentiable physics for
  learning and control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.02168, 2020. 5, 18

Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 22(268):1–8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/
  20-1364.html. 7

Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Jonathan Godwin, Tobias Pfaff, Rex Ying, Jure Leskovec, and Peter
  Battaglia. Learning to simulate complex physics with graph networks. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 8459–8468. PMLR, 2020. 3

Connor Schenck and Dieter Fox. Spnets: Differentiable fluid dynamics for deep neural networks.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 317–335. PMLR, 2018. 2, 3, 17

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017. 7

Daniel Seita, Yufei Wang, Sarthak Shetty, Yao Li, Zackory Erickson, and David Held. Toolflownet:
  Robotic manipulation with tools via predicting tool flow from point clouds. In Conference on
  Robot Learning. PMLR, 2022. 2, 3

Pierre Sermanet, Corey Lynch, Yevgen Chebotar, Jasmine Hsu, Eric Jang, Stefan Schaal, Sergey
  Levine, and Google Brain. Time-contrastive networks: Self-supervised learning from video. In
  2018 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 1134–1141. IEEE,
  2018. 2

Maximilian Sieb, Zhou Xian, Audrey Huang, Oliver Kroemer, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Graph-
 structured visual imitation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 979–989. PMLR, 2020. 3

Jos Stam. Stable fluids. In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and
  interactive techniques, pp. 121–128, 1999. 4

Alexey Stomakhin, Craig Schroeder, Lawrence Chai, Joseph Teran, and Andrew Selle. A material
  point method for snow simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 32(4):1–10, 2013. 4

Francisco Suárez-Ruiz, Xian Zhou, and Quang-Cuong Pham. Can robots assemble an ikea chair?
  Science Robotics, 3(17):eaat6385, 2018. 3

Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
  In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp. 5026–5033.
  IEEE, 2012. 3, 5

Hsiao-Yu Fish Tung, Zhou Xian, Mihir Prabhudesai, Shamit Lal, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. 3d-oes:
  Viewpoint-invariant object-factorized environment simulators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.06464,
  2020. 3

Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Andrew Everett Spielberg, Pingchuan Ma, Zhou Xian, Hao Zhang, Joshua B.
  Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan. Softzoo: A soft robot co-design benchmark for locomotion in
  diverse environments. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. 3

Yilin Wu, Wilson Yan, Thanard Kurutach, Lerrel Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning to manipulate
  deformable objects without demonstrations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13439, 2019. 3

Zhou Xian, Puttichai Lertkultanon, and Quang-Cuong Pham. Closed-chain manipulation of large
  objects by multi-arm robotic systems. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2(4):1832–1839,
  2017. 3

Zhou Xian, Shamit Lal, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Emmanouil Antonios Platanios, and Katerina Fragkiadaki.
  Hyperdynamics: Meta-learning object and agent dynamics with hypernetworks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.09439, 2021. 3


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fanbo Xiang, Yuzhe Qin, Kaichun Mo, Yikuan Xia, Hao Zhu, Fangchen Liu, Minghua Liu, Hanx-
  iao Jiang, Yifu Yuan, He Wang, et al. Sapien: A simulated part-based interactive environment.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  11097–11107, 2020. 2, 3, 5
Jie Xu, Tao Chen, Lara Zlokapa, Michael Foshey, Wojciech Matusik, Shinjiro Sueda, and Pulkit
   Agrawal. An end-to-end differentiable framework for contact-aware robot design. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2107.07501, 2021. 2, 3
Jie Xu, Viktor Makoviychuk, Yashraj Narang, Fabio Ramos, Wojciech Matusik, Animesh Garg, and
   Miles Macklin. Accelerated policy learning with parallel differentiable simulation. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2204.07137, 2022. 2, 3, 9
Zhenjia Xu, Zhou Xian, Xingyu Lin, Cheng Chi, Zhiao Huang, Chuang Gan, and Shuran Song.
  Roboninja: Learning an adaptive cutting policy for multi-material objects. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.11553, 2023. 9
Ben Yang, Youquan Liu, Lihua You, and Xiaogang Jin. A unified smoke control method based on
  signed distance field. Computers & graphics, 37(7):775–786, 2013. 3
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian,
  Travis Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Transporter networks: Re-
  arranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14406, 2020.
  3
Bo Zhu, Michiaki Iwata, Ryo Haraguchi, Takashi Ashihara, Nobuyuki Umetani, Takeo Igarashi, and
  Kazuo Nakazawa. Sketch-based dynamic illustration of fluid systems. In Proceedings of the 2011
  SIGGRAPH Asia Conference, pp. 1–8, 2011. 3


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D ETAILS ON F LUID L AB ’ S D IFFERENTIBILITY AND R ENDERING

Differentiability and gradient checkpointing We use the automatic differentiation tool (autodiff)
provided by Taichi to get gradients for most of our computations; for more complex computations
and kernels not supported by Taichi’s autodiff, we implemeneted gradient computation ourselves,
including SVD computations and the projection step in gas simulation. One additional challenge
for making the whole simulation fully differentiable is enabling gradient flow through time, which
requires bookkeeping system states of all timesteps. Since most of FluidLab’s tasks have tens of
thousands of simulation steps, it is impossible to fit the whole computation graph into the GPU
memory. In order to address this, we implemented efficient gradient checkpointing to enable gradi-
ent flow over unlimited time horizons. During the forward process of the simulation, only a local
trajectory of the environment states are stored in the GPU memory for fast computation. Whenever
the GPU memory is full, we store the latest state of the environment to a caching device (either CPU
memory or local disks), and clear up the GPU memory for further simulation. Once a complete for-
ward pass is done, we restore the cached states and run forward simulation again to fulfill the GPU
memory with the local chunk of simulation trajectory. Note that instead of caching all intermediate
states, we only store one single step of the states at every caching step, and run simulation again
to restore the states of the local trajectory; therefore, the i/o step of such caching operations is very
efficient. This enables us to propagate loss and gradient information backward in time through a
simulation trajectory with arbitrary number of steps, unconstrained by the GPU memory size.
Rendering We implemented a photo-realistic renderer for visualizing scenes created with Flu-
idEngine. The renderer is developed in C++ using OpenGL, supports GPU-accelerated real-time
rendering. Part of our rendering pipeline was modified based on FleX’s rendering system, enhanced
with various features such as particle-level colorization, headless rendering, dynamic object load-
ing, volume rendering for smoke field, etc. We also provided a set of python APIs to dynamically
update the scene configuration from within Python. The renderer supports rendering materials as
either particles or fluids. Particle-based rendering is more interpretable for visualization and debug-
ging purposes, while fluid-based rendering is more photo-realistic and allows potential image-based
sim-to-real transfer applications in the future.


B     F LUID L AB TASK AND E VALUATION D ETAILS

B.1   TASK D ETAILS

For RL algorithms, we downsample the number of particles and cells for each fluid body in the scene
to avoid a intractably huge observation space. The state matrix is then flattened and fed into an MLP
policy network. We do not evaluate image-based RL methods as many tasks FluidLab are 3D and
occlusion could be a potential problem, and leave such evaluations for future work.
All our tasks use a simulation step of 2e-3 seconds, each containing 10 substeps of 1e-4 seconds for
ensuring simulation stability. All our proposed tasks contain around 100,000 particles and runs in
real time (60 FPS where each frame is a simulation step) on a desktop computer equipped with an
Nvidia RTX 3090 GPU and an Intel i7-8700K CPU, and the typical GPU usage is under 50%.
Each task has a task-specific action range and action space, with certain dimensions of the full
action-space locked. We present our task-specific settings for action spaces, observed number of
particles per fluid body and observed number of grid cells in Table 3. Detailed properties of all
materials used are listed in Table 4.

B.2   L OSS AND R EWARD

Latte Art (Pouring), Latte Art (Stirring), Ice Cream (Static) and Ice Cream (Dynamic): These
tasks have a set of predefined goal patterns, and the loss is defined by summing up the Chamfer
distance between particles in the current state of the scene and the particles in the goal pattern at each
time step. Ideally, the goal pattern should be a static goal shape of the final step, but using a single
goal pattern would be extremely challenging for RL methods: if only the last step of the trajectory
is used for reward computation, such an extremely sparse reward will make learning infeasible;
computing a dense reward based on the distance between the current state of each timestep and the


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        Action space              number of particles      number of grid cells
         Task
                             Trans. Velocity      Rot. Velocity      per fluid body            for gas field
 Latte Art (Pouring)          Along x and z                -               1000                       -
 Latte Art (Stirring)         Along x and z                -               1000                       -
 Ice Cream (Static)          Along x, y and z              -               2000                       -
Ice Cream (Dynamic)          Along x, y and z              -               2000                       -
    Transporting              Along x and z         Around y                500                       -
       Mixing                 Along x and z                -               1000                       -
       Pouring                      -               Around z                500                       -
  Gathering (Easy)            Along x and z                -                500                       -
  Gathering (Hard)            Along x and z                -                500                       -
   Air Circulation                  -               Around y                 -               128 × 9 × 128

                                        Table 3: Task-specfic settings.

                                                                   Lamé parameters
                  Material                        Type                                    Density ρ
                                                                      µ            λ
                   Water                         Liquid              0.0         277.78      1.0
                   Milk                          Liquid              0.0         277.78      1.0
                Frothed Milk                 Viscous Liquid        208.33        277.78      1.0
                  Coffee                         Liquid              0.0         277.78      1.0
                 Ice Cream               Non-newtonian Liquid      416.67        277.78      0.5
             Floating object                     Elastic           416.67        277.78      0.5
                Sugar cube                   Viscous Liquid        208.33        277.78      1.0
        Light Liquid in Pouring                  Liquid              0.0         277.78      0.8
        Heavy Liquid in Pouring                  Liquid              0.0         277.78      1.5
         Object in Transporting                   Rigid            416.67        277.78      5.0

                        Table 4: Details of materials properties used in FluidLab.


goal pattern will also be non-informative: due to the dynamic movement within the fluid bodies,
mimicing the static goal pattern at each timestep will not result in successful learning. Therefore, in
order to make an informative comparison, we use a temporal trajectory of the desired goal pattern
to compute the loss L = Σt CD(st , sgoal
                                      t   ), where CD denotes Chamfer Distance.
Transporting, Pouring, Gathering (Easy) and Gathering (Hard): These tasks use a single spatial
location as the goal and the loss is computed as: L = Σi ∥pi − pgoal ∥, which is summed over all
particles of the object(s) to be manipulated. For Pouring, we apply this loss between the particles
of the upper layer fluid and the ground location, with an additional loss attracting the particles of the
lower layer fluid to their initial positions.
Mixing The goal of this task is to mix the sugar particles with the coffee. The loss is designed to
maximize the spatial coverage of the sugar particles and is defined as L = −Σi Σj ∥pi − pj ∥, where
both i and j iterate over all particles originally belonging to the sugar cube.
Air circulation We place 27 sensors in the house, with 9 sensors in each room uniformly. The loss is
defined as L = Σul |Tul −Tcool |+Σr |Tr −Tcool |+Σll |Tll −Twarm |, where T represents temperature,
and ul, r and ll denote sensors in the upper left, right and lower left room respectively.


                                                       15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We use the losses discussed above for optimization-based methods; for model-free RL methods, the
reward of each task is simply defined as R = c1 − c2 L, where c1 and c2 are constants to ensure a
reasonable reward scaling for each task.

C    E VALUATION OF PODS
We additionally evaluate PODS, a method that combines differentiable simulation and RL. It per-
forms well in relatively convex tasks such as Latte Art (Pouring), and even outperforms DP and
DP-H on simple tasks like transporting, mainly due to its exploratory nature from RL. However,
it is not able to match performance in other complex tasks, especially in those where DP shows
an clear advantage over DP-H and RL methods. We believe this is because PODS only uses local
gradient information without our proposed optimization techniques; also, it is additionally learning
a closed-loop policy which maps observation to action, where DP is only optimizing a trajectory. In
fact, what PODS is learning aligns with the next step of our research, where a better scene represen-
tation to describe the fluid system is needed to better distill DP-optimized trajectory to a closed-loop
policy network. Comparison with PODS suggests that a future research direction is how to encode
the scene in a more informative representation for better policy learning, such as a pointcloud based
representation; in addition, we expect better performance by combining our proposed optimization
landscapes with methods that use both differentiable simulation and RL. These remain as our future
work.

D    S IM - TO - REAL T RANSFER
Our simulation platform provides an efficient test bed and useful gradient information for develop-
ing algorithms to deal with complex fluid manipulation problems, testing how the optimized policies
perform in a real-world setting would be very helpful and informative in evaluating the sim-to-real
gap and suggesting future research directions. Therefore, we conducted experiments on a real robot
system, with a 7-DoF Franka Emika robot equipped with a parallel jaw gripper. We picked four
representative tasks proposed in FluidLab, including Latte Art (Stirring), Ice Cream (Dynamic),
Gathering and Mixing, and set up corresponding real world scenarios. We optimize the trajectories
in simulation, and then command the robot to execute them using velocity control in the corre-
sponding real-world scenarios. (See our project site for qualitative results.) It can be observed that
although there’s certain sim-to-real gap in terms of material behavior and dynamics, when we apply
the simulation-optimized trajectories to real-world, the tasks can be completed to a reasonable ex-
tent. The sim-to-real gap mainly comes from the simulation inaccuracy and difference in material
properties between sim and real. For example, in the latte art experiment, the frothed milk behaves
a bit differently than in simulation: it’s more sticky and tend to mix again after the latte art pen
passes. This could be further improved in simulation by developing more accurate material models,
as well as increasing the simulation resolution and number of particles, which we leave to our fu-
ture work. Another example is the ice cream experiment, where it is difficult to maintain a steady
flow speed of the ice cream, resulting in slight different end shape of the ice cream compared to the
simulated one. Although there exists such sim-to-real gap in material dynamics, the robot is able
to complete the proposed tasks reasonably well. We would also like to acknowledge that given our
current resources, we are not able to conduct all the proposed tasks in real world, such as the air
circulation task, which remains as our future work. However, We believe the current 4 selected tasks
cover a representative range of materials and task settings, and such experiments could shed light on
the value of our simulator as a test bed for robotic research, point out potential sim-to-real gap and
suggest possible improvements in our future work.

E    VALIDATION E XPERIMENTS FOR F LUID E NGINE
One useful way of validating the correctness of simulation engines is to run simulation experiments
and verify if the produced simulation results match known physical phenomena. Below we list a
number of classical physical phenomena that are typically observable in rigid body and computa-
tional fluid dynamics. We testified our simulation engine by running simulations to see if it can
successfully reproduce the listed behaviors. Visual results of such simulations are included in our
project website.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• Kármán vortex street: When a flow of fluid is separated by blunt bodies, a repeating pattern
  of swirling vortices would appear due to vortex shedding. We simulate a flow of fluid flowing
  through a rigid cylinder and visualize the top-down view. We colorized the fluid around the
  cylinder, and it can be seen that our simulator can faithfully produce a street of vortices.
• Magnus effect: This is an observable phenomenon commonly associated with a spinning object
  moving through a fluid. The path of the spinning object is deflected in a manner not present when
  the object is not spinning. One example of such phenomenon seen in daily life is the screw shot in
  football playing. This is an observable phenomenon commonly associated with a spinning object
  moving through a fluid. The path of the spinning object is deflected in a manner not present when
  the object is not spinning. One example of such phenomenon seen in daily life is the screw shot
  in football playing. Here we simulate a spinning ball in a fluid body. It can be observed that the
  spinning motion produces a deflection in the motion trajectory of the ball, and the extent of the
  deflection is dependent on its spinning velocity.
• Buoyancy: We verify here if objects with different density in a liquid body would incur different
  magnitude of buoyancy. It can be observed that the red all would float on the water surface due to
  buoyancy.
• Incompressibility and stable volume: Liquids are generally considered incompressible. Our
  MPM-based engine simulates weakly-compressible liquids, where the momentum and mass are
  updated every step via consecutive grid-particle-grid information passes. Therefore, one concern
  is if the simulated fluid bodies can maintain consistent pressure and volume through long-horizon
  simulations, without momentum and pressure loss. We verified our simulator can simulate a stable
  fluid body that maintains steady volume and pressure after 10,000 simulation steps.
• Conservation of momentum: When objects are in collision, their motions obey conservation of
  momentum. Here we test the collision of two objects with exactly the same mass on a friction-
  less floor, where it can be observed that they exchanged their momentum after the collision as
  expected.
• Varying bouncing behaviors with varying plasticity: Here we show different behaviors of the
  object bouncing on the floor when we vary the plasticity of the object. From left to right, we
  increase the plasticity of the object. Our simulator can simulate bouncing behavior with varying
  plasticity, where it can be observed energy dissipates faster with a greater plasticity.
• Rayleigh–Taylor instability: This phenomenon describes the instability of an interface between
  two fluids with different densities, which occurs when the heavy component is above and pushing
  the light one. Here we simulate the behavior of two layers of fluids with different densities, where
  it can be observed that a plume of heavy fluid with small vortices emerges and evolves due to the
  interfacial instabilities.
• Dam break: This is a classical engineering test case, where a fluid volume falls due to gravity
  and splash within the domain. We successfully reproduce this phenomenon with our simulation
  engine.

Our simulators successfully reproduced these physical phenomena, as we show on our project site.
We believe running such validation experiments could informatively help demonstrate the accuracy
and reliability of our simulation engine.

F     C OMPARISON WITH OTHER DIFFERENTIABLE SIMULATORS
F.1   SPN ETS

SPNets (Schenck & Fox, 2018) is a pioneering work in robotic manipulation of fluids. It is es-
sentially a fluid simulator implemented as neural network layers, which makes it differentiable.
Therefore, it is more like a differentiable simulator itself rather than a policy learning method. The
parameters of SPNets are the physical parameters of the fluids. One limitation of SPNets is that
its simulation capability: it only supports simulating single-phase non-Newtonian fluids, and only
supports one-way coupling from static boundaries to the fluids, i.e. it doesn’t support computing ef-
fects of fluids on other objects. In this work, one of our key insights is that in order to study realistic
fluid manipulation problems that are motivated by real-world scenarios with realistic complexity, it’s
crucial to be able to support a wide range of materials and their inter-coupling. Our motivation is to


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Material type             Contact with manipulator      Role of fluids             Key challenge / unique characteristic

 Latte Art (Pouring)     Inviscid and viscous liquid              Indirect            Manipulation target            Coupling between different liquids
 Latte Art (Stirring)    Inviscid and viscous liquid               Direct             Manipulation target   Coupling between liquids and the rigid manipulator
  Ice Cream (Static)        Non-Newtonion fluid                   Indirect            Manipulation target   Fine grained shape matching of non-Newtonian fluid
Ice Cream (Dynamic)         Non-Newtonion fluid                    Direct             Manipulation target     Additional interaction with the rigid manipulator
     Transporting       Inviscid liquid and rigid solid           Indirect           Transmitting medium     Use liquid to indirectly manipulate distant objects
        Mixing           Inviscid and viscous liquid               Direct             Manipulation target         Coupling between different liquid body
        Pouring                 Inviscid liquid                    Direct             Manipulation target             Fine-grained goal configuration
   Gathering (Easy)        liquid and elastic solid                Direct            Transmitting medium     Use liquid to indirectly manipulate distant objects
   Gathering (Hard)        liquid and elastic solid                Direct            Transmitting medium         More complex environment configuration
    Air Circulation                  Gas                          Indirect            Manipulation target      Involving dynamics of highly unstable air flow


                            Table 5: Comparison and characteristics of our selected tasks.


study problems beyond the single-phase water tasks proposed in SPNets, such as single-phase water
pouring and catching, where only the effect of manipulators on the water is considered. Therefore,
on the simulator side, SPNets is not able to simulate most of our propose tasks. In addition, on the
task solving side, in the SPNets paper the author did propose to use gradients provided by the differ-
entiable simulation to optimize trajectories for liquid control. Which is similar to our differentible
physics based optimization method (DP-H), except that we proposed a few optimization techniques
(DP) to help solving the tasks.
DiffSim (Qiao et al., 2020) is a differentiable simulation platform that leverages mesh-based repre-
sentation and implicit differentiation, which bring faster computation and less memory cost. How-
ever, mesh-based representation is not able to simulate highly deformable materials such as fluids.
In contrast to them, we opt for a particle-based representation since our work focuses on simulating
fluid systems and relevant manipulation skills. We use MPM-based method which naturally supports
particle-based materials ranging from solid to fluids, and also the coupling between them.

F.2      D I SEC T

DiSECt (Heiden et al., 2021) is a differentiable tool tailored towards robotic cutting of soft mate-
rials. It also opts for a mesh-based representation and FEM to simulate dynamics, which is ideal
for computing physical phenomena in cutting scenarios, such as plastic deformation, fracture, and
crack propagation. Our work differs from them in that FluidEngine is a general-purpose simulator,
and our focus is on manipulation scenarios involving different types of fluids. Therefore, although
our simulator does not specialize in special cutting scenarios, it can support a wide range of daily
manipulation tasks involving interaction between various material types, ranging from solid, liquid
to gas.

F.3      P HI F LOW

PhiFlow (Holl et al., 2020) is a differentiable fluid simulation toolbox. However, the major func-
tionality is a underlying differentiable PDE solver, which can be used to prototype small scenes
with fluids but is not capable of building up realisitic 3D robotic manipulation scenarios. It requires
manually specifying boundary conditions for fluid simulation, which is not realistic if we want to
use actual object meshes for manipulation. Also, it relies on grid-based simulation for fluids, while
our particle based simulation is more ideal for simulating liquids, which does not require boundary
specifying and supports sparse computation. Moreover, PhiFlow is a special-purpose simulator spe-
cific to flow simulation, and doesn’t support other material types such as solids, which is important
for conducting robotics research in manipulation.

F.4      JAX-F LUIDS

Similar to PhiFlow, JAX-Fluids (Bezgin et al., 2022) is a special-purpose differentiable solver tai-
lored to flow simulation. Therefore, it shares the similar limitations of PhiFlow as discussed above:
it’s not designed for general purpose multi-material simulation, not supporting dynamics of other
materials such as rigid and plastic objects, and does not support features such as mesh processing,
scene building, and realistic rendering. In contrast, FluidEngine is a full-stack simulation platform
providing such features and useful for conducting robotic manipulation research.


                                                                             18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    D ISCUSSION ON TASK SELECTIONS
When designing our tasks, we would like them to cover a wide range of variations, and these are the
main factors that we consider: 1) varying material type and their coupling, from inviscid liquid, to
viscous liquid, to non-newtonian fluid, to gaseous fluid, 2) the contact between the robot manipulator
and the fluid body (direct contact or indirect emitting), and 3) the role of fluids, as a transmitting
medium or the manipulation target. Therefore, we came up with the 10 selected tasks. In Table 5,
we compare the selected tasks over the above 3 factors, and identify the unique characteristics of
each task. We believe our proposed suite of task selections covers a wide range of fluid manipulation
tasks encountered in our daily life, and should be useful as a set of standardized tasks for studying
fluid manipulation problem.


                                                 19
