Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ROACTIVE M ULTI -C AMERA C OLLABORATION
FOR 3D H UMAN P OSE E STIMATION

 Hai Ci∗†§ , Mickel Liu∗†§ , Xuehai Pan∗†§ , Fangwei ZhongB♢§ , Yizhou Wang†§♡♠
 †
   School of Computer Science, Peking University
 §
   Nat’l Key Lab. of GAI & Beijing Institute for GAI (BIGAI)
 ♢
   School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
 ♡
   Inst. for AI, Peking University ♠ Nat’l Eng. Research Center of Visual Technology
    {cihai, XuehaiPan, zfw, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, mickelliu@stu.pku.edu.cn

                                              A BSTRACT
            This paper presents a multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) scheme for
            proactive Multi-Camera Collaboration in 3D Human Pose Estimation in dynamic
            human crowds. Traditional fixed-viewpoint multi-camera solutions for human
            motion capture (MoCap) are limited in capture space and susceptible to dynamic
            occlusions. Active camera approaches proactively control camera poses to find
            optimal viewpoints for 3D reconstruction. However, current methods still face
            challenges with credit assignment and environment dynamics. To address these
            issues, our proposed method introduces a novel Collaborative Triangulation Contri-
            bution Reward (CTCR) that improves convergence and alleviates multi-agent credit
            assignment issues resulting from using 3D reconstruction accuracy as the shared
            reward. Additionally, we jointly train our model with multiple world dynamics
            learning tasks to better capture environment dynamics and encourage anticipatory
            behaviors for occlusion avoidance. We evaluate our proposed method in four
            photo-realistic UE4 environments to ensure validity and generalizability. Empirical
            results show that our method outperforms fixed and active baselines in various
            scenarios with different numbers of cameras and humans.


(a) Dynamic occlusions lead to
     failed reconstruction           (b) Constrained MoCap area           Active MoCap in the wild

Figure 1: Left: Two critical challenges in fixed camera approaches. Right: Three active cameras
collaborate to best reconstruct the 3D pose of the target (marked in ).

1       I NTRODUCTION
Marker-less motion capture (MoCap) has broad applications in many areas such as cinematography,
medical research, virtual reality (VR), sports, and etc. Their successes can be partly attributed to
recent developments in 3D Human pose estimation (HPE) techniques (Tu et al., 2020; Iskakov
et al., 2019; Jafarian et al., 2019; Pavlakos et al., 2017b; Lin & Lee, 2021b). A straightforward
implementation to solve multi-views 3D HPE is to use fixed cameras. Although being a convenient
solution, it is less effective against dynamic occlusions. Moreover, fixed camera solutions confine
tracking targets within a constrained space, therefore less applicable to outdoor MoCap. On the
contrary, active cameras (Luo et al., 2018; 2019; Zhong et al., 2018a; 2019) such as ones mounted on
drones can maneuver proactively against incoming occlusions. Owing to its remarkable flexibility,
the active approach has thus attracted overwhelming interest (Tallamraju et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2021;
Xu et al., 2017; Kiciroglu et al., 2019; Saini et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2021).
    ∗
        Equal Contribution. B Corresponding author.
        Project Website: https://sites.google.com/view/active3dpose


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Previous works have demonstrated the effectiveness of using active cameras for 3D HPE on a single
target in indoor (Kiciroglu et al., 2019; Cheng et al., 2018), clean landscapes (Tallamraju et al., 2020;
Nägeli et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2018; Saini et al., 2022) or landscapes with scattered static obstacles
(Ho et al., 2021). However, to the best of our knowledge, we have not seen any existing work that
experimented with multiple (n > 3) active cameras to conduct 3D HPE in human crowd. There
are two key challenges : First, frequent human-to-human interactions lead to random dynamic
occlusions. Unlike previous works that only consider clean landscapes or static obstacles, dynamic
scenes require frequent adjustments of cameras’ viewpoints for occlusion avoidance while keeping
a good overall team formation to ensure accurate multi-view reconstruction. Therefore, achieving
optimality in dynamic scenes by implementing a fixed camera formation or a hand-crafted control
policy is challenging. In addition, the complex behavioural pattern of a human crowd makes the
occlusion patterns less comprehensible and predictable, further increasing the difficulty in control.
Second, as the team size grows larger, the multi-agent credit assignment issue becomes prominent
which hinders policy learning of the camera agents. Concretely, multi-view 3D HPE as a team
effort requires inputs from multiple cameras to generate an accurate reconstruction. Having more
camera agents participate in a reconstruction certainly introduces more redundancy, which reduces
the susceptibility to reconstruction failure caused by dynamic occlusions. However, it consequently
weakens the association between individual performance and the reconstruction accuracy of the team,
which leads to the “lazy agent” problem (Sunehag et al., 2017).
In this work, we introduce a proactive multi-camera collaboration framework based on multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) for real-time distributive adjustments of multi-camera formation for
3D HPE in a human crowd. In our approach, multiple camera agents perform seamless collaboration
for successful reconstructions of 3D human poses. Additionally, it is a decentralized framework
that offers flexibility over the formation size and eliminates dependency on a control hierarchy or a
centralized entity. Regarding the first challenge, we argue that the model’s ability to predict human
movements and environmental changes is crucial. Thus, we incorporate World Dynamics Learning
(WDL) to train a state representation with these properties, i.e., learning with five auxiliary tasks to
predict the target’s position, pedestrians’ positions, self state, teammates’ states, and team reward.
To tackle the second challenge, we further introduce the Collaborative Triangulation Contribution
Reward (CTCR), which incentivizes each agent according to its characteristic contribution to a
3D reconstruction. Inspired by the Shapley Value (Rapoport, 1970), CTCR computes the average
weighted marginal contribution to the 3D reconstruction for any given agent over all possible
coalitions that contain it. This reward aims to directly associate agents’ levels of participation with
their adjusted return, guiding their policy learning when the team reward alone is insufficient to
produce such direct association. Moreover, CTCR penalizes occluded camera agents more efficiently
than the shared reward, encouraging emergent occlusion avoidance behaviors. Empirical results show
that CTCR can accelerate convergence and increase reconstruction accuracy. Furthermore, CTCR is
a general approach that can benefit policy learning in active 3D HPE and serve as a new assessment
metric for view selection in other multi-view reconstruction tasks.
For the evaluations of the learned policies, we build photo-realistic environments (UnrealPose)
using Unreal Engine 4 (UE4) and UnrealCV (Qiu et al., 2017). These environments can simulate
realistic-behaving crowds with assurances of high fidelity and customizability. We train the agents on
a Blank environment and validate their policies on three unseen scenarios with different landscapes,
levels of illumination, human appearances, and various quantities of cameras and humans. The
empirical results show that our method can achieve more accurate and stable 3D pose estimates than
off-the-shelf passive- and active-camera baselines. To help facilitate more fruitful research on this
topic, we release our environments with OpenAI Gym-API (Brockman et al., 2016) integration and
together with a dedicated visualization tool.
Here we summarize the key contributions of our work:
 • Formulating the active multi-camera 3D human pose estimation problem as a Dec-POMDP and
   proposing a novel multi-camera collaboration framework based on MARL (with n ≥ 3).
 • Introducing five auxiliary tasks to enhance the model’s ability to learn the dynamics of highly
   dynamic scenes.
 • Proposing CTCR to address the credit assignment problem in MARL and demonstrating notable
   improvements in reconstruction accuracy compared to both passive and active baselines.
 • Contributing high-fidelity environments for simulating realistic-looking human crowds with au-
   thentic behaviors, along with visualization software for frame-by-frame video analysis.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     R ELATED W ORK
3D Human Pose Estimation (HPE) Recent research on 3D human pose estimation has shown
significant progress in recovering poses from single monocular images (Ma et al., 2021; Pavlakos
et al., 2017a; Martinez et al., 2017; Kanazawa et al., 2018; Pavlakos et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2018;
Ci et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2020; Ci et al., 2020) or monocular video (Mehta et al., 2017; Hossain
& Little, 2018; Pavllo et al., 2019; Kocabas et al., 2020). Other approaches utilize multi-camera
systems for triangulation to improve visibility and eliminate ambiguity (Qiu et al., 2019; Jafarian
et al., 2019; Pavlakos et al., 2017b; Dong et al., 2019; Lin & Lee, 2021b; Tu et al., 2020; Iskakov
et al., 2019). However, these methods are often limited to indoor laboratory environments with fixed
cameras. In contrast, our work proposes an active camera system with multiple mobile cameras for
outdoor scenes, providing greater flexibility and adaptability.
Proactive Motion Capture Few previous works have studied proactive motion capture with a single
mobile camera (Zhou et al., 2018; Cheng et al., 2018; Kiciroglu et al., 2019). In comparison, more
works have studied the control of a multi-camera team. Among them, many are based on optimization
with various system designs, including marker-based (Nägeli et al., 2018), RGBD-based (Xu et al.,
2017), two-stage system (Saini et al., 2019; Tallamraju et al., 2019), hierarchical system (Ho et al.,
2021), etc. It is important to note that all the above methods deal with static occlusion sources or clean
landscapes. Additionally, the majority of these works adopt hand-crafted optimization objectives and
some forms of fixed camera formations. These factors result in poor adaptability to dynamic scenes
that are saturated with uncertainties. Recently, RL-based methods have received more attention due
to their potential for dynamic formation adjustments. These works have studied active 3D HPE in the
Gazebo simulation (Tallamraju et al., 2020) or Panoptic dome (Joo et al., 2015; Pirinen et al., 2019;
Gärtner et al., 2020) for active view selection. Among them, AirCapRL (Tallamraju et al., 2020)
shares similarities with our work. However, it is restricted to coordinating between two cameras in
clean landscapes without occlusions. We study collaborations between multiple cameras (n ≥ 3) and
resolve the credit assignment issue with our novel reward design (CTCR). Meanwhile, we study a
more challenging scenario with multiple distracting humans serving as sources of dynamic occlusions,
which requires more sophisticated algorithms to handle.
Multi-Camera Collaboration Many works in computer vision have studied multi-camera collabora-
tion and designed active camera systems accordingly. Earlier works (Collins et al., 2003; Qureshi &
Terzopoulos, 2007; Matsuyama et al., 2012) focused on developing a network of pan-tile-zoom (PTZ)
cameras. Owing to recent advances in MARL algorithms (Lowe et al., 2017; Sunehag et al., 2017;
Rashid et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021; Jin et al., 2022), many works have formulated
multi-camera collaboration as a multi-agent learning problem and solved it using MARL algorithms
accordingly (Li et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2020; Wenhong et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2022; Sharma et al.,
2022; Pan et al., 2022). However, most works focus on the target tracking problem, whereas this
work attempts to solve the task of 3D HPE. Compared with the tracking task, 3D HPE has stricter
criteria for optimal view selections due to correlations across multiple views, which necessitates
intelligent collaboration between cameras. To our best knowledge, this work is the first to experiment
with various camera agents (n ≥ 3) to learn multi-camera collaboration strategies for active 3D HPE.

3     P ROACTIVE M ULTI -C AMERA C OLLABORATION
This section will explain the formulation of multi-camera collaboration in 3D HPE as a Dec-POMDP.
Then, we will describe our proposed solutions for modelling the virtual environment’s complex
dynamics and strengthening credit assignment in the multi-camera collaboration task.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We formulate the multi-camera 3D HPE problem as a Decentralized Partially-Observable Markov
Decision Process (Dec-POMDP), where each camera is considered as an agent which is decentralized-
controlled and has partial observability over the environment. Formally, a Dec-POMDP is defined
as ⟨S, O, An , n, P, r, γ⟩, where S denotes the global state space of the environment, including all
human states and camera states in our problem. oi ∈ O denotes the agent i’s local observation, i.e.,
the RGB image observed by camera i. A denotes the action space of an agent and An represents
the joint action space of all n agents. P : S × An → S is the transition probability function
P (st+1 |st , at ), in which at ∈ An is a joint action by all n agents. At each timestep t, every agent
obtains a local view oti from the environment st and then preprocess oti to form i-th agent’s local


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                              Next Environment Step


                                                                                                        Camera Agent #n

                                                                                                          Camera Agent #2

                                                                           Target Prediction
                                                                             Target Prediction               Camera Agent #1

                                                                           StateTarget Prediction
                                                                                 Encoder
       UE4 Virtual


                                                                                                                  {(𝜙,𝜇,𝜎)}
                                       Observation
                                                                        MLP
                                                                              State Encoder
      Environment                      Processing
                                                                                   LSTM       +          +        Actor
                                           Observation
                                                                          MLP
                                                                                StateS. C.Encoder
                        #n                 Processing
                                                Observation
                                                                                      LSTM      +            +                Actor
                             #2                                                          `
                                                Processing                    MLP       S. C.
                                                                                         LSTM                                   Actor
                                  #1                                                            S. C.

                                                                         Pedestrian Prediction               Training
                     Environment Constants
                          RGB Images                                       Pedestrian Prediction                 Training

                                                                              Pedestrian Prediction


                                                      n-Agents Decentralized Execution


Figure 2: Simplified Pipeline Architecture. For i agent at t step, the environment returns local
camera view oti and environment constants that are pre-processed to generate local observation õti
(described here). Target Prediction and Pedestrian Prediction modules generate predictions p̂ttgt and
p̂tpd , respectively. The parameters of the Mixture Density Network(MDN) within the Target Prediction
Module are concatenated to the state encoder’s output to improve the quality of the representation.

observation õti . The agent performs action ati ∼ πit (·|õti ) and receives its reward r(st , at ). γ ∈ (0, 1]
                                                                                                       ′
is the discount factor used to calculate the cumulative discounted reward G(t) = t′ ≥t γ t −t r(t′ ).
                                                                                           P
                                                                                                         n
In a cooperative team, the objective is to learn a group of decentralized policies {πi (ati |õti )}i=1 that
maximizes E(s,a)∼π [G(t)]. For convenience, we denote i as the agent index, JnK = {1, . . . , n} is
the set of all n agents, and −i = JnK \ {i} are all n agents except agent i.
Observation Camera agents have partial observability over the environment. The pre-processed
observation o˜i = (pi , ξi , ξ−i ) of the camera agent i consists of: (1) pi , a set of states of visible
humans to agent i, containing information, including the detected human bounding-box in the 2D
local view, the 3D positions and orientations of all visible humans measured in both local coordinate
frame of camera i and world coordinates; (2) own camera pose ξi showing the camera’s position and
orientation in world coordinates; (3) peer cameras poses ξ−i showing their positions and orientations
in world coordinates and are obtained via multi-agent communication.
Action Space The action space of each camera agent consists of the velocity of 3D egocentric
translation (x, y, z) and the velocity of 2D pitch-yaw rotation (θ, ψ). To reduce the exploration
space for state-action mapping, the agent’s action space is discretized into three levels across all
five dimensions. At each timestep, the camera agent can move its position by [+δ, 0, −δ] in (x, y, z)
directions and rotate about pitch-yaw axes by [+η, 0, −η] degrees. In our experiments, the camera’s
pitch-yaw angles are controlled by a rule-based system.

3.2     F RAMEWORK
This section will describe the technical framework that constitutes our camera agents, which contains
a Perception Module and a Controller Module. The Perception Module maps the original RGB
images taken by the camera to numerical observations. The Controller Module takes these numerical
observations and produces corresponding control signals. Fig. 2 illustrates this framework.
Perception Module The perception module executes a procedure consisting of four sequential
stages: (1) 2D HPE. The agent performs 2D human detection and pose estimation on the observed
RGB image with the YOLOv3 (Redmon & Farhadi, 2018) detector and the HRNet-w32 (Sun et al.,
2019) pose estimator, respectively. Both models are pre-trained on the COCO dataset, (Lin et al.,
2014) and their parameters are kept frozen during policy learning of camera agents to ensure cross-
scene generalization. (2) Person ReID. A ReID model (Zhong et al., 2018c) is used to distinguish
people in a scene. For simplicity, an appearance dictionary of all to-be-appeared people is built in
advance following (Gärtner et al., 2020). At test time, the ReID network computes features for all
detected people and identifies different people by comparing features to the pre-built appearance
dictionary. (3) Multi-agent Communication. Detected 2D human pose, IDs, and own camera pose are
broadcasted to other agents. (4) 3D HPE. 3D human pose is reconstructed via local triangulation after
receiving communications from other agents. The estimated position and orientation of a person can
then be extracted from the corresponding reconstructed human pose. The communication process is
illustrated in Appendix Fig. 9.

                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: An instance of computing Collaborative Triangulation Contribution Reward (CTCR) for
every camera. Left: Three cameras tasked to perform HPE on the target person avoiding occlusions
from two pedestrians. Middle: Three cameras can constitute four valid coalitions, each generating a
different 3D HPE. Right: Compute CTCR (without re-scaling by n) for each camera.

Controller Module The controller module consists of a state encoder E and an actor network
A. The state encoder E takes õti as input, encoding the temporal dynamics of the environment via
LSTM. The future states of the target, pedestrians, and cameras are modelled using Mixture Density
Network (MDN) (Bishop, 1994) to account for uncertainty. During model inference, it computes
target position prediction, and then the (ϕ, µ, σ) parameters of target prediction MDN are used as a
part of the inputs to the actor network to enhance feature encoding. Please refer to Section 3.4 for
more details regarding training the MDN.
                Feature Embedding       zit = MLP(õti ),                                                (1)
                Temporal Modeling       hti = LSTM(zit , ht−1 i  ),                                      (2)
                                          t+1               t   t t
      Human Trajectory Prediction       p̂tgt/pd = MDN(zi , hi , ptgt/pd ),                              (3)
                                        eti = E õti , ht−1 ) = Concat(zit , hti , {(ϕ, µ, σ)}MDNtgt ,

                   Final Embedding                      i                                              (4)
where ptgt and ppd refer to the state of the target and the pedestrian, respectively. The actor network A
consists of 2 fully-connected layers that output the action, ati = A(E(õti , ht−1
                                                                                 i  )).
3.3   R EWARD S TRUCTURE
To alleviate the credit assignment issue that arises in multi-camera collaboration, we propose the
Collaborative Triangulation Contribution Reward (CTCR). We start by defining a base reward that
reflects the reconstruction accuracy of the triangulated pose generated by the camera team. Then we
explain how our CTCR is computed based on this base team reward.
Reconstruction Accuracy as a Team Reward To directly reflect the reconstruction accuracy, the
reward function negatively correlates with the pose estimation error (Mean Per Joint Position Error,
MPJPE) of the multi-camera triangulation. Formally,

                                   0,                             |X| ≤ 1,
                        r(X) =                                                                  (5)
                                   1 − Gemen (MPJPE(X)), |X| ≥ 2.
Where the set X represents the participating cameras in triangulation, and employs the Geman-
                                              ·/c)2
McClure smoothing function, Gemen(·) = (2( ·/c)2 +4 , to stabilize policy updates, where c = 50mm in

our experiments. However, the shared team reward structure in our MAPPO baseline, where each
camera in the entire camera team X receives a common reward r(X), presents a credit assignment
challenge, especially when a camera is occluded, resulting in a reduced reward for all cameras.
To address this issue, we propose a new approach called Collaborative Triangulation Contribution
Reward (CTCR).
Collaborative Triangulation Contribution Reward (CTCR) CTCR computes each agent’s
individual reward based on its marginal contribution to the collaborative multi-view triangulation.
Refer to Fig. 3 for a rundown of computing CTCR for a 3-cameras team. The contribution of agent i
can be measured by:
                                             X |S|!(n − |S| − 1)!
      CTCR(i) = n · φr (i),        φr (i) =                             [r(S ∪ {i}) − r(S)], (6)
                                                             n!
                                              S⊆JnK\{i}



                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Where n denotes the total number of agents. S denotes all the subsets of JnK not containing agent
i. |S|!(n−|S|−1)!
         n!       is thePnormalization term. [r(S ∪ {i}) − r(S)] means the marginal contribution
of agent i. Note that i∈JnK φr (i) = r(JnK). We additionally multiply a constant n to rescale the
CTCR to have the same scale as the team reward. Especially in the 2-cameras case, the individual
CTCR should be equivalent to the team reward, i.e., CTCR(i = 1) = CTCR(i = 2) = r({1, 2}).
For more explanations on CTCR, please refer to Appendix Section G.

3.4    L EARNING M ULTI -C AMERA C OLLABORATION VIA MARL
We employ the multi-agent learning variant of PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) called Multi-Agent PPO
(MAPPO) (Yu et al., 2021) to learn the collaboration strategy. Alongside the RL loss, we jointly train
the model with five auxiliary tasks that encourage comprehension of the world dynamics and the
stochasticity in human behaviours. The pseudocode can be found in Appendix A.
World Dynamics Learning (WDL) We use the encoder’s hidden states (zit , hti ) as the basis to
model the world. Three WDL objectives correspond to modelling agent dynamics : (1) learning the
forward dynamics of the camera P1 (ξit+1 |zit , hti , ati ), (2) prediction of team reward P2 (rt |zit , hti , ati ),
                                                           t+1 t
(3) prediction of future position of peer agents P3 (ξ−i       |zi , hti , ati ). Two WDL objectives correspond
to modelling human dynamics: (4) prediction of future position of target person P4 (pt+1              t    t t
                                                                                                tgt |zi , hi , ptgt ),
                                                              t+1 t        t t
(5) prediction of future position of pedestrians, P5 (ppd |zi , hi , ppd ). All the probability functions
above are approximated using Mixture Density Networks (MDNs) (Bishop, 1994).
Total Training Objectives LTrain = LRL + λWDL LWDL . The LRL is the reinforcement learning
loss consisting of PPO-Clipped
                           P loss and centralized-critic network loss similar to MAPPO (Yu et al.,
2021). LWDL = − n1 l λl i E[log Pl (·|õti , hti , ati )] is the world dynamics learning loss that consists
                     P
of MDN supervised losses on the five prediction tasks mentioned above.

4     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we first introduce our novel environment, U NREAL P OSE, used for training and testing
the learned policies. Then we compare our method with multi-passive-camera baselines and perform
an ablation study on the effectiveness of the proposed CTCR and WDL objectives. Additionally, we
evaluate the effectiveness of the learned policies by comparing them against other active multi-camera
methods. Lastly, we test our method in four different scenarios to showcase its robustness.

4.1    U NREAL P OSE : A V IRTUAL E NVIRONMENT FOR P ROACTIVE H UMAN P OSE E STIMATION
We built four virtual environments for simulating active HPE in the wild using Unreal Engine 4 (UE4),
which is a powerful 3D game engine that can provide real-time and photo-realistic renderings for
making visually-stunning video games. The environments handle the interactions between realistic-
behaving human crowds and camera agents. Here is a list of characteristics of U NREAL P OSE that
we would like to highlight: Realistic: Diverse generations of human trajectories, built-in collision
avoidance, and several scenarios with different human appearance, terrain, and level of illumination.
Flexibility: extensive configuration in numbers of humans, cameras, or their physical properties,
more than 100 MoCap action sequences incorporated. RL-Ready: integrated with OpenAI Gym API,
overhaul the communication module in the UnrealCV (Qiu et al., 2017) plugin with inter-process
communication (IPC) mechanism. For more detailed descriptions, please refer to Appendix Section B.


          (a) Blank                (b) School Gym               (c) Urban Street             (d) Wilderness

       Figure 4: U NREAL P OSE: Our virtual environments for active 3D HPE in human crowd



                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            MPJPE vs. Number of Cameras                                                                   MPJPE vs. Number of Humans
                           250                                 Fixed Cameras                                               120
                                                               Fixed Cameras (RANSAC)
                                                               Fixed Cameras (PlaneSweepPose)
                           200                                 MAPPO                                                       100
                                                               MAPPO + CTCR
                                                               MAPPO + CTCR + WDL
 MPJPE (mm)


                                                                                                MPJPE (mm)
                           150                                                                                              80


                           100                                                                                              60


                            50                                                                                              40

                                    2            3                       4               5                                        1   2          3          4          5   6
                                                     Number of Cameras                                                                         Number of Humans


                           1.00
                                         Success Rate vs. Number of Cameras                                                1.00
                                                                                                                                      Success Rate vs. Number of Humans
                           0.95                                                                                            0.98
Success Rate ( = 200 mm)


                                                                                                Success Rate ( = 200 mm)
                           0.90                                                                                            0.96
                           0.85                                                                                            0.94
                           0.80                                                                                            0.92
                           0.75                                Fixed Cameras
                                                               Fixed Cameras (RANSAC)                                      0.90
                           0.70                                Fixed Cameras (PlaneSweepPose)
                                                               MAPPO                                                       0.88
                           0.65                                MAPPO + CTCR
                                                               MAPPO + CTCR + WDL                                          0.86
                           0.60
                                    2            3                       4               5                                        1   2           3          4         5   6
                                                     Number of Cameras                                                                          Number of Humans

Figure 5: Comparative evaluation of mean per-joint position error (MPJPE) and success rate
(τ = 200mm) between the baseline methods and the proposed approaches. Left column: av-
erage performance w.r.t. the number of camera agents employed in environments containing one to
six humans. Right column: average performance w.r.t. the number of humans in the environment,
where three to five cameras are utilized.
4.2                               E VALUATION M ETRICS
We use Mean Per Joint Position Error (MPJPE) as our primary evaluation metric, which measures the
difference between the ground truth and the reconstructed 3D pose on a per-frame basis. However,
using MPJPE alone may not provide a complete understanding of the robustness of a multi-camera
collaboration policy for two reasons: Firstly, cameras adjusting their perception quality may take
multiple frames to complete, and secondly, high peaks in MPJPE may be missed by the mean
aggregation. To address this, we introduce the “success rate” metric, which evaluates the smooth
execution and robustness of the learned policies. Success rate is calculated as the ratio of frames in
an episode with MPJPE lower than τ . Formally, SuccessRate(τ ) = P (MPJPE ≤ τ ). This metric
is a temporal measure that reflects the integrity of multi-view coordination. Poor coordination may
cause partial occlusions or too many overlapping perceptions, leading to a significant increase in
MPJPE and a subsequent decrease in the success rate.

4.3                               R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS
The learning-based control policies were trained in a total of 28 instances of the BlankEnv, where
each instance uniformly contained 1 to 6 humans. Each training run consisted of 700,000 steps, which
corresponds to 1,000 training iterations. To ensure a fair evaluation, we report the mean metrics
based on the data from the latest 100 episodes, each comprising 500 steps. The experiments were
conducted in a 10m × 10m area, where the cameras and humans interacted with each other.
Active vs. Passive To show the necessity of proactive camera control, we compare the active
camera control methods with three passive methods, i.e., Fixed Camera, Fixed Camera (RANSAC),
and Fixed Camera (PlaneSweepPose). “Fixed Cameras” denotes that the poses of the cameras are
fixed, hanging 3m above ground and −35◦ camera pitch angles. The placements of these fixed
cameras are carefully determined with strong priors, e.g., right-angle, triangle, square, and pentagon
formations for 2, 3, 4, and 5 cameras, respectively. “RANSAC” denotes the method that uses
RANSAC (Fischler & Bolles, 1981) for enhanced triangulation. “PlaneSweepPose” represents the
off-the-shelf learning-based method (Lin & Lee, 2021b) for multi-view 3D HPE. Please refer to
Appendix E.2 for more implementation details. We show the MPJPE and Success Rate versus a


                                                                                                7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  3 Cameras                                   4 Cameras                                   5 Cameras
             275
                                                                                                                            MAPPO
             250                                                                                                            MAPPO + CTCR
             225                                                                                                            MAPPO + CTCR + WDL (Ours)
             200
             175
MPJPE (mm)


             150
             125
             100
              75
              50
              25
               0
                   BlankEnv SchoolGym UrbanStreet Wilderness   BlankEnv SchoolGym UrbanStreet Wilderness   BlankEnv SchoolGym UrbanStreet Wilderness


Figure 6: Evaluation results for testing our multi-camera collaboration policy (three to five cameras)
in four different environments that have six walking humans (including the target human).

different number of cameras in Fig. 5. We observe that all passive baselines are being outperformed
by the active approaches due to their inability to adjust camera views against dynamic occlusions.
The improvement of active approaches is especially significant when the number of cameras is less,
i.e. when the camera system has little or no redundancy against occlusions. Notably, the MPJPE
attained by our 3-camera policy is even lower than the MPJPE from 5 Fixed cameras. This suggests
that proactive strategies can help reduce the number of cameras necessary for deployment.

The Effectiveness of CTCR and WDL We also perform ablation studies on the two proposed
modules (CTCR and WDL) to analyze their benefits to performance. We take “MAPPO” as the
active-camera baseline for comparison, which is our method but trained instead by a shared global
reconstruction reward and without world dynamics modelling. Fig. 5 shows a consistent performance
gap between the “MAPPO” baseline and our methods (MAPPO + CTCR + WDL). The proposed
CTCR mitigates the credit assignment issue by computing the weighted marginal contribution of each
camera. Also, CTCR promotes faster convergence. Training curves are shown in Appendix Fig. 13.
Training with WDL objectives further improves the MPJPE metric for our 2-Camera model. However,
its supporting effect gradually weakens with the increasing number of cameras. We argue that is
caused by the more complex dynamics involved with more cameras simultaneously interacting in the
same environment. Notably, we observe that the agents trained with WDL are of better generalization
in unseen scenes, as shown in Fig. 6.

Versus Other Active Methods To show the effectiveness of the learned policies, we further com-
pare our method with other active multi-camera formation control methods in 3-cameras BlankEnv.
“MAPPO” (Yu et al., 2021) and AirCapRL (Tallamraju et al., 2020) are two learning-based meth-
ods based on PPO (Schulman et al., 2017). The main difference between these two methods is
the reward shaping technique, i.e., AirCapRL additionally employs multiple carefully-designed
rewards (Tallamraju et al., 2020) for learning. We also programmed a rule-based fixed formation
control method (keeping an equilateral triangle, spread by 120◦ ) to track the target person. Results
are shown in Table 1. Interestingly, these three baselines achieve comparable performance. Our
method outperforms them, indicating a more effective multi-camera collaboration strategy for 3D
HPE. For example, our method learns a spatially spread-out formation while automatically adjusting
to avoid impending occlusion.

Generalize to Various Scenarios We train the control policies in BlankEnv while testing them
in three other realistic environments (SchoolGym, UrbanStreet, and Wilderness) to evaluate their
generalizability to unseen scenarios. Fig. 6 shows that our method consistently outperforms baseline

Table 1: A comparison with other active control methods on the control of three cameras. We also
report fixed camera results as a reference. MPJPE is averaged over six environment instances, each
with a different number of humans (1 to 6, respectively).

                                       Fixed                                       AirCapRL                Rule-based
                                                               MAPPO                                       Formation                   Ours
                                      Cameras                                     (Reproduced)
     MPJPE (mm) ↓                       122.4                   71.6                      70.2                 70.0                    56.7


                                                                              8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               (a) 3 Cameras                (b) 4 Cameras                  (c) 5 Cameras
Figure 7: Visualizations for the emergent formations in controlling three to five cameras. The target
person is colored in blue and others are colored in pink. The camera agents learn to spread out and
avoid occlusions while maintaining good reconstruction accuracy without a centralized controller.
methods with lower variance in MPJPE during the evaluations in three test environments. We report
the results in the BlankEnv as a reference.
Qualitative Analysis In Figure 7, we show six examples of the emergent formations of cameras
under the trained policies using the proposed methods (CTCR + WDL). The camera agents learn
to spread out and ascent above humans to avoid occlusions and collision. Their placements in an
emergent formation are not assigned by other entities but rather determined by the decentralized
control policies themselves based on local observations and agent-to-agent communication. For more
vivid examples of emergent formations, please refer to the project website for the demo videos.1 For
more analysis on the behaviour mode of our 3-, 4- and 5-camera models, please refer to Appendix
Section H.
5       C ONCLUSION AND D ISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this paper presents the first proactive multi-camera system targeting the 3D
reconstruction in a dynamic crowd. It is also the first study regarding proactive 3D HPE that promptly
experimented with multi-camera collaborations at different scales and scenarios. We propose CTCR
to alleviate the multi-agent credit assignment issue when the camera team scales up. We identified
multiple auxiliary tasks that improve the representation learning of complex dynamics. As a final
note, we release our virtual environments and the visualization tool to facilitate future research.
Limitations and Future Directions Admittedly, a couple of aspects of this work have room for
improvement. Firstly, the camera agents received the positions for their teammates via non-disrupting
broadcasts of information, which may be prone to packet losses during deployment. One idea
is to incorporate a specialized protocol for multi-agent communication into our pipeline, such as
ToM2C(Wang et al., 2022). Secondly, intended initially to reduce the communication bandwidth
(for example, to eliminate the need for image transmission between cameras), the current pipeline
comprises a Human Re-Identification module requiring a pre-scan memory on all to-be-appeared
human subjects. For some out-of-distribution humans’ appearances, the current ReID module may
not be able to recognize. Though ACTIVE 3DP OSE can accommodate a more sophisticated ReID
module (Deng et al., 2018) to resolve this shortcoming. Thirdly, the camera control policy requires
accurate camera pose, which may need to develop a robust SLAM system (Schmuck & Chli, 2017;
Zhong et al., 2018b) to work in dynamic environments with multiple cameras. Fourthly, the motion
patterns of targets in virtual environments are based on manually designed animations, which will
lead to the poor generalization of the agents on unseen motion patterns. In the future, we can enrich
the diversity by incorporating a cooperative-competitive multi-agent game (Zhong et al., 2021) in
training. Lastly, we assume near-perfect calibrations for a group of mobile cameras, which might be
complicated to sustain in practice. Fortunately, we are seeing rising interest in parameter-free pose
estimation (Gordon et al., 2022; Ci et al., 2022), which does not require online camera calibration
and may help to resolve this limitation.
    1
        Project Website for demo videos: https://sites.google.com/view/active3dpose


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6   E THICS S TATEMENT

Our research into active 3D HPE technologies has the potential to bring many benefits, such as
biomechanical analysis in sports and automated video-assisted coaching (AVAC). However, we
recognize that these technologies can also be misused for repressive surveillance, leading to privacy
infringements and human rights violations. We firmly condemn such malicious acts and advocate
for the fair and responsible use of our virtual environment, U NREAL P OSE, and all other 3D HPE
technologies.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors would like to thank Yuanfei Wang for discussions on world models; Tingyun Yan
for his technical support on the first prototype of U NREAL P OSE. This research was supported by
MOST-2022ZD0114900, NSFC-62061136001, China National Post-doctoral Program for Innovative
Talents (Grant No. BX2021008) and Qualcomm University Research Grant.

R EFERENCES
Epic games incorporated. unreal engine 4. https://www.unrealengine.com.
Christopher M. Bishop. Mixture density networks. Workingpaper, Aston University, 1994.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.01540, 2016.
Géry Casiez, Nicolas Roussel, and Daniel Vogel. 1 C filter: a simple speed-based low-pass filter for
  noisy input in interactive systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
  Computing Systems, pp. 2527–2530, 2012.
Wei Cheng, Lan Xu, Lei Han, Yuanfang Guo, and Lu Fang. ihuman3d: Intelligent human body
 3d reconstruction using a single flying camera. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM International
 Conference on Multimedia, pp. 1733–1741, 2018.
Hai Ci, Chunyu Wang, Xiaoxuan Ma, and Yizhou Wang. Optimizing network structure for 3d human
  pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 2262–2271, 2019.
Hai Ci, Xiaoxuan Ma, Chunyu Wang, and Yizhou Wang. Locally connected network for monocular
  3d human pose estimation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp.
 1429–1442, 2020.
Hai Ci, Mingdong Wu, Wentao Zhu, Xiaoxuan Ma, Hao Dong, Fangwei Zhong, and Yizhou Wang.
  Gfpose: Learning 3d human pose prior with gradient fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08641,
  2022.
Robert T Collins, Omead Amidi, and Takeo Kanade. Acquiring multi-view video with an active
  camera system. In Multisensor Surveillance Systems, pp. 135–147. 2003.
Weijian Deng, Liang Zheng, Qixiang Ye, Guoliang Kang, Yi Yang, and Jianbin Jiao. Image-
 image domain adaptation with preserved self-similarity and domain-dissimilarity for person re-
 identification. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
 pp. 994–1003, 2018.
Junting Dong, Wen Jiang, Qixing Huang, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Fast and robust multi-person
  3d pose estimation from multiple views. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7792–7801, 2019.
Zeyu Fang, Jian Zhao, Mingyu Yang, Wengang Zhou, Zhenbo Lu, and Houqiang Li.
  Coordinate-aligned multi-camera collaboration for active multi-object tracking. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.10881, 2022.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Martin A Fischler and Robert C Bolles. Random sample consensus: a paradigm for model fitting
 with applications to image analysis and automated cartography. Communications of the ACM, 24
 (6):381–395, 1981.
Erik Gärtner, Aleksis Pirinen, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Deep reinforcement learning for active hu-
  man pose estimation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34,
  pp. 10835–10844, 2020.
Brian Gordon, Sigal Raab, Guy Azov, Raja Giryes, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Flex: Extrinsic parameters-
  free multi-view 3d human motion reconstruction. In European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV), pp. 176–196. Springer, 2022.
Cherie Ho, Andrew Jong, Harry Freeman, Rohan Rao, Rogerio Bonatti, and Sebastian Scherer. 3d
  human reconstruction in the wild with collaborative aerial cameras. In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
  Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5263–5269, 2021.
Mir Rayat Imtiaz Hossain and James J Little. Exploiting temporal information for 3d human pose
 estimation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 68–84,
 2018.
Karim Iskakov, Egor Burkov, Victor Lempitsky, and Yury Malkov. Learnable triangulation of
  human pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  7718–7727, 2019.
Yasamin Jafarian, Yuan Yao, and Hyun Soo Park. Monet: Multiview semi-supervised keypoint via
  epipolar divergence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 753–762, 2019.
Kefan Jin, Jian Wang, Hongdong Wang, Xiaofeng Liang, Yongjin Guo, Mianjin Wang, and Hong
  Yi. Soft formation control for unmanned surface vehicles under environmental disturbance using
  multi-task reinforcement learning. Ocean Engineering, 260:112035, 09 2022. doi: 10.1016/j.
  oceaneng.2022.112035.
Hanbyul Joo, Hao Liu, Lei Tan, Lin Gui, Bart Nabbe, Iain Matthews, Takeo Kanade, Shohei Nobuhara,
  and Yaser Sheikh. Panoptic studio: A massively multiview system for social motion capture. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3334–3342, 2015.
Angjoo Kanazawa, Michael J Black, David W Jacobs, and Jitendra Malik. End-to-end recovery of
  human shape and pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, pp. 7122–7131, 2018.
Sena Kiciroglu, Helge Rhodin, Sudipta N Sinha, Mathieu Salzmann, and Pascal Fua. Activemo-
  cap: optimized drone flight for active human motion capture. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16–20, 2019.
Muhammed Kocabas, Nikos Athanasiou, and Michael J Black. Vibe: Video inference for human
 body pose and shape estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
 and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5253–5263, 2020.
Jing Li, Jing Xu, Fangwei Zhong, Xiangyu Kong, Yu Qiao, and Yizhou Wang. Pose-assisted multi-
   camera collaboration for active object tracking. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 759–766, 2020.
Jiahao Lin and Gim Hee Lee. Multi-view multi-person 3d pose estimation with plane sweep stereo.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
   pp. 11886–11895, June 2021a.
Jiahao Lin and Gim Hee Lee. Multi-view multi-person 3d pose estimation with plane sweep stereo.
   In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
   11886–11895, 2021b.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 740–755, 2014.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
  critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Neural Information Processing Systems,
  30, 2017.
Wenhan Luo, Peng Sun, Fangwei Zhong, Wei Liu, Tong Zhang, and Yizhou Wang. End-to-end active
 object tracking via reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
 3286–3295, 2018.
Wenhan Luo, Peng Sun, Fangwei Zhong, Wei Liu, Tong Zhang, and Yizhou Wang. End-to-end active
 object tracking and its real-world deployment via reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on
 Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 42(6):1317–1332, 2019.
Xiaoxuan Ma, Jiajun Su, Chunyu Wang, Hai Ci, and Yizhou Wang. Context modeling in 3d human
  pose estimation: A unified perspective. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6238–6247, 2021.
Julieta Martinez, Rayat Hossain, Javier Romero, and James J Little. A simple yet effective baseline
  for 3d human pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
  Vision, pp. 2640–2649, 2017.
Takashi Matsuyama, Shohei Nobuhara, Takeshi Takai, and Tony Tung. Active camera system for
  object tracking and multi-view observation. In 3D Video and Its Applications, pp. 45–85. Springer,
  2012.
Dushyant Mehta, Srinath Sridhar, Oleksandr Sotnychenko, Helge Rhodin, Mohammad Shafiei, Hans-
  Peter Seidel, Weipeng Xu, Dan Casas, and Christian Theobalt. Vnect: Real-time 3d human pose
  estimation with a single rgb camera. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):1–14, 2017.
Tobias Nägeli, Samuel Oberholzer, Silvan Plüss, Javier Alonso-Mora, and Otmar Hilliges. Flycon:
  real-time environment-independent multi-view human pose estimation with aerial vehicles. ACM
  Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(6):1–14, 2018.
Xuehai Pan, Mickel Liu, Fangwei Zhong, Yaodong Yang, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yizhou Wang. MATE:
  Benchmarking multi-agent reinforcement learning in distributed target coverage control. In Thirty-
  sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=SyoUVEyzJbE.
Georgios Pavlakos, Xiaowei Zhou, Konstantinos G Derpanis, and Kostas Daniilidis. Coarse-to-fine
  volumetric prediction for single-image 3d human pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7025–7034, 2017a.
Georgios Pavlakos, Xiaowei Zhou, Konstantinos G Derpanis, and Kostas Daniilidis. Harvesting
  multiple views for marker-less 3d human pose annotations. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6988–6997, 2017b.
Georgios Pavlakos, Luyang Zhu, Xiaowei Zhou, and Kostas Daniilidis. Learning to estimate 3d
  human pose and shape from a single color image. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 459–468, 2018.
Dario Pavllo, Christoph Feichtenhofer, David Grangier, and Michael Auli. 3d human pose estimation
  in video with temporal convolutions and semi-supervised training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7753–7762, 2019.
Aleksis Pirinen, Erik Gärtner, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Domes to drones: Self-supervised active
  triangulation for 3d human pose reconstruction. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.
Haibo Qiu, Chunyu Wang, Jingdong Wang, Naiyan Wang, and Wenjun Zeng. Cross view fusion
  for 3d human pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 4342–4351, 2019.
Weichao Qiu, Fangwei Zhong, Yi Zhang, Siyuan Qiao, Zihao Xiao, Tae Soo Kim, and Yizhou Wang.
 Unrealcv: Virtual worlds for computer vision. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International
 Conference on Multimedia, pp. 1221–1224, 2017.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Faisal Qureshi and Demetri Terzopoulos. Smart camera networks in virtual reality. In 2007 First
  ACM/IEEE International Conference on Distributed Smart Cameras, pp. 87–94, 2007. doi:
  10.1109/ICDSC.2007.4357510.
Anatol Rapoport. N-person game theory : concepts and applications / Anatol Rapoport. University
  of Michigan Press Ann Arbor, 1970. ISBN 0472050176.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4295–4304, 2018.
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi.        Yolov3: An incremental improvement.          arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1804.02767, 2018.
Nitin Saini, Eric Price, Rahul Tallamraju, Raffi Enficiaud, Roman Ludwig, Igor Martinovic, Aamir
  Ahmad, and Michael J Black. Markerless outdoor human motion capture using multiple au-
  tonomous micro aerial vehicles. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 823–832, 2019.
Nitin Saini, Elia Bonetto, Eric Price, Aamir Ahmad, and Michael J Black. Airpose: Multi-view
  fusion network for aerial 3d human pose and shape estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08093,
  2022.
Patrik Schmuck and Margarita Chli. Multi-uav collaborative monocular slam. In 2017 IEEE
  International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 3863–3870. IEEE, 2017.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.02438,
  2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Anil Sharma, Saket Anand, and Sanjit K Kaul. Intelligent camera selection decisions for target
  tracking in a camera network. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications
  of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 3388–3397, January 2022.
Ke Sun, Bin Xiao, Dong Liu, and Jingdong Wang. Deep high-resolution representation learning for
  human pose estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 5693–5703, 2019.
Xiao Sun, Bin Xiao, Fangyin Wei, Shuang Liang, and Yichen Wei. Integral human pose regression.
  In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 529–545, 2018.
Peter Sunehag, Guy Lever, Audrunas Gruslys, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Vinicius Zambaldi, Max
  Jaderberg, Marc Lanctot, Nicolas Sonnerat, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, et al. Value-decomposition
  networks for cooperative multi-agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05296, 2017.
Rahul Tallamraju, Eric Price, Roman Ludwig, Kamalakar Karlapalem, Heinrich H Bülthoff, Michael J
  Black, and Aamir Ahmad. Active perception based formation control for multiple aerial vehicles.
  IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 4(4):4491–4498, 2019.
Rahul Tallamraju, Nitin Saini, Elia Bonetto, Michael Pabst, Yu Tang Liu, Michael J Black, and Aamir
  Ahmad. Aircaprl: autonomous aerial human motion capture using deep reinforcement learning.
  IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(4):6678–6685, 2020.
Hanyue Tu, Chunyu Wang, and Wenjun Zeng. Voxelpose: Towards multi-camera 3d human pose
  estimation in wild environment. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision,
  pp. 197–212, 2020.
Jianhong Wang, Yuan Zhang, Tae-Kyun Kim, and Yunjie Gu. Shapley q-value: A local reward
   approach to solve global reward games. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7285–7292, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yuanfei Wang, Fangwei Zhong, Jing Xu, and Yizhou Wang. Tom2c: Target-oriented multi-agent
  communication and cooperation with theory of mind. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M3tw78MH1Bk.
Zhou Wenhong, LI Jie, LIU Zhihong, and SHEN Lincheng. Improving multi-target cooperative
  tracking guidance for uav swarms using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Chinese Journal of
  Aeronautics, 35(7):100–112, 2022.
Jing Xu, Fangwei Zhong, and Yizhou Wang. Learning multi-agent coordination for enhancing target
   coverage in directional sensor networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   volume 33, pp. 10053–10064, 2020.
Lan Xu, Yebin Liu, Wei Cheng, Kaiwen Guo, Guyue Zhou, Qionghai Dai, and Lu Fang. Flycap:
  Markerless motion capture using multiple autonomous flying cameras. IEEE Transactions on
  Visualization and Computer Graphics, 24(8):2284–2297, 2017.
Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Yu Wang, Alexandre M Bayen, and Yi Wu. The surprising
  effectiveness of mappo in cooperative, multi-agent games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01955, 2021.
Ailing Zeng, Xiao Sun, Fuyang Huang, Minhao Liu, Qiang Xu, and Stephen Lin. Srnet: Improving
  generalization in 3d human pose estimation with a split-and-recombine approach. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 507–523, 2020.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and Control, pp.
  321–384, 2021.
Fangwei Zhong, Peng Sun, Wenhan Luo, Tingyun Yan, and Yizhou Wang. Ad-vat: An asymmetric
  dueling mechanism for learning visual active tracking. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018a.
Fangwei Zhong, Sheng Wang, Ziqi Zhang, Chen Zhou, and Yizhou Wang. Detect-slam: Making
  object detection and slam mutually beneficial. In 2018 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of
  Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1001–1010. IEEE, 2018b.
Fangwei Zhong, Peng Sun, Wenhan Luo, Tingyun Yan, and Yizhou Wang. Ad-vat+: An asymmetric
  dueling mechanism for learning and understanding visual active tracking. IEEE Transactions on
  Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 43(5):1467–1482, 2019.
Fangwei Zhong, Peng Sun, Wenhan Luo, Tingyun Yan, and Yizhou Wang. Towards distraction-robust
  active visual tracking. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12782–12792.
  PMLR, 2021.
Zhun Zhong, Liang Zheng, Zhedong Zheng, Shaozi Li, and Yi Yang. Camera style adaptation for
  person re-identification. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, pp. 5157–5166, 2018c.
Xiaowei Zhou, Sikang Liu, Georgios Pavlakos, Vijay Kumar, and Kostas Daniilidis. Human motion
  capture using a drone. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
  pp. 2027–2033, 2018.


                                               14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     T RAINING ALGORITHM PSUEDOCODE

Algorithm 1 Learning Multi-Camera Collaboration (CTCR + WDL)
 1: Initialize: n agents with a tied-weights MAPPO policy π and mixture density models (MDN) for WDL
    prediction models {(Pself , Preward , Ppeer , Ptgt , Ppd )}π , E parallel environment rollouts
 2: for Iteration = 1, 2, . . . M do
 3:     In each E environment rollouts, each agent i ∈ JnK collects trajectory with length T :
                                                                                                T
                                    τ = (õti , õt+1     , ati , rit , ht−1 , st , at−1 , rt ) t=1

                                                    i                    i

 4:    Substitute individual reward of each agent rt with CTCR: rit ← CTCR(i) (equation 6)
 5:    For each step in τ , compute advantage estimates Â1i , . . . , ÂTi with GAE (Schulman et al., 2015) for
    each agent i ∈ JnK
 6:    Yield a training batch D of the size E × T × n
 7:    for Mini-batch SGD Epoch = 1, 2, . . . , K do
 8:        Sample a stochastic mini-batch of size B form D, which B = |D|/K
 9:        Compute zit and hti using the encoder model Eπ
10:        Compute PPO-CLIP objective loss LPPO , global critic value loss LValue , adaptive KL loss LKL
11:        Compute the objectives that constitutes LWDL :
                 • Self-State Prediction Loss    Lself = −Eτ [log P (ξit+1 |zit , hti , ati )]
                 • Reward Prediction Loss        Lreward = −Eτ [log P (rt |zit , hti , ati )]
                                                                            t+1 t
                 • Peer-State Prediction Loss    Lpeer = −Eτ [log P (ξ−i        |zi , hti , ati )]
                 • Target Prediction Loss          Ltgt = −Eτ [log P (pt+1   t    t    t
                                                                       tgt |zi , hi , ptgt )]

                  • Pedestrians Prediction Loss Lpd = −Eτ [log P (pt+1    t    t    t
                                                                     pd |zi , hi , ppd )]
12:         LTrain = λPPO LPPO + λValue LValue + βKL LKL + λWDL LWDL
13:         Optimize LTrain w.r.t to the current policy parameter θπ


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     U NREAL P OSE : ACCESSORIES AND M ISCELLANEOUS I TEMS
Our UnrealPose virtual environment supports different active vision tasks, such as active human
pose estimation and active tracking. This environment also supports various settings ranging from
single-target single-camera settings to multi-target multi-camera settings. Here we provide a more
detailed description of the three key characteristics of UnrealPose:
Realistic The built-in navigation system governs the collision avoidance movements of virtual
humans against dynamic obstacles. In the meantime, it also ensures diverse generations of walking
trajectories. These features enable the users to simulate a realistic-looking crowd exhibiting socially
acceptable behaviors. We have also provided several pre-set scenes, e.g., school gym, wilderness,
urban crossing, and etc. These scenes have notable differences in illuminations, terrains, and crowd
appearances to reflect the dramatically different-looking scenarios in real-life.
Extensive Configuration The environment can be configured with different numbers of humans and
cameras and swapped across other scenarios with ease, which we demonstrated in Fig 4(a-d). Besides
simulating walking human crowds, the environment incorporates over 100 Mocap action sequences
with smooth animation interpolations to enrich the data variety for other MoCap tasks.
RL-Ready We use the UnrealCV (Qiu et al., 2017) plugin as the medium to acquire images and
annotations from the environment. The original UnrealCV plugin suffers from unstable data transfer
and unexpected disconnections under high CPU workloads. To ensure fast and reliable data acquisition
for large-scale MARL experiments, we overhauled the communication module in the UnrealCV
plugin with inter-process communication (IPC) mechanism, which eliminates the aforementioned
instabilities.

B.1   V ISUALIZATION T OOL

We provide a visualization tool to facilitate per-frame analysis of the learned policy and reconstruction
results (shown in Fig. 8). The main interface consists of four parts: (1) Live 2D views from all
cameras. (2) 3D spatial view of camera positions and reconstructions. (3) Plot of statistics. (4) Frame
control bar. This visualization tool supports different numbers of humans and cameras. Meanwhile, it
is written in Python to support easy customization.


Figure 8: Visualization Tool. RGB videos at the two sides show the local camera view for each
individual camera. The center part shows the live 3D reconstructions and corresponding MPJPE.


B.2   L ICENSE

All assets used in the environment are commercially-available and obtained from the UE4 Marketplace.
The environment and tools developed in this work are licensed under Apache License 2.0.



                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C    O BSERVATION P ROCESSING
Fig.9 shows the pipeline of the observation processing. Each camera observes an RGB image and
detects the 2D human poses and IDs via the Perception Module described in the main paper. The
camera pose, 2D human poses and IDs are then broadcast to other cameras for multi-view 3D
triangulation. The human position is calculated as the median of the reconstructed joints. Human
orientation is calculated from the cross product of the reconstructed shoulder and spine.


                        Figure 9: Decentralized Observation Processing


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

D.1    T RAINING D ETAILS

All control policies are trained in the BlackEnv scene. At the testing stage, we apply zero-
shot transfer for the learned policies to three realistic scenes: SchoolGym, UrbanStreet, and
Wilderness.
To simulate a dynamic human crowd that performs high random behaviors, we sample arbitrary goals
for each human and employ the built-in navigation system to generate collision-free trajectories. Each
human walks at a random speed. To ensure the generalization across a different number of humans,
we train our RL policy with a mixture of environments of 1 to 6 humans. The learning rate is set to
5 × 10−4 with scheduled decay during the training phase. The annealing schedule for the learning
rate is detailed in Table. 2. The maximum episode length is 500 steps, discounted factor γ is 0.99
and the GAE horizon is 25 steps. Each sampling iteration produces a training batch with the size of
700 steps, then we perform 16 iterations on every training batch with 2 SGD mini-batch updates for
each iteration (i.e. SGD batch size = 350).
Table 2 shows the common training hyper-parameters shared between the baseline models (MAPPO)
and all of our methods. Table. 4 shows the hyperparameters for the WDL module.

            Table 2: Common hyperparameters for models in baselines and our methods

    Common Hyperparameter                             Baseline, Our Methods
    Max Episode Length                                500
    Rollout Fragment Length                           25
    Number of Rollouts                                28
    Train Batch Size                                  700
    SGD Mini-batch Size                               350
    Number of SGD Iterations (Sample Reuse)           16
    gamma (γ)                                         0.99
    GAE lambda (λ)                                    1.0
    Initial KL Coefficient                            0.2
    KLTarget                                          0.01
    Entropy Regulation Coefficient                    0.0
    Value Function Loss Coefficient                   0.1
    Value Function Clipping                           1000
    Gradient Clipping                                 50
    Initial Learning Rate                             0.0005
    Learning Rate Schedule (lr, end step)             [(0, 5E-4), (200E3, 5E-4), (200E3, 1E-4), (400E3,
                                                      1E-4), (600E3, 5E-5), (600E3, 5E-5)]
    LSTM Cell Size                                    128
    Encoder Hidden Layers                             [128, 128, 128]
    Value Network Hidden Layers                       [128]
    Actor Network Hidden Layers                       [128]



D.2    D IMENSIONS OF F EATURE T ENSORS IN THE C ONTROLLER M ODULE

Table 3 serves as a complementary description for Eqn. 1, 2, 3, 4. The table shows the dimensions
of the feature tensors used in the controller module.“B” denotes the batch size. In the current
model design, the dimension of local observation is adjusted based on the maximum number of
camera agents (N _cammax ) and the maximum number of observable humans (N _humanmax ) in an
environment. In our experiments, N _humanmax has been set to 7. The observation pre-processor
will zero-pad each observation to a length equal N _humanmax × 18 if the current environment


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


instance has less than N _humanmax humans. “9” and “18” correspond to the feature length for
a camera and a human, respectively. The MDN of the Target Prediction module has 16 Gaussian
components, in which each component outputs (ϕ, µx , σx , µy , σy ) and ϕ is the weight parameter of a
component. The current implementation of MDN only predicts the x-y location of a human, which
is a simplification since the z coordinate of a simulated human barely changes across an episode
compared to the x and y coordinates. The dimension of an MDN output has a length of 80 and the
exact prediction is produced by ϕ-weighted averaging. In Eqn. 4, {(ϕ, µ, σ)}MDNtgt is an encoded
feature produced by passing the MDN output to a 2-layer MLP that has an output dimension of 128.

             Table 3: Dimensions of the feature tensors used in the controller module

                            Feature                    Shape
                    ôi                 (B, N _cammax ×9+N _humanmax ×18)
                    zi                  (B, 128)
                    hi                  (B, 128)
                    p̂tgt , p̂pd        (B, 128)
                    {(ϕ, µ, σ)}MDNtgt   (B, 128)
                    ei                  (B, 384)


D.3   C OMPUTATIONAL R ESOURCES

We used 15 Ray workers for each experiment to ensure consistency in the training procedure. Each
worker carries a Gym vectorized environment consisting of 4 actual environment instances. Each
worker demands approximately 3.7 GB of VRAM. We run each experiment with 8 NVIDIA RTX
2080 Ti GPUs. Depending on the number of camera agents, the total training hours required for an
experiment to run 500k steps will vary between 4 to 12 hours.

                                Table 4: Hyperparamters for WDL

         WDL Hyperparameter                        Our Methods
         Prediction Loss Coefficient (λWDL )       1.0
         Camera Prediction Coefficient             1.0
         Other Camera Prediction Coefficient       1.0
         Reward Prediction Coefficient             1.0
         Human Prediction Coefficient              1.0
         Pedestrian Prediction Coefficient         0.1
         MDN: Hidden Layers                        [128, 128]
         MDN: Number of Gaussian Distributions     16


D.4   T RAINING C URVE

Fig. 13 shows the training curves of our method and the baseline method. We can find that our
methods converge faster and improve reconstruction accuracy than the baseline method.

D.5   T OTAL I NFERENCE T IME

Our solution can run in real-time. Table 5 reports the inference time for each module of the proposed
Active3DPose pipeline.


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Comparing the training curves (MPJPE (cm) vs. Environment Steps) for 3, 4, 5 cameras
policies trained to 500k timesteps for the baseline and our method. Intervals for one standard deviation
are shown, and each interval is computed based on samples from 3 different runs on different seeds.


Table 5: The total inference speed of our current implementation is around 8 FPS. The average time
data are generated on a computing node with one NVIDIA RTX 2080TI GPU and one Intel Xeon
E5-2699A CPU. These data are from testing our 5-camera model over 2500 environment steps in the
Blank Environment.

                                                       Average Time (ms)
                           Human Detection             20.05
                           ReID Module                 28.88
                           2D Pose Estimation          31.16
                           3D Triangulation            1.43
                           Observation Processing      3.97
                           RL Model Inference          40.76
                           Total Inference Time        126.25


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E                     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
E.1                   A BLATION S TUDY ON WDL O BJECTIVES

We perform a detailed ablation study regarding the effect of each WDL sub-task on the model
performance. As shown in Fig. 11, we can observe that the MPJPE metric gradually decreases as
we incorporate more WDL losses. This aligns with our assumptions that training the model with
world dynamics learning objectives will promote the model’s ability to capture a better representation
of future states, which in turn increases performance. Our method additionally demonstrates the
importance of incorporating information regarding the target’s future state into the encoder’s output
features. Predicting the target’s future states should not only be used as an auxiliary task but should
also directly influence the inference process of the actor model.
                250
                                         MPJPE 3D vs. Number of Humans                                                                       Success Rate vs. Number of Humans
                           Ours - Human Pred - RL Pred                                                               0.90                                                Ours - Human Pred - RL Pred
                           Ours - Human Pred                                                                                                                             Ours - Human Pred
                           Ours                                                                                                                                          Ours
                200                                                                                                  0.85


                                                                                          Success Rate ( = 200 mm)
MPJPE 3D (mm)


                                                                                                                     0.80
                150

                                                                                                                     0.75
                100
                                                                                                                     0.70

                 50
                       1             2             3            4        5           6                                       1           2             3            4             5              6
                                                  Number of Humans                                                                                    Number of Humans


Figure 11: Detailed ablation study on WDL modules in the 2-cameras environment. Here we
commence the study by running three separate experiments differed by the number of auxiliary tasks
involved. A minus sign (-) followed by the name of a module indicates the absence of this module
in this trial. RLPred: learn agent’s forward dynamics, Human Pred: predict future target position
and predict future pedestrian position. Ours is our fully implemented method (MAPPO+WDL) for
controlling 2 camera agents.

E.2                   BASELINE — F IXED -C AMERAS

In addition to the triangulation and RANSAC baselines introduced in the main text, we compare
and elaborate on two more baselines that use fixed cameras: (1) fixed cameras with RANSAC-based
triangulation and temporal smoothing (TS) (2) an off-shelf 3D pose estimator PlaneSweepPose (Lin
& Lee, 2021a).
In the temporal smoothing baseline, we applied a low-pass filter (Casiez et al., 2012) and temporal
fusion where the algorithm will fill in any missing key points in the current frame with the detected
key points from the last frame.
In the PlaneSweep baseline, as per the official instructions, we train three separate models (3 cams to
5 cams) with the same camera setup as in our testing scenarios. We have tested the trained models in
different scenarios and reported the MPJPE results in Table 6, 7, 8 and 9. Note that, this off-shelf pose
estimator performs better than the Fixed-Camera Baseline (Triangulation) but still underperforms
compared to our active method. Fig. 12 illustrates the formations of the fixed camera baselines.

Table 6: Four fixed-camera baselines compared to our method in the 6-human Blank environment.
Results for all baselines are evaluated over 20 episodes of 500 steps. RANSAC: RANSAC-based
Triangulation TS: Temporal Smoothing with temporal fusion PlaneSweep: PlaneSweepPose (Lin &
Lee, 2021a).

                                      Fixed Cameras                  Fixed Cameras                                          Fixed Cameras                 Fixed Cameras
       BlankEnv                                                                                                                                                                             Ours
                                      (Triangulation)                  (RANSAC)                                             (RANSAC+TS)                    (PlaneSweep)
       3 Cameras                              142.0                          129.0                                               123.5                            123.3                     73.3
       4 Cameras                              122.3                          116.6                                               106.0                            116.4                     54.7
       5 Cameras                               87.0                           72.3                                                77.7                             86.5                     51.6


                                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Four fixed-camera baselines compared to our method in the 6-human SchoolGym environ-
ment. Results for all baselines are evaluated over 20 episodes of 500 steps. RANSAC: RANSAC-
based Triangulation TS: Temporal Smoothing with temporal fusion PlaneSweep: PlaneSweep-
Pose (Lin & Lee, 2021a).

                Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras
 SchoolGym                                                                                 Ours
                (Triangulation)      (RANSAC)         (RANSAC+TS)         (PlaneSweep)
  3 Cameras          149.1             149.8              144.1              132.6         99.4
  4 Cameras          133.3             124.5              124.7              120.3         67.7
  5 Cameras          100.2              76.8               83.0               92.8         64.6



Table 8: Four fixed-camera baselines compared to our method in the 6-human UrbanStreet environ-
ment. Results for all baselines are evaluated over 5 episodes of 500 steps. RANSAC: RANSAC-based
Triangulation TS: Temporal Smoothing with temporal fusion PlaneSweep: PlaneSweepPose (Lin &
Lee, 2021a).

                Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras
 UrbanStreet                                                                               Ours
                (Triangulation)      (RANSAC)         (RANSAC+TS)         (PlaneSweep)
  3 Cameras          513.4              210.1              194.2             160.3         103.6
  4 Cameras          279.4              190.8              174.5             154.5          66.4
  5 Cameras          136.7               94.1               94.4             106.5          61.9



Table 9: Four fixed-camera baselines compared to our method in the 6-human Wilderness environment.
Results for all baselines are evaluated over 20 episodes of 500 steps. RANSAC: RANSAC-based
Triangulation TS: Temporal Smoothing with temporal fusion PlaneSweep: PlaneSweepPose (Lin &
Lee, 2021a).

                Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras      Fixed Cameras
 Wilderness                                                                                Ours
                (Triangulation)      (RANSAC)         (RANSAC+TS)         (PlaneSweep)
  3 Cameras         234.0              159.6               160.5              139.2         72.6
  4 Cameras         165.6              143.9               146.6              129.5         71.3
  5 Cameras         108.1               74.9                86.5               95.1         54.3


                                                22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         2-cam                     3-cam                     4-cam                      5-cam


                         Figure 12: Illustration of fixed camera placements


      (a) 6 Cams - Hexagon               (b) 8 Cams - Octagon           (c) 16 Cams - Double Octagon


   (d) 16 Cams - Hexadecagon         (e) 16 Cams - Double Octagon         (f) 24 Cams - “Xmas Tree”
                                                 (OH)

 Figure 13: In search of a topology of a fixed-camera system that could outperform our 5-camera
         model, we have designed six more 3D topologies that contain 8 to 24 cameras.



Camera placements for all fixed-camera baselines are shown in Fig. 12. These formations are carefully
designed not to disadvantage the fixed-camera baselines on purpose. Especially for the 5-cameras
pentagon formation, which helps the fixed-camera baseline to obtain satisfactory performance on the
5-camera setting as shown in Tables 6, 7, 8 and 9.


Table 10: Comparing six more fixed-camera network topologies with our 5-camera method. Although
these topologies have significantly more cameras than our 5-active-camera model, the fixed-camera
approach cannot close the performance gap between fixed-camera systems and the learned policy.
We also observe inversions in MPJPE when increasing the number of cameras from 8 to 16 to 24.
These results suggest that the fixed-camera system has saturated the reconstruction accuracy beyond
8 cameras, and there are no further upsides to increasing the scale. We reason this is due to the errors
and biases in the 2D pose model that subsequently affect the triangulation algorithm’s effectiveness.

                                                                MPJPE (mm)
                        6 Cams - Hexagon                        88.0
                        8 Cams - Octagon                        78.5
                        16 Cams - Double Octagon                86.7
                        16 Cams - Hexadecagon                   81.7
                        16 Cams - Double Octagon (OH)           94.9
                        24 Cams - “Xmas Tree”                   87.0
                        Ours, 5 Cams, active cameras            51.6


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.3   O UR M ETHOD E NHANCED WITH RANSAC- BASED T RIANGULATION

RANSAC is a generic technique that can be used to improve triangulation performance. In this
experiment, we also train and test our model with RANSAC. The final result (Table 11) shows a
further improvement on our original triangulation version.

Table 11: Evaluate the effect of adding RANSAC-based Triangulation to our method. Both models
are trained from scratch on a mix of Blank environment instances with 1 to 6 humans. MPJPE(mm)
is averaged over the training results in six different configurations of Blank environment instances
(1-6 humans).

                                    Ours (5 Cams)       Ours (5 Cams + RANSAC)
                 MPJPE (mm)↓              46.7                      35.0


F     G ENERATING S AFE AND S MOOTH T RAJECTORIES

F.1   C OLLISION AVOIDANCE

In order to generate safe trajectories, in this section, we introduce and evaluate two different ways to
enforce collision avoidance between cameras and humans.

Obstacle Collision Avoidance (OCA) OCA resembles a feed-forward PID controller on the final
control outputs before execution. Concretely, OCA adds a constant reverse quantity to the control
output if it detects any surrounding objects within its safety range. This “detouring” mechanism
safeguards the cameras from possible collisions and prevents them from making dangerous maneuvers.

Action-Masking (AM) AM also resembles a feed-forward controller but is instead embedded into
the forward step of the deep-learning model. At each step, AM module first identifies the dangerous
actions among all possible actions, then modifies the probabilities (output by the policy model) of
choosing the hazardous actions to be zero so that the learning-based control policy will never pick
them. Note that AM must be trained with the MARL policy model.
We proposed the minimum Camera-Human distance (in which the scope includes the target and
the pedestrians) as the safety metric. It measures the distance between the closest human and the
camera at a timestep. Fig. 14 shows the histograms of Min Camera-Human distance sampled over
five episodes of 500 steps.


Figure 14: Histograms of minimum Camera-to-Human distances to demonstrate the safety integrity
level for three different 5-Cameras methods. Vanilla: original deep MARL policy without any
safety feature. Obstacle Collision Avoidance: deep MARL policy added with OCA module Action
Masking: deep MARL policy trained with AM module.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   T RAJECTORY S MOOTHING

Exponential Moving Average (EMA) To generate smooth trajectories, we introduce EMA to
smooth the outputs of our learned policy model. EMA is a common technique used in smoothing
time-series data. In our case, the smoothing operator is defined as :
                                     ât = ât−1 + η · (at − ât−1 )
Where at is the action (or control signal) output by the model at the current step, ât−1 is the smoothed
action from the last step and η is the smoothing factor. A smaller η results in greater smoothness. ât
is the smoothed action that the camera will execute.

F.3   ROBUSTNESS OF THE L EARNED P OLICY

In this section, we evaluate the robustness of our model on different external perturbations to the
control signal. In conclusion, our model shows resilience against the delay effect and random noise.

Delay EMA also brings a delay effect while smoothing the generated trajectory. The level of
smoothing positively correlates with a larger delay factor. Here, we evaluate our model’s robustness
to the EMA simulated delay.

Random Action Noise Control devices in real-life are inevitably affected by errors. For example,
the control signal of a controller may be over-damped or may overshoot. We simulated this type of
random error by multiplying the output action by a uniformly-sampled noise.
In Table 12, we intend to observe the effects of EMA delay and random action noise on the recon-
struction accuracy of our model, marked as “Vanilla”.

Table 12: Adding delay (EMA) and action noise to our proposed method. In this experiment, we set
η = 0.50 and noise factor between [0.80, 1.20). Results are reported on 5 episodes of 500 steps.

                                                                                     Add action noise
                   Ours(Vanilla)       Add delay(EMA)         Add action noise
                                                                                     and delay(EMA)
MPJPE (mm)              (51.6)                +0.8                     +2.1                 +3.9


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G    M ORE E XPLANATIONS ON CTCR
Figure 3 is an example of using Eq. 6 to compute CTCR for each of the three cameras. The CTCR is
incentivized by the Shapley Value.The main idea is that the overall optimality needs to also account
for the optimality of every possible sub-formation. For a camera agent to receive the highest CTCR
possible, its current position and view must be optimal both in terms of its current formation and any
sub-formation possible.
Note: a group of collaborating players is often referred to as a “coalition” in other literatures. Here
we apply the same concept but to a group of cameras, so we used the more initiative term “formation”
instead.
Eq. 6 can be further breakdown as follows:
                              X |S|!(n − |S| − 1)!
                    φr (i) =                       [r(S ∪ {i}) − r(S)]
                                           n!
                              S⊆JnK\{i}

                              1     X   |S|!(n − 1 − |S|)!
                          =                                [r(S ∪ {i}) − r(S)]
                              n              (n − 1)!
                              S⊆JnK\{i}

                            1   X  n − 1 −1
                          =                        [r(S ∪ {i}) − r(S)]
                            n              |S|
                                  S⊆JnK\{i}


where JnK = 1, 2, . . . , n denotes the set of all cameras and the binomial coefficient nk =

    n!                                                                          n−1

k!(n−k)! , 0 ≤ k ≤ n. S denotes a formation (a subset) without camera i.         |S| is the number
of combinations of subset S (i.e., the binomial coefficient), which serves as a normalization term.
r(S) computes the reconstruction accuracy of the formation S. And [r(S ∪ {i}) − r(S)] computes
the marginal improvement after adding the camera i to sub-formation S. So this equation means we
iterate over all possible S and compute the marginal contribution of camera i and average over all
possible combinations of (S, i).
Suppose we have a 3-cameras formation, similarly shown in Figure 3. So n = 3, the number of
cameras. Let’s name these cameras (1,2,3), and let’s say we only care about Camera 1 for now.
Since we are computing the average marginal contribution for Camera 1, we are looking for those
formations that do not have Camera 1 because we want to see how much of an increase in performance
resulted from the addition of Camera 1 to those formations. For all possible formations denoted by
the set JnK, four formations satisfy this condition, S ⊆ JnK \ {i} −→ S ∈ (∅, {2}, {3}, {2, 3}).
The binomial coefficient n−1                                                         2

                           |S| for a 2-camera sub-formation in a 3-cameras case is 2 , which makes
sense because there exists only one unique combination that does not contain Camera 1, which is
sub-formation {2, 3}. r({2, 3}) computes the reconstruction accuracy of the formation {2, 3} and
r({2, 3} ∪ {1}) computes the reconstruction accuracy after adding Camera 1 to sub-formation {2, 3}.
Their difference gives us the marginal contribution of  Camera 1. As we sum over all subsets S of
JnK not containing Camera 1, and then divide by n−1   |S| and the number of cameras n, we have the
average marginal contribution of Camera 1 (φr ({1})) to the collaborative triangulated reconstruction.
Further multiplying this term by n, you have the CTCR1 as shown in Eq. 6.


                                                  26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H    A NALYSIS ON MODES OF BEHAVIORS OF THE TRAINED AGENTS
Here in Figure 15 we provide statistics and analysis on the behaviour mode of the agents controlled by
our 3-, 4- and 5-camera policies, respectively. We are interested in understanding the characteristics
of the emergent formations learned by our model. Hence we proposed three quantitative measures
to understand the topology of the emergent formations: (1) the min-angle between the cameras’
orientation and the per-frame-mean of the min-camera angle, (2) the camera’s pitch angle, and (3) the
camera-human distance. Hence we provide rigorous definitions as follows:


                    min-camera angle(i) = min⟨axis of camera i, axis of camera j⟩
                                               j̸=i
                                                         1 X
               per-frame-mean of min-camera angle =          min-camera angle(i)
                                                         n
                                                            i∈[n]


In simpler terms, min-camera angle(i) finds the minimum angle between camera i and any other
camera j. “per-frame-mean of min-camera angle” is the mean of min-camera angle(i) for all camera
i in one frame. A positive camera’s pitch angle means looking upward, and a negative camera’s pitch
angle means looking downward. The camera-human distance measures the distance between the
target human and the given camera.
Regarding the distance between cameras and humans, the camera agents actively adjust their position
relative to the target human. The cameras learn to keep a camera-human distance between 2m and
3m. It is neither too distant from the target human nor too close, violating the safety constraint. The
camera agents surround the target at an appropriate distance to have a better resolution on the 2D
views. In the meantime, as the safe-distance constraint is enforced during training, the camera agents
are prohibited from aggressively minimizing the camera-human distance.
The histograms for the camera’s pitch angle suggest that the cameras mostly maintain negative pitch
angles. Their preferred strategy is to hover over the humans and capture images at a higher altitude.
This is likely because of emergent occlusion avoidance. The cameras also emerge to fly at an even
level with the humans (where the pitch angle approximately equals 0) to capture more accurate
2D poses of the target human. This propensity is apparent from the peaks at x = 0 angles in the
histograms. A relatively wide distribution of the pitch angle histogram suggests that the camera
formation is spread out in the 3D space and dynamic adjustments of flying heights and pitch angles
by the camera agents.
For the average angle between the cameras’ orientations, this statistic shows that the cameras in
various formations will maintain reasonable non-zero spatial angles between each other. Therefore,
their camera views are less likely to coincide and provide more diverse perspectives to generate a
more reliable 3D triangulation.


                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  (a) 3 camera agents, 6 humans


                                  (b) 4 camera agents, 6 humans


                                  (c) 5 camera agents, 6 humans

Figure 15: Histograms of the three metrics for 3-, 4- and 5-camera methods. Left Column: pdf of
 camera-to-target distance. Middle Column: pdf of camera pitch angle. Right Column: pdf of
   per-frame-mean of min-camera angle. Detailed descriptions of each metric can be found in
                                            Section H.


                                               28
