Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B ETTER G ENERATIVE R EPLAY FOR C ONTINUAL
F EDERATED L EARNING
 Daiqing Qi1 , Handong Zhao2 , Sheng Li1
 1
   University of Virginia, 2 Adobe Research
 {daiqing.qi, shengli}@virginia.edu, hazhao@adobe.com



                                               A BSTRACT

            Federated Learning (FL) aims to develop a centralized server that learns from
            distributed clients via communications without accessing the clients’ local data.
            However, existing works mainly focus on federated learning in a single task sce-
            nario. with static data. In this paper, we introduce the continual federated learning
            (CFL) problem, where clients incrementally learn new tasks and history data can-
            not be stored due to certain reasons, such as limited storage and data retention pol-
            icy 1 . Generative replay (GR) based methods are effective for continual learning
            without storing history data. However, we fail when trying to intuitively adapt GR
            models for this setting. By analyzing the behaviors of clients during training, we
            find the unstable training process caused by distributed training on non-IID data
            leads to a notable performance degradation. To address this problem, we propose
            our FedCIL model with two simple but effective solutions: 1. model consolida-
            tion and 2. consistency enforcement. Experimental results on multiple benchmark
            datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms baselines. Code is
            available at: https://github.com/daiqing98/FedCIL.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017) is an emerging topic in machine learning, where a pow-
erful global model is maintained via communications with distributed clients without access to their
local data. A typical challenge in federated learning is the non-IID data distribution (Zhao et al.,
2018; Zhu et al., 2021a), where the data distributions learnt by different clients are different (known
as heterogeneous federated learning). Recent methods (Li et al., 2020; Chen & Chao, 2020; Zhu
et al., 2021b) gain improvements in the typical federated learning setting, where the global model is
learning a single task and each client is trained locally on fixed data. However, in real-world appli-
cations, it is more practical that each client is continuously learning new tasks. Traditional federated
learning models fail to solve this problem.
In practice, history data are sometimes inaccessible considering privacy constraints (e.g., data pro-
tection under GDPR) or limited storage space (e.g., mobile devices with very limited space), and the
unavailability of previous data often leads to catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989)
in many machine learning models. Continual learning (Thrun, 1995; Kumar & Daume III, 2012;
Ruvolo & Eaton, 2013; Chu & Li, 2023) aims to develop an intelligent system that can continuously
learn from new tasks without forgetting learnt knowledge in the absence of previous data. Common
continual learning scenarios can be roughly divided into two scenarios (Van de Ven & Tolias, 2019):
task incremental learning (TIL) and class incremental learning (CIL) (Rebuffi et al., 2017). In both
scenarios, the intelligent system is required to solve all tasks so far. In TIL, task-IDs of different
task are accessible, while in CIL, they are unavailable, which requires the system to infer task-IDs.
The unavailability of task-IDs makes the problem significantly harder.
In this paper, we propose a challenging and realistic problem, continual federated learning. More
specifically, we aim to deal with the class-incremental federated learning (CI-FL) problem. In this
setting, each client is continuously learning new classes from a sequence of tasks, and the centralized
server learns from the clients via communications. It is more difficult than the single FL or CIL,
    1
        https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


because both the non-IID and catastrophic forgetting issues need to be addressed. Compared with
traditional continual learning settings that only involve one model, our problem is more complex
because there are multiple models including one server and many clients.
Owning to the success of generative replay ideas in continual learning, we propose to adopt Auxil-
iary Classifier GAN (ACGAN) (Odena et al., 2017), a generative adversarial network (GAN) with
an auxiliary classifier, as the base model for the server and clients. Then the generator of the model
can be used for generative replay to avoid forgetting. Interestingly, experiments show that a sim-
ple combination of ACGAN and FL algorithms fails to produce promising results. It is already
known that the unstable training process (Roth et al., 2017; Kang et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2020) and
imbalanced data can worsen the performance of generative models. We find that this phenomenon
becomes more severe in the context of federated learning, which leads to the failure of the intuitively
combined model.
To overcome these challenges, we propose a federated class-incremental learning (FedCIL) frame-
work. In FedCIL, the generator of ACGAN helps alleviate catastrophic forgetting by generating syn-
thetic data of previous distributions for replay, meanwhile, it benefits federated learning by transfer-
ring better global and local data distributions during the communications. Our model is also subject
to the privacy constraints in federated learning. During the communications, only model parameters
are transmitted. With the proposed global model consolidation and local consistency enforcement,
our model significantly outperforms baselines on benchmark datasets.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

       • We introduce a challenging and practical problem of continual federated learning, i.e.,
         class-incremental federated learning (CI-FL), where a global model continuously learns
         from multiple clients that are incrementally learning new classes without memory buffers.
         Subsequently, we propose generative replay (GR) based methods for this challenge.
       • We empirically find the unstable learning process caused by distributed training on highly
         non-IID data with popular federated learning algorithms can lead to a notable performance
         degradation of GR based models. Motivated by this observation, we further propose to
         solve the problem with model consolidation and consistency enforcement.
       • We design new experimental settings and conduct comprehensive evacuations on bench-
         mark datasets. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of our model.

2   R ELATED W ORK
Class-Incremental Learning. Class-incremental learning (CIL) (Rebuffi et al., 2017) is a hard
continual learning problem due to the unavailability of the task-IDs. Existing approaches to solve
the CIL problem can be divided into three categories (Ebrahimi et al., 2020), including the replay-
based methods (Rolnick et al., 2019; Chaudhry et al., 2019), structure-based methods (Yoon et al.,
2017), and regularization-based methods (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Aljundi et al., 2018). In addition,
the generative replay based methods (Shin et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018) belong to the replay-based
methods, but they do not need a replay buffer for storing previous data. Instead, an additional
generator is trained to capture the data distribution of data learnt so far, and it generates synthetic
data for replay when the real data becomes unavailable. The generative replay based methods have
obtained promising results on various CIL benchmarks, where storing data is not allowed (data-free).
Federated Learning. Federated learning has been extensively studied in recent years. We mainly
discuss the ones that involve generative models in this section. For instance, some recent federated
learning methods train a GAN across distributed resources (Zhang et al., 2021; Rasouli et al., 2020)
in a federated learning paradigm. They are subject to privacy constraints in that the parameters of the
GAN are shared instead of the real data. In our work, we also strictly follow the privacy constraints
by only transmitting GAN parameters.
Continual Learning and Federated Learning. So far, only few works lie in the intersection of
federated learning and continual learning. Casado et al. (2020) discussed federated learning with
changing data distributions, but it only involves single-task scenario of federated learning. Yoon
et al. (2021) introduced a federated continual learning setting from the perspective of continual
learning. Our work is significantly different from it. First, in (Yoon et al., 2021), the federated


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


continual learning focuses on the performance of each single client, and thus it does not maintain a
global model on the server side. Our objective is opposite to it in that we aim to develop a global
model that incrementally learns from the clients. Second, the method in (Yoon et al., 2021) focuses
on the task-incremental learning, where task-IDs are required for inference, while our work aims to
deal with the more challenging task of class-incremental learning, where task-IDs are not available.
In addition, the methods proposed in (Usmanova et al., 2021; Guo et al., 2021; Hendryx et al.,
2021) are also relevant to our work, all of which have a global model that incrementally learns new
classes. In particular, federated reconnaissance (Hendryx et al., 2021) uses prototype networks for
its proposed task. It is different from our work in that, in federated reconnaissance, new classes
maybe overlapped with old classes, which is not allowed in the standard class incremental scenario.
Also, it focuses on few-shot learning and uses a buffer to store prototypes of learnt classes, which
is not needed in our framework. (Guo et al., 2021) is very relevant to (Hendryx et al., 2021), which
allows overlapped classes among a client’s private tasks. Thus it is inconsistent with the standard
incremental learning (IL) setting. (Usmanova et al., 2021) is different from us in the communication
settings. Dong et al. (2022) used a memory buffer to store old data, which decreases the difficulty
to a large extend. We focus on generative replay based continual learning methods which works
with no memory buffers. We further clarify the differences between our work and the most related
methods in Appendix D.

3     P RELIMINARY

In this section, we first present the problem definitions. Then we clarify the differences between our
setting and existing work.

3.1   P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

Federated Learning (FL). A typical Federated Learning problem can be formalized by assuming
a set C = {C1 , C2 , ..., Cn } of n different clients, where each client Ck owns its private data Dk with
its corresponding task Tk , and a global model parameterized by θg is deployed on a centralized
server, which communicates with the clients during their training on their own local data. The aim
of FL is to learn a global model that minimizes its risk on each of the client tasks. where Lk is the
objective of Tk . On the other hand, we present the definition of class-incremental learning, which is
a challenging continual learning problem as task-IDs are not available.
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL). In class-incremental learning, a model sequentially learns
from a sequence of data distributions denoted as D = {D1 , D2 , ..., Dm }, where each Di is the
data distribution of the corresponding task T i and label space is Y i . During T t , all data distri-
butions {Di |i < t} will be unavailable, and the goal of CIL is to effectively learn from Dt , while
maintaining its performance on learnt tasks. After all m tasks, the model is expected to map samples
from D = {D1 , D2 , ..., Dm } to Y 1 ∪ Y 2 ... ∪ Y m without Task-IDs.
Class-Incremental Federated Learning (CI-FL). In CI-FL, each client Ci sequentially learns from
a series of m tasks locally (denoted as T i = {Ti1 , Ti2 , ..., Tim }) in a class-incremental way, during
which time, the clients communicate with global model on centralized server. The goal of CI-FL is
to maintain a global model that predicts all classes seen by all clients so far.

3.2   D ESIDERATA

We have some desiderata for our proposed setting, which makes our class-incremental federated
learning more general, realistic and challenging, compared with existing works. Discussions includ-
ing differences with existing works are available in Appendix D.

4     M ETHODOLOGY

We propose a new framework, FedCIL, for class-incremental federated learning, as shown in Fig. 1.
In this section, we first review ACGAN, which is adopted as the base model for server and clients.
Then we discuss an interesting observation, i.e., simply combining ACGAN and federated learning
algorithms fails to work well. Motivated by the findings, we finally present our FedCIL framework.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Centralized Server                                                                   Client 1
          z～                                                                                                                            Lc3
      l ～{‘N’, ‘e’, ‘w’ …}                                                                   z～                                         Lc1
                                           z～                  θglobal                       l ～{‘N’ …}

                                    l ～{‘N’, ‘e’, ‘w’ …}                                                                                Lc2
                                                                     Lserver                              Dataset

                θ2   θglobal               θ2   θglobal                θ3    θglobal         z～

                                                                                             l ～{‘N’ …}                        logits
                                                                                                                                        Llocal
Cient 1                   Cient 2                    Cient 3                       •••
           θ1                         θ2                          θ3



Figure 1: Framework of our FedCIL. The left figure illustrates the model consolidation on the
server side. During each communication, the server model is first initialized from merged clients,
then consolidated with synthetic samples generated by client generators. The right figure illustrates
consistency enforcement on client side (client 1 for example), which is achieved by consistency loss
functions applied to the output logits of the classification module of the client.

4.1       ACGAN

Generative replay based methods are popular in a strict CIL setting, where storing data is not allowed
(data-free). DGR (Shin et al., 2017), a representative generative replay based method, trains a GAN
for replay in addition to the classification model. ACGAN (Odena et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2018) is
better than DGR in that, it reduces the complexity of the model by integrating the the classifier and
the generative model as a single model. Besides, it enables conditional generation, which is crucial
for learning an unbiased classifier. Thus we choose ACGAN as the base model for each client.
In ACGAN, each sample is generated by providing the noise z and a class label c to the generator.
The objective function of the generator can be written as:
                              Lgen = min LG                G

                                             gan (θ, X) + Lce (θ, X) ,                        (1)
                                                                       θG

                                        LG
                                         gan (θ, X) = −Ez∼pz ,c∼pc [log(Dθ D (Gθ G (z, c)))] ,                                          (2)
                                        LG
                                         ce (θ, X) = −Ez∼pz ,c∼pc [yc log(Cθ C (Gθ G (z, c)))] ,                                        (3)
where C, D and G are the classification module, discriminator module and the generator, respec-
tively. Note that C and D share the feature extractor layers and only differ in the last out put layer.
LG                G
  ce (θ, X) and Lgan (θ, X) are respectively the standard cross-entropy loss for classification and the
generator loss in a typical GAN. X is the training dataset. θ denotes the overall parameters. θC ,
θD , and θG are the parameters for classification module, discriminator module and the generator,
respectively. pc is the label distribution, and pz is the noise distribution. yc is the ground truth label.
The corresponding discriminator loss function is:
                                Ldis = min LD                   D

                                                gan (θ, X) + Lce (θ, X) ,                               (4)
                                                                  θ D ,θ C

           LD
            gan (θ, X) = −E(x,c)∼X [log(Dθ D (x))] − Ez∼pz ,c∼pc [log(1 − Dθ D (Gθ G (z, c)))],                                         (5)
       LDce (θ, X) = −E(x,c)∼X [yc log(Cθ C (x))] − Ez∼pz ,c∼pc [yc log(Cθ C (Gθ G (z, c)))] .                                          (6)
Overall, we write the loss function of ACGAN as:
                                                               Lacgan (θ, X) = Lgen + Ldis .                                            (7)
When trained properly, The ACGAN can generate synthetic images while it can also give predictions
of real images.

4.2       W HY DOES INTUITIVE COMBINATION FAIL TO WORK WELL ?

However, simply combining the ACGAN and a federated learning algorithm to adapt ACGAN to
heterogeneous federated learning yields unpromising results. The instability of ACGAN during
training, which is aggravated in the context of non-IID federated learning leads to the degradation


                                                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               (a) Classification loss                               (b) Gradient Norm

Figure 2: The classification losses and gradient norms (i.e., Eq. (6)) of (1) ACGAN + FedProx, (2)
ACGAN (offline) and (3) FedCIL (Ours) of a randomly selected client during a period of training
on EMNIST.
of the model performance. Fig. 2 illustrates this phenomenon. In the simply combined model, the
classification loss experiences undesired peaks in each communication round, which impedes the
training of the generator in ACGAN.
In a single model scenario, the gradient exploding in the classifier of ACGAN have a negative impact
on the training of the generator, which appears more often when the classifier is not well-trained yet,
e.g., on the early training stage. When it happens, the classification loss from Eq. (6) comes into
dominance and breaks the balance between the classification loss from Eq. (6) and the discrimination
loss from Eq. (5). The generation ability will be limited due to such over-tilt since then. Finally
the generation ability is impaired, which impacts the quality of generative replay, leading to more
forgetting. Therefore, we need to prevent the classification loss from growing too high at the early
stages of each communication round.
The standard cross-entropy loss function is written as:
                                                       exp(F (x)⊤ wy )
                            Lce = −Ex∼X [log( P                             )]                     (8)
                                                     c               ⊤
                                                     j=1 exp   F (x)   wj

where x is the instance from the training data distribution X and y is its label, F is the feature
extractor and W = {w1 , ..., wc } is the parameter set of the classifications layer. c is the number of
total classes.
Then the derivative of Eq. (8) w.r.t wk∈{1,2,...,c} is:
                  ∂LCE                             exp(F ((x, y))⊤ wk )
                       = −Ex∼X [F (x)(1y=k − log( P                        ))]                     (9)
                   ∂wk                              c
                                                        exp   F (x)
                                                                   ⊤
                                                                     w
                                                    j=1                j

where 1y=k is the indicator function whose value equals to 1 if y = k else 0.
Eq. (9) indicates that the gradient norm of Lce is associated with the feature norm (i.e., the norm of
F (x)) and the classification possibilities. Thus the generation ability is more likely to degrade when
the classifier gives inaccurate predictions.
The way clients are trained in federated learning makes such degradation more often. In each com-
munication round, each local client first synchronizes parameters with the global model, which
worsens the performance of the classifier on its local dataset. According to Eq. (9), the gradient
norm tends to grow, which can lead to the gradient exploding. And the large values of LD      ce (θ, X)
from Eq. (6) break the balance between LD                D                             D
                                          ce (θ, X) and Lgan (θ, X). The over-tilt to Lce (θ, X) limits
the generation ability and finally decreases the model performance, which relies on the quality of
generative replay. Moreover, the training process in federated learning consists of many commu-
nications rounds, which makes it worse because such degradation happens in early stages of every
communication round, throughout the whole training process.
Figures 2 and 4 illustrates this process. At the beginning of each communication round, the classifi-
cation loss and FID score of ACGAN experiences an obviously peak if simply combining ACGAN
with a FL algorithm (FedProx is used in experiments). It is observed every 400 iterations as we set
local intention T = 400. In a single model scenario without federated learning, i.e., ACGAN (of-
fline), the loss is stable. Our model works in federated learning while the loss curve is comparable


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to ACGAN (offline). Note that ACGAN (offline) indicates the ideal case. Because in FL, clients are
synchronized with the server at every communication round and offline training is unavailable.

4.3   F ED CIL

To address the problems, we propose a new framework (Fig. 1) for class-incremental federated learn-
ing. We denote all parameters of a single client model Ci as θi and that of the global model G as
θglobal . Clients sequentially learn a series of non-overlapped classes. Meanwhile, the server com-
municates with the clients multiple rounds to learn all classes seen by all clients so far. During each
round, clients first learn the current or new classes from their own dataset for certain iterations. Then
the model parameters of selected clients are sent to the server, where the global model aggregates
the parameters and conduct a model consolidation to enrich itself with the knowledge from different
clients. Finally, the parameters of the global model are sent back the all clients.
Model consolidation. On the server side, the centralized server first receives the parameters (de-
noted by θ1 , θ2 , ...) sent by selected clients Cselected = {C1 , C2 , ...}. Then the parameters are merged
to initialize the global model. Note that in CI-FL setting, clients continuously learn new classes, thus
new output nodes are added to the global model if any of the clients learns new classes. In a practical
CI-FL setting, the local data of clients are usually non-IID and more importantly, new classes are
continuously collected and learnt by clients, thus simply merging the parameters often fails in such
case. We proposed to solve this problem by model consolidation. The global model is first initialized
with the merged parameters and an ensemble of classification heads from different clients. Then we
generate balanced synthetic data with collected generator parameters from selected clients. Finally
the global model is consolidated by the ACGAN loss function Lacgan with generated data:
                                    Lserver = Lacgan (θglobal , X g ),                                 (10)
where X g are synthetic data generated by collected generators this communication round and θglobal
is the parameter of the generator on the server.
Consistency enforcement. On the client side, each client owns three modules during the local
training: (1) a ACGAN (2) a copy of the generator of itself Gt−1   θG
                                                                        (yellow generator in Fig. 1) at the
end of last task (3) the global generator Gθglobal
                                              G      (red generator in Fig. 1) which it received in the
last communication. In local training, the client first initializes itself with received parameter θglobal
from the global model. During the training, the client is expected to effectively learn from new
classes while maintain its knowledge on learnt classes. For this purpose, Gθt−1      G  generates samples
   g
Xt−1   conditioned on labels from previous tasks and they are mixed up with training data X to form
the input for ACGAN loss:
                                                            g
                                  Llocal = Lacgan (θ, Xt−1       ∪ X),                                (11)
Although the classifier of a client is trained to give same predictions of the real images and the
synthetic images generated by generators if they have the same label, their features can be different
because their sources are different.
Denote generated samples by the generator of current model, the generator from last task, and the
                                                  g
generator from received global model as Xt−1           and Xgg and denote the real sample as X. Given
   g       g
Xt−1 , Xg and X, to learn a better global model, their features are expected be close to each other
when their labels are the same. In this case, it is easier to reach a global optimality instead of
sticking in a local optimality or diverges. We propose to achieve it by consistency enforcement,
i.e., aligning the their features produced by intermediate layers of the classifier. To make it simple,
instead of aligning features output by intermediate layers, we try to align their output logits by the
last layer, i.e., the classification layer, which is common in knowledge distillation. In this way, given
different images with the same label but from different generators or the real dataset, the classifier
tends to output similar distributions. Thus the classifier is more robust against images from different
distributions. We use consistency loss functions to ensure this:
                                                           C   g            C   g
                 Lc1 = min(−Exgt−1 ∼Xt−1
                                     g
                                         ,xg   g [D
                                           g ∼Xg   KL (f (θ , xt−1 ) || f (θ , xg ))])                 (12)
                         θC

                     Lc2 = min(−Ex∼X,xgg ∼Xgg [DKL (f (θC , x) || f (θC , xgg ))]),                    (13)
                              θC

                     Lc3 = min(−Exgg ∼xgg ,y(xgg )∼Y [DKL (f (θC , xgg ) || y(xgg ))]),                (14)
                              θC


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        Lc = Lc1 + Lc2 + Lc3 .                                   (15)
Finally, the overall loss function for a client is:
                                         Lclient = Llocal + Lc ,                                 (16)
where DKL (P || Q) is the Kullback–Leibler divergence, a measure of how one probability distri-
bution Q is different from the second probability distribution P. θC is the parameter related to the
classification module and f (θC , x) are the softmaxed output logits of the classification head.
Eq. (13) can also be interpreted as using some soft labels for the classification task of real samples.
With proper soft label, the classification module can be trained more stably and has better general-
ization thus can have better performance(Phuong & Lampert, 2019). It is especially fitful for our
CI-FL setting because better generalization benefits both class incremental learning (Mirzadeh et al.,
2020) (Buzzega et al., 2020) and federated learning, where non-IID data requires better generaliza-
tion of the model. Intuitively, Eq. (14) can transfer knowledge from the global model to the client
                         g
by the generated data Xglobal  to enrich the client with global knowledge.
Privacy. To protect privacy in federated learning, only sharing parameters is a simple yet effective
solution. Related works that train a GAN across distributed resources (Zhang et al., 2021; Rasouli
et al., 2020) adopts this strategy. We also adopt this solution and mainly focus on addressing the
catastrophic forgetting problem in CI-FL. Some advanced methods like Private FL-GAN (Xin et al.,
2020), which specifically address the privacy issue, can be integrated into our framework if higher
levels of privacy are required.

5     E XPERIMENTS
5.1   DATASETS

Choice of Datasets. We adopt commonly used datasets for federated learning (FL) (Zhu et al.,
2021b), suggested by the LEAF benchmark (Caldas et al., 2018). Proper modifications are made
according to the definition of our CI-FL setting. For vision tasks, MNIST, EMINST and CelebA
are suggested. We do not use CelebA because it is built as a binary classification task in FL and
not suitable for continual learning setting. Besides, we add use CIFAR-10, which is a simple but
still challenging dataset in data-free class-incremental learning (CIL). They are simple datasets for
classification, but difficult and far from being solved in non-IID FL and CIL (Prabhu et al., 2020).
For all datasets: MNIST, EMINST-Letters, EMNIST-Balanced and CIFAR-10, we build 5 tasks
for each client with 2 classes every task. Details of datasets and data processing can be found in
Appendix A.

5.2   BASELINES

We compare our FedCIL approach with the following baselines, including two representative FL
models and three models for continual federated learning. Details of baselines can be found in
Appendix B. FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017). FedProx (Li et al., 2020). A representative FL
model which is better at tackling heterogeneity in federated networks than FedAvg. FedLwF-
2T (Usmanova et al., 2021). It exploits the idea of Learning without Forgetting(LwF) (Li &
Hoiem, 2017) in federated learning. FedProx/FedAvg+ACGAN Replay (Also referred as Fed-
Prox/FedAvg+ACGAN in the paper). It is a combination of FedProx/FedAvg and ACGAN. Fed-
Prox/FedAvg+DGR (Shin et al., 2017). It is a combination of FedProx/FedAvg and Deep Genera-
tive Replay (DGR) (Shin et al., 2017).

5.3   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Setting. We use five clients in all experiments and all of them participate in each communication
with the server, following related works (Usmanova et al., 2021; Hendryx et al., 2021), where five
or less than five clients are used. In (Yoon et al., 2021), the same setting is also used on non-iid-50
dataset. Taking CIL into account when dealing with FL is very challenging, thus existing works and
our work adopt this setting to simplify the case for analysis.
Configuration. Unless otherwise specified, we set local training iteration T = 400 and global
communication round R = 200 for all models. As we build five tasks for each client, there are 40


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Results on MNIST, EMNIST-Letters, EMNIST-Balanced and CIFAR-10. We report the
accuracy of the global model when all clients finish their training on all tasks, which is referred as
global accuracy.

  Model                                     MNIST         EMNIST-L        EMNIST-B        CIFAR-10
  FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017)          72.28 ± 0.82    19.36 ± 0.95    17.25 ± 0.25    27.21 ± 2.39
  FedProx (Li et al., 2020)              72.84 ± 0.73    19.69 ± 0.75    17.74 ± 0.55    27.43 ± 2.46
  FedLwF-2T (Usmanova et al., 2021)      75.61 ± 0.93    23.91 ± 0.78    17.22 ± 0.90    27.02 ± 2.38
  FedAvg+DGR                             97.46 ± 0.51    71.92 ± 0.74    63.55 ± 0.46    37.93 ± 2.27
  FedProx+DGR                            97.55 ± 0.48    71.83 ± 0.65    63.55 ± 0.27    37.87 ± 2.47
  FedAvg+ACGAN Replay                    97.13 ± 0.35    73.85 ± 0.17    66.87 ± 0.79    38.31 ± 2.64
  FedProx+ACGAN Replay                   97.38 ± 0.63    73.91 ± 0.29    66.19 ± 0.92    38.34 ± 2.55
  FedCIL (Ours)                          99.13 ± 0.34    78.15 ± 0.30    73.12 ± 0.47    45.27 ± 2.42


        (a) FedCIL (Ours)                  (b) FedProx+DGR                  (c) FedProx+AGCAN
Figure 3: The confusion matrices for the global model (classifier) on the server in FedCIL, Fed-
Prox+DGR and FedProx+ACGAN.
rounds per task. For each local iteration, we adopt mini-batch size B = 32 for MNIST, EMNIST-L,
EMNIST-B and B = 100 for CIFAR-10. The number of generated samples in a iteration is the
same as the mini-batch size. The backbone of the feature extractor is a 3-layer CNN and that of the
generator is a 4-layer CNN with batch normalization layers. The Adam optimizer is used with the
learning rate 1e-4. We run each experiment three times and report the mean and standard deviation.

5.4   R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Table 1 shows the results on MNIST, EMNIST-Letters, EMNIST-Balanced and CIFAR-10. From
the results we can see catastrophic forgetting becomes more notable as the similarity between tasks
of different clients reduces. FedLwF-2T (Usmanova et al., 2021) outperforms FedAvg and FedProx
on MNIST and EMNIST-Letters. But on EMNIST-Letters and EMNIST-Balanced, with overlapped
classes becoming less or almost none, its performance drops significantly. FedProx/FedAvg+DGR
and FedProx/FedAvg+ACGAN Replay outperforms other baselines by a large margin, which is
more obvious when the setting becomes more difficult. Our model FedCIL further gains more
improvement compared to the two models. We further summarize how our proposed two methods
benefit continual federated learning and illustrate it with examples in Appendix E. More discussions
and results on FedCIL are available in Appendix F.
FedCIL learns better generators. To prevent forgetting, generative replay based methods exploit
a generator to generate data for replay. Thus the quality of generated images has an important
influence on the model performance. The generators of clients in our model generate better data than
others. As stated in the weakness of simple combination, directly training ACGAN in heterogeneous
federated learning setting with a FL algorithm leads to the performance degradation of generators.
This is because the sever-client synchronization in every communication round damages each
client’s classification performance on its local dataset at the early training stages of each round. Such
classification accuracy decrease then lead to much larger classification loss according to Eq. (9).
Fig. 2 shows this phenomenon. The unexpected huge classification loss can break the balance be-
tween the losses from Eq. (5) and Eq. (6), thus model will overly tilt to the classification part.
Eventually it weakens the performance of generator.
From Fig. 2 it is observed that our model doesn’t suffer from this problem. Our propose model con-
solidation and consistency enforcement effectively prevent the gradient exploding in early stages of


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                                                  Continual Graph Learning

                                                   Resubmission


                                                       FedProx + ACGAN


                                                        FedCIL (Ours)



                                                                          c='0'              c='H'           c='B'


Figure 4: FID scores of ACGAN + FedProx,               Figure 5: Visualization of generated images
ACGAN (offline) and ours. A random client is           from clients in FedProx+AC-GAN (first row)
selected during training on EMNIST.                    and FedCIL (second row).

every communication round, which guarantees the stability of the generator. Fig. 5 shows the gen-
erated images by FedCIL and FedProx+ACGAN. It visualizes that generators in FedCIL generates
images of higher quality than FedProx+ACGAN. FID score can be a measurement of the quality
of generated images (lower is better). Fig. 4 shows that generators in our model is more stable and
have better FID score than FedProx+ACGAN during the training.
FedCIL learns less biased classifiers and generators. Fig. 3 shows the confusion matrices for the
global models in FedCIL, FedProx+DGR and FedProx+ACGAN on EMNIST-Letters. It is observed
that the global classifier in our model is less biased compared with two baselines. In our CI-FL
setting, each client is learning n classes with x instances for one class during a task. If some clients
are learning same classes, the proportion of this class will be larger than other classes. Thus when
the server and clients are synchronized, the server model is prone to be biased towards this class. Our
model consolidation on the server side can effectively alleviate this phenomenon by consolidating
the merged model with balanced generated data. In this way the knowledge on the less frequent
classes can be strengthened. On the client side, with Eq. (15), the global knowledge can be better
transferred to the local clients, preventing the local clients from overfitting to its local dataset.
FedCIL allows more effective server-client communication. Different from class-incremental
learning (CIL), where we only need to address the problem of catastrophic forgetting in a single
model, both server and clients models need to be considered in CI-FL. From the perspective of CIL,
each model can of course learn from the history state of itself. However, with other models available
in the CI-FL, they are also expected to learn from each other. Compared with FedProx+DGR,
where each client keeps a private GAN for generative replay and only synchronize classifiers with
the server model, the generators in FedCIL can effectively learn form others for better generation
ability. Thus the generative replay can be more effective and achieve better performance.

                                       Table 2: Ablation study
                                         Method                           Accuracy
                                       Full method                       78.15 ± 0.30
                          Ablate model consolidation (Eq. 10)            75.02 ± 0.41
                         Ablate consistency enforcement (Eq. 15)         73.91 ± 0.29
                                 Ablate generative replay                19.36 ± 0.95


Ablation Study. We perform ablation studies on EMNIST-Letters to evaluate the contribution of
each component. Table 2 proves the effectiveness of our proposed methods. Each module can
improve the model performance effectively. The results are consistent with our analysis above.
Influence of local iterations. We study how the local iterations T affects our model in Appendix C.


6   C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduce a practical and challenging federated continual learning scenario, where
a centralized server continuously learns from clients that are incrementally learning new tasks from
a streaming of local data. Furthermore, we find simply adapting generative replay ideas into the
setting fails to work as expected. Then we analyze its weaknesses and propose a new model FedCIL
to address the problems. Experimental results on benchmark datasets manifest its effectiveness.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by the the U.S. Army Research Office Award under Grant Number
W911NF-21-1-0109 and Adobe Data Science Research Award.

R EFERENCES
Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars.
  Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Proceedings of the European Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 139–154, 2018.
Pietro Buzzega, Matteo Boschini, Angelo Porrello, Davide Abati, and Simone Calderara. Dark expe-
  rience for general continual learning: a strong, simple baseline. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:15920–15930, 2020.
Sebastian Caldas, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMa-
  han, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.01097, 2018.
Fernando E Casado, Dylan Lema, Roberto Iglesias, Carlos V Regueiro, and Senén Barro. Fed-
  erated and continual learning for classification tasks in a society of devices. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.07129, 2020.
Arslan Chaudhry, Marcus Rohrbach, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, Puneet K
  Dokania, Philip HS Torr, and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. On tiny episodic memories in continual
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.10486, 2019.
Hong-You Chen and Wei-Lun Chao. Fedbe: Making bayesian model ensemble applicable to feder-
  ated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01974, 2020.
Zhixuan Chu and Sheng Li. Continual treatment effect estimation: Challenges and opportunities.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.01026, 2023.
Jiahua Dong, Lixu Wang, Zhen Fang, Gan Sun, Shichao Xu, Xiao Wang, and Qi Zhu. Federated
   class-incremental learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
   Pattern Recognition, pp. 10164–10173, 2022.
Sayna Ebrahimi, Franziska Meier, Roberto Calandra, Trevor Darrell, and Marcus Rohrbach. Adver-
  sarial continual learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 386–402. Springer,
  2020.
Yongxin Guo, Tao Lin, and Xiaoying Tang. A new analysis framework for federated learning on
  time-evolving heterogeneous data. FL-ICML, 2021.
Sean M Hendryx, Dharma Raj KC, Bradley Walls, and Clayton T Morrison. Federated reconnais-
  sance: Efficient, distributed, class-incremental learning. NeurIPS Workshop on New Frontiers in
  Federated Learning, 2021.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, Jeff Dean, et al. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2(7), 2015.
Minguk Kang, Woohyeon Shim, Minsu Cho, and Jaesik Park. Rebooting acgan: Auxiliary classifier
 gans with stable training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23505–23518,
 2021.
James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcom-
  ing catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences,
  114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
Abhishek Kumar and Hal Daume III. Learning task grouping and overlap in multi-task learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6417, 2012.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Sys-
  tems, 2:429–450, 2020.

Zhizhong Li and Derek Hoiem. Learning without forgetting. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
  and Machine Intelligence, 40(12):2935–2947, 2017.

Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.

H. Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Agüera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data, 2017.

Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Razvan Pascanu, and Hassan Ghasemzadeh. Under-
  standing the role of training regimes in continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems, 33:7308–7320, 2020.

Augustus Odena, Christopher Olah, and Jonathon Shlens. Conditional image synthesis with auxil-
  iary classifier gans. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2642–2651. PMLR,
  2017.

Mary Phuong and Christoph Lampert. Towards understanding knowledge distillation. In Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5142–5151. PMLR, 2019.

Ameya Prabhu, Philip HS Torr, and Puneet K Dokania. Gdumb: A simple approach that questions
 our progress in continual learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 524–540.
 Springer, 2020.

Mohammad Rasouli, Tao Sun, and Ram Rajagopal. Fedgan: Federated generative adversarial net-
 works for distributed data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07228, 2020.

Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Alexander Kolesnikov, Georg Sperl, and Christoph H Lampert. icarl:
  Incremental classifier and representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2001–2010, 2017.

David Rolnick, Arun Ahuja, Jonathan Schwarz, Timothy Lillicrap, and Gregory Wayne. Experience
  replay for continual learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Kevin Roth, Aurelien Lucchi, Sebastian Nowozin, and Thomas Hofmann. Stabilizing training of
  generative adversarial networks through regularization. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 30, 2017.

Paul Ruvolo and Eric Eaton. Ella: An efficient lifelong learning algorithm. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 507–515. PMLR, 2013.

Hanul Shin, Jung Kwon Lee, Jaehong Kim, and Jiwon Kim. Continual learning with deep generative
  replay. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.

Sebastian Thrun. Is learning the n-th thing any easier than learning the first? Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 8, 1995.

Anastasiia Usmanova, François Portet, Philippe Lalanda, and German Vega. A distillation-based
  approach integrating continual learning and federated learning for pervasive services. IJCAI 3rd
  Workshop on Continual and Multimodal Learning for Internet of Things, 2021.

Gido M Van de Ven and Andreas S Tolias. Three scenarios for continual learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.07734, 2019.

Chenshen Wu, Luis Herranz, Xialei Liu, Joost van de Weijer, Bogdan Raducanu, et al. Memory
  replay gans: Learning to generate new categories without forgetting. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 31, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Yue Wu, Pan Zhou, Andrew G Wilson, Eric Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Improving gan training with
  probability ratio clipping and sample reweighting. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:5729–5740, 2020.
Bangzhou Xin, Wei Yang, Yangyang Geng, Sheng Chen, Shaowei Wang, and Liusheng Huang.
  Private fl-gan: Differential privacy synthetic data generation based on federated learning. In
  ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
  (ICASSP), pp. 2927–2931. IEEE, 2020.
Kunran Xu, Lai Rui, Yishi Li, and Lin Gu. Feature normalized knowledge distillation for image
  classification. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 664–680. Springer, 2020.
Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically
  expandable networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.01547, 2017.
Jaehong Yoon, Wonyong Jeong, Giwoong Lee, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. Federated contin-
  ual learning with weighted inter-client transfer. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, pp. 12073–12086. PMLR, 2021.
Yikai Zhang, Hui Qu, Qi Chang, Huidong Liu, Dimitris Metaxas, and Chao Chen. Training
  federated gans with theoretical guarantees: A universal aggregation approach. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2102.04655, 2021.
Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated
  learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582, 2018.
Hangyu Zhu, Jinjin Xu, Shiqing Liu, and Yaochu Jin. Federated learning on non-iid data: A survey.
  Neurocomputing, 465:371–390, 2021a.
Zhuangdi Zhu, Junyuan Hong, and Jiayu Zhou. Data-free knowledge distillation for heterogeneous
  federated learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12878–12889. PMLR,
  2021b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    DATASET
       • MNIST: It is a digit image classification dataset of 10 classes with a training set of 60,000
         instances and a test set of 10,000 instances. We split instances of each class into non-
         overlapped parts. Each client randomly picks up two classes without replacement to form
         a task and it is repeated for five times for form a sequence of five classes. Note that for
         any client, if a class already exists in any of its tasks, the client will not pick up this class
         again. This ensures that for any client, a class will not appear more than once in its private
         sequence, which is subject to the definition of class-incremental learning. In the setting,
         classes from different clients are highly overlapped. Note that although it is highly over-
         lapped from the overall view, however, during each task, clients are still learning different
         tasks, the data is non-IID and it is still a challenging federated learning problem.
       • EMNIST-Letters: It is a character classification dataset of 26 classes containing 145,600
         instances. We process this dataset similar to MNIST and each client also randomly picks
         up two classes to form a task and repeats five times in total. It is harder because classes
         from different clients are less overlapped and the sever eventually learns more classes.
       • EMNIST-Balanced: It is a digit and character classification dataset of 47 classes contain-
         ing 131,600 instances. We follow the same steps to process this dataset. It is the hardest
         because there are almost no overlapped classes from different clients and the server learns
         more classes.
       • CIFAR-10: It is an image classification dataset of 10 classes with 60,000 instances. The
         process on this dateset is the same as MNIST.

Figure 6 illustrates the how we build tasks for clients.
                   Dataset
                   Instances
                                                                                          Task 1       Task 2


                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                •
                                       1    2    3     4              n
                                                            •
                                                            •
                                                            •


                                       1    2    3     4              n        Client 1
                                                            •
                                                            •
                                                            •


                                                                                          1   1         1   1


                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                •
          labels


                                       1    2    3     4              n
                                                            •
                                                            •
                                                            •


                                                                               Client 2   1   2         1   2



                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                •
                                       1    2    3     4              n
                                                            •
                                                            •
                                                            •


                                       1    2    3     4              n
                                                            •
                                                            •
                                                            •


                                       1    2    3     4              n
                                                            •
                                                            •
                                                            •


                       •                              •                                            •
                       •                              •                                            •
                       •                              •                                            •
                                       i   : A batch of instances of a class


Figure 6: Illustration of how to build tasks for clients. Different color represents different classes.
We split instances of each class into non-overlapped parts. Each client randomly picks up two
classes without replacement to form a task and it is repeated for five times for form a sequence of
five classes. Note that for a client, if a class already exists in any of its tasks, the client will not pick
up this class again. This ensures that for any client, a class will not appear more than once in its
private sequence, which is subject to the definition of class-incremental learning.


B    BASELINES
       • FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) : It is a representative federated learning model, which
         aggregates client parameters in each communication. It is a simply yet effective model for
         federated learning.
       • FedProx (Li et al., 2020) : It is also a representative federated learning model, which is
         better at tackling heterogeneity in federated networks than FedAvg.
       • FedLwF-2T (Usmanova et al., 2021). It uses the idea of Learning without Forgetting(LwF)
         (Li & Hoiem, 2017) in federated learning. LwF keeps a copy of itself at the end of each task,
         which acts as a teacher to remind the current model of previous knowledge via knowledge
         distillation (Hinton et al., 2015). FedLwF-2T is similar to LwF and uses the global model
         as the second teacher during the local training of the clients.
       • FedProx/FedAvg+ACGAN Replay (Also referred as FedProx/FedAvg+ACGAN in the
         paper). It is a combination of FedProx/FedAvg and ACGAN. Each client is an ACGAN


                                                            13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Centralized Server                                                      Centralized Server                                                 Centralized Server

                                                  Server side:
                                                  Model Consolidation
                                                  Client side:
                         θglobal                  Consistency Enforcement                        θglobal                                                            θglobal



         θ1    θglobal             θ2   θglobal        θ3    θglobal             θ1    θglobal             θ2   θglobal        θ3   θglobal          θ1   θglobal             θ2   θglobal        θ3   θglobal


                                                                   •••                                                                    •••                                                                •••
    θ1                      θ2                    θ3                        θ1                      θ2                    θ3                    θ1                     θ2                    θ3
    Client 1                 Client 2              Client 3                 Client 1                 Client 2             Client 3

                                                                                                                                                θGAN-1                 θGAN-2                θGAN-3

                                                                                                                                                Client 1                Client 2             Client 3


                FedCIL (Ours)                                                         FedProx+ACGAN                                                         FedProx+DGR
                                                            Figure 7: Illustration of our model and baselines.

                based model and uses generative replay (i.e., exploiting the samples generated by the gen-
                erator of the ACGAN for replay to prevent forgetting) locally. The global model and the
                clients are synchronized by FedProx or FedAvg.
              • FedProx/FedAvg+DGR (Shin et al., 2017). It is a combination of FedProx/FedAvg and
                Deep Generative Replay (DGR) (Shin et al., 2017). Each client consists of a GAN and a
                classifier. The GAN is trained additionally for generative replay. The train process of a
                client is the same as the process in (Shin et al., 2017). The global model and the clients (the
                classifiers) are synchronized by FedProx or FedAvg.

Figure 7 illustrates our model and baselines.

C        I NFLUENCE OF LOCAL ITERATIONS
To study how the number of local iterations affect our model, we experiment on EMNIST-Letters
with different local iterations from 50 to 1000. The accuracy curve tends to be more gentle as the
number of local iteration increases, which is helpful when the local training time is limited. We can
have a compromise between performance and speed according to different application scenarios.


                                                              Figure 8: Influence of different local iterations

D        D ESIDERATA
We have some desiderata for the proposed setting, which makes the class-incremental federated
learning more general, realistic and challenging, compared with existing works.
1. For a client, it is continuously learning new classes, and the learnt classes will be unavailable in
future tasks. We strictly follow a typical continual learning setting, in which there are no overlapped
classes among tasks, and thus more challenging. This is a significant difference from (Hendryx
et al., 2021) and (Guo et al., 2021), where any instance only appears once but different instances of
the same class may appear in different tasks in the task sequence of a client.
2. For different clients, there may be overlapped classes in their respective private tasks. This is
practical because each client is learning their own tasks without communicating with each other.
Thus, it is reasonable that we do not put extra assumptions on the overall data distribution of all
clients.


                                                                                                            14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    0.80                              C1                   0.80                              C1
                                                      C2                                                     C2
                    0.75                                                   0.75
                                                      C3                                                     C3


        Accuracy


                                                                Accuracy
                    0.70                                                   0.70
                                                      C4                                                     C4
                    0.65                              C5                   0.65                              C4

                    0.60                                                   0.60

                    0.55                                                   0.55

                    0.50                                                   0.50


                           Communication rounds (R)                               Communication rounds (R)


                           (a) FedCIL (Ours)                                (b) FedProx+ACGAN Replay

Figure 9: Case study on EMNIST. We record the performance of each client (1-5) on its own local
dataset immediately after it receives the parameters from the global model. We plot this perfor-
mance of each client for several communication rounds during training.

3. The clients are not allowed to store previous data in a buffer, which is consistent with (Usmanova
et al., 2021) and (Yoon et al., 2021).
4. The clients are not allowed to communicate with each other at any time. To follow the privacy
constraints in typical federated learning, neither the raw data sharing between the server and the
clients nor among the clients is allowed.
5. At any given time-step t, the global model should be able to classify all classes that all clients
collected and learned so far. It means that the global model is dynamically updated all the time,
which makes it a powerful lifelong federated learning model. On the contrast, (Yoon et al., 2021)
learns client models and does not maintain a global model that discriminates all classes without
task-IDs.
6. The number of communication rounds should be flexible according to different settings. This
is different from (Usmanova et al., 2021), where a round of communication happens when a client
finishes its learning on a local dataset, which will be no longer available in the next round. Our
assumption is more general and follows a typical continual learning paradigm.

E     C ASE S TUDY

In Section 4.2, we demonstrate when the generation ability of ACGAN degrades and how this phe-
nomenon is aggravated in the context of federated learning. To summarize, the performance of
ACGAN degrades when the gradient norm (Eq. (9)) grows too large and breaks the balance be-
tween LD               D                             D
        ce (θ, X) and Lgan (θ, X). The over-tilt to Lce (θ, X) limits the generation ability and finally
decreases the model performance.
The gradient exploding happens in early stages of each local training (Fig. 2 and Fig. 4 ). According
to Eq. (9), the gradient norm is associated with 1. the predicted class probability distribution and
2. feature norms. Our model consolidation and consistency enforcement are designed from the two
perspectives.

E.1     P REDICTED CLASS PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION

The gradient norms of baseline models are very large at early stage of local training because the
predictions are highly inaccurate at the beginning. Received global model are directly merged from
clients from last round via FedAvg or FedProx. Empirically we find such merging hurts the local
performance of clients to a large extend and yields highly inaccurate predictions on local data,
leading to large gradient norms (Eq. (9)).

E.1.1              C ASES : W HEN MERGED GLOBAL MODEL IS INACCURATE ?
We conduct a case study, where we record the performance of each client on its own local dataset
after it receives the parameters from the global model. Higher performance at this moment indicates
lower gradient norms according to Eq. (9).


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Fig. 9, one client (C4) consistently behaves notably worse than others in the baseline model. In
fact it is common in baseline models and sometimes more than one clients behaves this way. And
the global model is biased towards some classes (Fig .3). We observe this phenomenon happens to
some of the clients in the following cases:
Imbalanced classes For instance, during the first task in EMNIST-L, Client 1 learns classes {18,
23}, Client 2 learns classes {10, 11}, Client 3 learns classes {15, 23}. In this case, after model
averaging on the server, performance on Client 2’s local data is impaired and is notably worse than
others. Because Client 1 and Client 3 both learn from class 23, the merged model tends to be biased
towards class 23.
Different difficulty levels (a) For instance, during the second task in EMNIST-L, Client 4 learns
classes {14, 21}, none of which are learnt by other clients before. Client 1 learns classes {2, 20},
where class 2 is learnt by Client 3 in Client 3’s previous task. In this case, the merged model has
worse performance on the Client 4’s private task than on Client 1’s. This is because the merged
model tends to be biased towards easier classes.
Different difficulty levels (b) On EMNIST-B, We also observe that, even when classes are balanced
and all incoming classes are not learnt by any of the clients, i.e., it is not one of the two mentioned
cases above, some clients still learn worse than others. We attribute it to the differences of the
inherit difficulty of different tasks. Clients that are learning more difficult tasks tend to have worse
performance on their local data immediately after receiving the merged global model from the server.

E.1.2    S OLUTIONS : H OW F ED CIL WORKS IN THE CASES ?

In model consolidation, synthetic samples, which are used to consolidate the merged model, are gen-
erated by uploaded client models respectively before they are merged to a global model. Thus the
generated image quality is not affected by three cases above. Therefore, consolidating the merged
model with these high-quality synthetic images largely eliminates the model performance degrada-
tion caused by above cases. Besides, we generate balanced samples conditioned on classes, which
additionally helps to solve the class imbalance problem.
After our model consolidation, the server model is less biased towards different clients’ tasks or
classes. Fig. 3 and Fig. 9 illustrate our effectiveness towards this aspect. Our consistency enforce-
ment does the same thing, but from the perspective of client side: we distill the knowledge from the
global model to local clients by generating class-balanced samples with the global model.
To summarize, in FedCIL, each client, which is initialized from the our better consolidated global
model, makes more accurate and consistent predictions at the early stage of the local training. It
largely prevents the ACGAN from the early gradient exploding problem.


E.2     F EATURE N ORMS

According to Eq. (9), lower feature norms also help to reduce the gradient norms. Previous study (Xu
et al., 2020) reveals that knowledge distillation can help to reduce the overly high feature norms
caused by noisy samples.
From this perspective, the consistency enforcement, which is also a kind of knowledge distillation
in terms of form, can help to reduce the feature norm when training with noisy generated samples,
in addition to its benefits on learning less biased models mentioned in Section 4.3 and appendix E.1.


F     D ISCUSSIONS

F.1     D IFFERENCES WITH R E ACGAN

From a high-level view, Both ReACGAN Kang et al. (2021) and our method can stabilize the train-
ing process of ACGANs, but they are designed to solve entirely different problems with different
motivations. Thus it is not surprising that ReACGAN hardly helps to improve the model perfor-
mance in Tab. 3.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        Model                  Accuracy
                                    FedAvg + DGR                63.55
                               FedAvg + ACGAN Replay             66.19
                             FedAvg + ReACGAN Replay             65.87
                                     FedCIL (Ours)               73.12

            Table 3: Model Performance with Difference GR Strategies on EMNIST-B.


ReACGAN stabilizes the offline training of one ACGAN by exploiting feature normalization and
relational information in the class-labeled dataset. It doesn’t consider challenges from federated
learning and continual learning. In other words, it is neither a federated learning nor a continual
learning algorithm. Instead, FedCIL stabilizes the distributed training of multiple ACGANs by
improving the server-side aggregation of client models and client-side feature learning (with the
help of the global model). Our model consolidation and consistency enforcement are designed for
the non-iid distribution and the catastrophic forgetting challenges in our continual federated learning
setting. ReACGGN is not designed for these purposes.

F.2   L OCAL P ERFORMANCE

A typical federated learning scenario aim to learn a global model with distributed data, and thus
local performance is usually not considered in evaluation. We added experiments to see how the
private performance vary across different models. Tab 4 shows the results.

                                        Model                 Accuracy
                                    FedProx + DGR              85.97
                              FedProx + ACGAN Replay            86.40
                                     FedCIL (Ours)              88.73

                         Table 4: Local Model Performance on EMNIST-L.

It is interesting that our model has higher average private accuracy on the client side. We agree
that in federated learning, better global accuracy often contradicts local accuracy. In the extreme
case, if each client only does local training without communications, it is more likely to have higher
performance on its own dataset with low global accuracy. Here we believe the continual learning
part plays an important role. Because our model better remembers previous knowledge, the extra
benefits from continual learning leads to its higher accuracy.


                                                  17
