Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E FFICIENTLY C ONTROLLING M ULTIPLE R ISKS WITH
PARETO T ESTING
 Bracha Laufer-Goldshtein, Adam Fisch, Regina Barzilay & Tommi Jaakkola
 CSAIL, MIT, {lauferb,fisch,regina,tommi}@csail.mit.edu



                                             A BSTRACT
         Machine learning applications frequently come with multiple diverse objectives
         and constraints that can change over time. Accordingly, trained models can be
         tuned with sets of hyper-parameters that affect their predictive behavior (e.g., their
         run-time efficiency versus error rate). As the number of constraints and hyper-
         parameter dimensions grow, naively selected settings may lead to sub-optimal
         and/or unreliable results. We develop an efficient method for calibrating models
         such that their predictions provably satisfy multiple explicit and simultaneous
         statistical guarantees (e.g., upper-bounded error rates), while also optimizing any
         number of additional, unconstrained objectives (e.g., total run-time cost). Building
         on recent results in distribution-free, finite-sample risk control for general losses,
         we propose Pareto Testing: a two-stage process which combines multi-objective
         optimization with multiple hypothesis testing. The optimization stage constructs
         a set of promising combinations on the Pareto frontier. We then apply statistical
         testing to this frontier only to identify configurations that have (i) high utility
         with respect to our objectives, and (ii) guaranteed risk levels with respect to our
         constraints, with specifiably high probability. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
         our approach to reliably accelerate the execution of large-scale Transformer mod-
         els in natural language processing (NLP) applications. In particular, we show how
         Pareto Testing can be used to dynamically configure multiple inter-dependent
         model attributes—including the number of layers computed before exiting,
         number of attention heads pruned, or number of text tokens considered—to
         simultaneously control and optimize various accuracy and cost metrics.

1    I NTRODUCTION
Suppose you want to deploy a modern machine learning model in a real-world environment.
As a practitioner, you may frequently have to weigh several performance considerations (Jin &
Sendhoff, 2008; Ribeiro et al., 2020; Min et al., 2021). For example, how much computational
budget can you spend? What accuracy do you require? How large, if any, of a discrepancy in
predictive performance across different groups of end-users can you tolerate? Often models are
equipped with hyper-parameter configurations that provide “knobs” for tuning different aspects of
their performance, depending on how such questions are answered. As the number of parameter
dimensions and objectives grow, however, choosing the right set of parameters to rigorously control
model performance on test data in the intended ways can become prone to error.
To address this challenge, the recently proposed Learn Then Test (LTT) framework of Angelopoulos
et al. (2021) combines any type of parameterizable predictive model with classic statistical hypothe-
sis testing to provide an algorithm for selecting configurations that lead to provable distribution-free,
finite-sample risk control of any user-specified objective. Nevertheless, while theoretically general,
a key pair of practical challenges arises when the space of parameters to explore and constraints
to satisfy are large. The first is that evaluating all possible configurations can quickly become
intractable, while the second is that the statistical tests relied upon to guarantee risk control can
quickly lose power—and fail to identify configurations that are also useful for the task at hand.
In this work, we build upon the results of LTT by introducing Pareto Testing, a simple procedure that
can provide a computationally and statistically efficient way to identify valid, risk-controlling config-
urations with (specifiably) high probability, which, critically, are also useful with respect to other ob-
jectives of interest. Our method consists of two stages. In the first stage, we solve an unconstrained,


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: A demonstration of our calibration procedure applied to multi-dimensional adaptive
computation in a Transformer model (left). Here we have the option to drop tokens from the input,
make an “early-exit” prediction after processing a subset of the layers, or only compute a subset
of the self-attention heads in each layer in order to do faster inference. Our calibration procedure
(right) applies multi-objective optimization to identify a Pareto frontier of configurations with
different performance profiles, and then applies statistical testing to efficiently identify a subset of
“risk-controlling” configurations with high probability (e.g., bounded error rates).
multi-objective optimization problem in order to recover an approximate set of Pareto-optimal con-
figurations, i.e., settings for which no other configuration exists that is uniformly better in all re-
spects. Here we can exploit standard multi-objective optimization methods to efficiently explore
and filter large parameter spaces to only its most promising configurations. In the second stage, we
perform rigorous sequential testing over the recovered set, which we empirically find to yield tight
control of our desired risks, while also giving good performance with respect to our free objectives.1
We apply our approach to adaptive computation in large-scale Transformer models (Vaswani et al.,
2017) for natural language processing (NLP), see Figure 1. While larger models generally perform
better, they can also be incredibly computationally intensive to run (Bapna et al., 2020; Schwartz
et al., 2020; Moosavi et al., 2021). Often, however, not every application, domain, or example re-
quires the same amount of computation to achieve similar performance. As such, many techniques
have been proposed for accelerating computation, including attention head pruning, token dropping,
or early exiting (Graves, 2016; Xin et al., 2020; Hou et al., 2020; Goyal et al., 2020). Still, deter-
mining the extent to which to apply different modifications while still preserving good performance
can be tricky. Our proposed procedure allows the user to jointly configure multiple model settings
subject to multiple statistical guarantees on model performance—such as average and worst-case
relative reductions in accuracy (e.g., so that the adaptive model is within 5% of the full model’s
accuracy), average inference cost (e.g., so that the adaptive model uses less than a certain number of
FLOPS on average), or maximum abstention rates in selective prediction settings.
Contribution. The core idea and contribution of our work can be summarized quite plainly:

1. Our framework leverages statistical testing techniques via the LTT framework (Angelopoulos
   et al., 2021) to identify valid risk-controlling hyper-parameter configurations;
2. To improve efficiency, we introduce Pareto Testing, our main contribution, as a way to efficiently
   guide the number and order of configurations that we test when searching for valid settings;
3. We demonstrate the scalability and effectiveness of our method in managing trade-offs in multi-
   dimensional adaptive computation in NLP applications with large-scale Transformer models;
4. On diverse text classification tasks, we empirically achieve tight, simultaneous control of multiple
   risks while also improving performance on any non-controlled objectives, relative to baselines.
   1
       If we fail to find any valid configurations (which may not exist) with the right confidence, then we abstain.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2   R ELATED WORK
Risk control. Our work adds to a rich history of tools for uncertainty estimation and risk control
for machine learning algorithms (Vovk, 2002; Vovk et al., 2015; 2017; Lei et al., 2013; 2018; Gupta
et al., 2020; Bates et al., 2021; Barber et al., 2021; Angelopoulos et al., 2021). Here we focus on
achieving model-agnostic, distribution-free, and finite-sample performance guarantees—similar to
the coverage guarantees given by prediction sets or regression intervals in conformal prediction (Pa-
padopoulos et al., 2002; Vovk et al., 2005; Angelopoulos et al., 2022). As outlined in §1, this paper
builds on the groundwork set by Angelopoulos et al. (2021), which provides a general methodology
for calibrating any risk function that is controllable via some low-dimensional hyper-parameter con-
figuration. We extend their framework to efficiently handle (relatively) higher-dimensional settings
with multiple auxiliary objectives. Our application to confident model acceleration is also closely
related to Schuster et al. (2021; 2022), though our method is designed for a much broader setting
that involves (i) multiple objectives, and (ii) multiple model pruning dimensions.
Multi-objective optimization. Solving for multiple objectives is a fundamental problem (Deb,
2001; Miettinen, 2012; Bradford et al., 2018). Typically, multi-objective problems are more
difficult than single-objective problems, as a single solution does not always exist due to trade-offs.
Instead, there is a set of solutions that are all equally “good”, which is known as the Pareto
frontier (Censor, 1977; Arora, 2004). Our setting falls at the intersection of multi-objective
optimization and risk-control, where we want to perform multi-objective optimization subject to
statistical bounds on a subset of the objectives. Our two-stage approach is able to directly combine
techniques in multi-objective optimization (Knowles, 2006; Lindauer et al., 2022) with those in risk
control (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), in order to identify valid, statistically efficient solutions.
Model configuration. We approach our multi-objective optimization problem by uncovering model
configurations that deliver on the desired performance guarantees (e.g., bounded error rates), while
also providing “best-effort” optimization of the auxiliary objectives (e.g., minimal inference cost)
without any re-training. This is adjacent to the field of hyper-parameter tuning and architecture
search, which deals with determining appropriate model hyper-parameter values, or even designing
higher-level network structures (Elsken et al., 2019). While most approaches focus on finding con-
figurations that maximize predictive performance, some have also considered additional measures
such as efficiency (Shah & Ghahramani, 2016; Belakaria et al., 2019; Elsken et al., 2018; Dong et al.,
2018; Zhou et al., 2018; Chu et al., 2020), fairness (Schmucker et al., 2020; Candelieri et al., 2022),
or robustness (Karl et al., 2022). Our work, however, differs by treating hyper-parameter selection as
a multiple-testing problem with rigorous statistical guarantees following Angelopoulos et al. (2021).
Adaptive computation. Our main application is configuring adaptive model computation. Large-
scale deep learning models can be accurate, but also computationally intensive to run. Many efforts
have been focused on improving run-time efficiency, including model distillation (Sanh et al., 2019;
Jiao et al., 2020; Sun et al., 2020), dynamic architecture selection (Yu et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2020;
Hou et al., 2020), early-exiting (Teerapittayanon et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2020), token pruning (Goyal
et al., 2020; Ye et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Modarressi et al., 2022; Guan et al., 2022), and others.
This work focuses on configurable, adaptive computation that does not require model re-training.
Furthermore, only a few methods have proposed combining multiple pruning dimensions, such as
depth and width (Hou et al., 2020), token pruning with early-exiting (He et al., 2021), and pruning
model units of different granularity (Xia et al., 2022). Our multi-dimensional calibration scheme
generalizes these approaches, and allows for flexible tuning in each pruning axis.

3   P ROBLEM FORMULATION
Consider an input variable X ∈ X , and an associated label Y ∈ Y, drawn from some joint
distribution. Assume a predictive model of the form f : X × Λ → Y, where Λ ≜ Λ1 × . . . × Λn is
the space of n hyper-parameters (λ1 , . . . , λn ) that configure f . The parameters of the model f are
optimized over a training set Dtrain , while the hyper-parameters then provide n additional degrees
of freedom in influencing either (i) how the model is trained over Dtrain , or (ii) how the model is
used. We focus on the latter in this paper. For example, in our adaptive Transformer example, f
has n = 3 pruning dimensions: the number of attention heads per layer, the truncated length of the
input text sequence, and the effective network depth in terms of the selected early-exit layer. In this



                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


scenario, the hyper-parameters (λ1 , λ2 , λ3 ) are real-valued thresholds, and determine the extent of
sparsification along each axis given some “importance/confidence” score (to be defined later).
Next, consider a set of objective functions {Q1 , . . . , Qc+k } of the form Qi (λ1 , . . . , λn ) =
E[qi (X, Y ; λ1 , . . . , λn )] for some loss function qi . Under our setting, we assume that the user
wishes to arbitrarily bound the first c objective functions (hereby called risk functions) by
{α1 , . . . , αc } ∈ Rc , while also minimizing the remaining k objective functions. We further assume
that (λ1 , . . . , λn ) can be used to either increase or decrease each objective Qi (not necessarily
independently), although we do not assume that all values of Qi are jointly achievable.
To estimate suitable hyper-parameter values, let Dcal = (Xi , Yi ), i = 1, . . . , m be an i.i.d. calibra-
tion set that we will use to select (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ). As functions of Dcal , (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ) are also random
variables, and therefore Qi (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ) is a random conditional expectation (constant given Dcal ).
Our goal is to select (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ) in such a way that the {Q1 , . . . , Qc } objectives that we wish to
control are appropriately bounded with specifiably high probability—as we now formally define.
Definition 3.1 ((α, δ)-risk controlling configuration). Let Dcal = {(Xi , Yi )}m         i=1 be i.i.d. random
variables that are used to estimate a model configuration (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ). Let {Qi (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n )}ci=1 be
a set of risk functions conditioned on the choice of (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ). For any set of risk levels {αi }ci=1
and tolerance δ ∈ (0, 1), we say that (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ) is a (α, δ)-risk controlling configuration, if:2

                P Qi (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ) ≤ αi ≥ 1 − δ, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , c} simultaneously,                      (1)
where the probability in Eq. (1) is over the draw of Dcal .

Many satisfactory configurations may exist for a given task and constraints. Our key practical goal
is to find a (α, δ)-risk controlling configuration that also best minimizes the remaining objectives,
{Qc+1 , . . . , Qc+k }. As such, we focus on the expected performance of Qc+j (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ), for j ∈
{1, . . . , k} as a relative measure of effectiveness when comparing selected configurations.3

4    BACKGROUND
We briefly review the Learn then Test framework of Angelopoulos et al. (2021), multiple hypothesis
testing, and multiple objective optimization—which comprise the key components of our method.
Learn then Test (LTT). The core idea of LTT is to use multiple hypothesis testing to rigorously
select a risk controlling configuration λ = (λ1 , . . . , λn ) ∈ Λ. Consider a single risk Q. A set of
possible configurations Λg is chosen for testing, usually by defining a discrete grid over the configu-
ration space Λ. For each configuration λ ∈ Λg , LTT tests the null hypothesis, Hλ : Q(λ) > α, i.e.,
that the risk is not controlled. A successful rejection of Hλ then implies that λ is risk-controlling.
A valid (super-uniform) p-value to use as a basis for accepting or rejecting Hλ can be derived from
concentration bounds on the empirical risk. For example, Hoeffding’s inequality can be used to yield
                                                                                           2
                                                                        −2m(α−Q̂cal (λ))
                             pcal (λ, α) = p(Q̂cal (λ); α, m) = e                          +   ,                        (2)
              cal
so that P(p (λ, α) ≤ u) ≤ u, for all u ∈ [0, 1]. Similar p-values can be derived from different
bounds. Here, we will use the more powerful Hoeffding-Bentkus p-value throughout (Appendix A).
A subset of valid λ configurations is then selected out of Λg by applying a family-wise error rate
(FWER) controlling procedure, so that the probability of making one or more false discoveries (i.e.,
choosing invalid λ) is bounded by δ ∈ (0, 1). This can be extended to multiple risk control by defin-
ing the combined null hypothesis, Hλ : ∃ i where Qi (λ) > αi . A valid combined p-value can be
obtained by taking the maximum p-value over all objective functions (see Appendix A for a proof):
                     pcal (λ, α) = max p(Q̂cal
                                           i (λ); αi , m),              with α = (α1 , . . . , αc ).                    (3)
                                      1≤i≤c

Multiple hypothesis testing. A key component of LTT is the choice FWER-controlling procedure.
As the number of tested hypotheses Hλ grows (e.g., for combinatorially many λ), the harder it is to
    2
      This is a slight abuse of terminology in that, technically, (λ̂1 , . . . , λ̂n ) as a random variable is not necessar-
ily a configuration that achieves risk control, but rather its realizations are valid with the appropriate probability.
    3
      This is analogous to using the average set size to compare conformal predictors (Vovk et al., 2005; 2016).


                                                             4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


reject Hλ while limiting the probability of false discoveries to δ. Different FWER-controlling proce-
dures have different statistical efficiency/power (i.e., ability to correctly reject Hλ when it is false).
Angelopoulos et al. (2021) consider a number of FWER-controlling procedures, namely the Bonfer-
roni correction, Fixed Sequence Testing (FST), and Sequential Graphical Testing (SGT)—see Ap-
pendix E for a complete discussion. At a high level, the Bonferroni correction assigns an “error bud-
get” of δ/|Λg | to each possible λ ∈ Λg . For large |Λg |, this strict tolerance can result in conservative
rejections. FST and SGT attempt to exploit structure in Λ by ordering and testing λ ∈ Λg in ways
that are likely to result in more valid rejections. FST considers a sequence of hypothesis tests in some
order, and terminates when the first null hypothesis Hλ fails to be rejected. The efficiency of FST
relies heavily on the ordering of hypothesis tests (e.g., those that are more likely to be rejected should
be tested earlier). Defining a proper ordering for FST is challenging for a large, possibly unstructured
(or with unknown structure) Λ. This challenge intensifies when combined with the additional goal of
finding configurations that not only provide multiple risk control, but also optimize Qc+1 , . . . , Qc+k .
Multiple objective optimization. Generally speaking, multi-objective optimization minimizes a
                                                                                   T
vector-valued function g(λ) : Λ → Rr , where g(λ) = [G1 (λ), . . . , Gr (λ)] consists of r objec-
tives Gi (we use G to avoid confusion with Q for now). For nontrivial multi-objective function g(λ)
with conflicting objectives (e.g., accuracy vs. cost), there is no single point that minimizes all objec-
tives simultaneously. Instead, for any λ, λ′ ∈ Λ, we say that λ′ dominates λ (λ′ ≺ λ), if for every
i ∈ {1, . . . r}, Gi (λ′ ) ≤ Gi (λ), and for some i ∈ {1, . . . r}, Gi (λ′ ) < Gi (λ). In other words, λ′
dominates λ if there is no objective for which λ is superior to λ′ , and for at least one objective λ′ is
strictly better. The Pareto optimal set consists of all points that are not dominated by any point in Λ:
                        Λpar = {λ ∈ Λ : {λ′ ∈ Λ : λ′ ≺ λ, λ′ ̸= λ } = ∅}.                              (4)


5     PARETO TESTING
We now present our method for selecting effective risk-controlling configurations. We adopt the
strategy of Split FST (Angelopoulos et al., 2021) for separating the calibration data into two disjoint
subsets Dopt and Dtesting of sizes m1 and m2 , respectively. The first split is used for defining an
ordered sequence of configurations to test, while the second is used to conduct the hypothesis tests.
5.1   C ONSTRUCTING THE PARETO FRONTIER
We begin with defining a set of tests/configurations to consider. We solve the multi-objective
optimization problem defined by the vector-valued function q(λ) : Λ → Rc+k that consists of all of
                                                                                                    T
the objective functions (both constrained and unconstrained), i.e. q(λ) = [Q1 (λ), . . . , Qc+k (λ)] .
                      opt                                 opt
Practically, we use q (λ) with empirical objectives Q̂i (λ) defined over Dopt . Any efficient
solver for multi-objective optimization can be used to approximate the Pareto optimal set Λpar . We
will show results with both brute-force optimization over a grid of configurations, as well as with a
multi-objective Bayesian optimizer (Lindauer et al., 2022).
The main idea of our method is to perform testing only over the Pareto optimal set. This consists
of the most “promising” configurations, and provides the best achievable trade-offs between all ob-
jectives (with respect to Dopt ). As mentioned earlier, a major challenge when dealing with a large
hyper-parameter space is that testing numerous configurations can quickly lead to a loss in statistical
efficiency. We overcome this by focusing only on the “optimal” region of the hyper-parameter space.
5.2   O RDERING THE PARETO FRONTIER
We now define an ordering for the set of tests/configurations on the Pareto frontier along which to
conduct FST. We take the simple, but empirically effective, strategy of ordering λ ∈ Λpar by their
(combined) estimated p-values popt (λ, α) = max1≤i≤c p(Q̂opt     i (λ); αi , m1 ), which we compute
over Dopt (the same data used to recover the Pareto frontier, but separate from testing data). Con-
verting the c constrained dimensions to p-values and taking their maximum, allows us to align and
compare risks of different types (e.g., binary 0/1 error vs. precision/recall rates in [0, 1]), or that are
controlled by different bounds (e.g., αi ≪ αj ). Intuitively, because we focus on the Pareto optimal
set, for each configuration along this ordering there is no other configuration with a lower estimated
p-value that is also expected to be dominant on the k free objectives. Note that for c > 1, we can


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Pareto Testing
Definitions: f is a configurable model with n thresholds λ = (λ1 , . . . , λn ). Dcal = Dopt ∪ Dtesting is a
calibration set of size m, split into optimization and (statistical) testing sets of size m1 and m2 , respectively.
{Q1 , . . . , Qc+k } are objective functions. α = {α1 , . . . , αc } are user-specified risk bounds for the first c ob-
jectives. Λ is the configuration space. δ is the tolerance. PARETO O PTIMAL S ET returns the Pareto frontier, and
can either be computed via a multi-objective optimization algorithm or exhaustive search (see Algorithm F.1).
 1: function OPTIMIZATION(Dopt , Λ, α)
 2:    Λpar ←PARETO O PTIMAL S ET(Λ, Q̂opt                  opt
                                              1 , . . . , Q̂c+k )
        opt                         opt
 3:    p (λ, α) ← max1≤i≤c p(Q̂i (λ); αi , m1 ), for all λ ∈ Λpar
 4:    Λordered ← Order configurations according to increasing popt (λ, α)
 5:    return Λordered
 6: function CALIBRATION(Dtesting , Λordered , α, δ)
       Q̂testing (λ) ← m12 (X,Y )∈Dtesting qi (X, Y ; λ), for all λ ∈ Λordered , and 1 ≤ i ≤ c
                          P
 7:      i

 8:     ptesting (λ, α) ← max1≤i≤c p(Q̂testing
                                       i       (λ); αi , m2 ), for all λ ∈ Λordered
 9:     Apply FST: Λr = {λ(j) : j < J}, J = minj {j : ptesting (λ(j) , α) ≥ δ}
10:     Λ∗ ← PARETO O PTIMAL S ET(Λr , Q̂testing               testing
                                               c+1 , . . . , Q̂c+k )
                    ∗
11:     return Λ

(optionally) prune the frontier by considering only the subset Λ′par ⊆ Λpar that is optimal with respect
to q̃opt (λ, α) = [popt (λ, α), Q̂opt                opt     T
                                  c+1 (λ), . . . , Q̂c+k (λ)] . In other words, since we only care about the
maximum p-value over the constrained objectives, we can ignore configurations in Λpar that only dif-
fer along the constrained dimensions, without affecting the free dimensions or the combined p-value.
5.3    A PPLYING FIXED SEQUENTIAL TESTING ON THE PARETO FRONTIER
After defining and ordering Λpar over Dopt , we then pro-
ceed with FST over Dtesting to identify a subset Λr ⊆
Λpar of configurations for which we can successfully re-
ject Hλ (i.e., that are valid risk-controlling configura-
tions). Finally, after obtaining the validated subset Λr , we
again find and return the resulting Pareto frontier (now,
with respect to only the objectives of practical interest:
{Qc+1 , . . . , Qc+k }). For k = 1, this consists of a single
configuration λ∗ , while for k > 1, this consists of a set of
non-dominated, valid configurations Λ∗ .
Our method is summarized in Algorithm 1 and is
illustrated in Figure 2. We call it Pareto Testing for two
reasons: (i) the method reduces to applying FST over a Figure 2: Pareto Testing with two
path defined by the Pareto front of the multi-objective objectives. Q is controlled at α while
                                                                            1
problem, and (ii) repeated testing for different α limita- Q is minimized. FST is applied along
                                                                 2
tions yields a calibrated Pareto frontier with constraints the sequence of configurations on the
on specific dimensions in the objective function space. Pareto front, ordered from low to high
It is straightforward to show that Pareto Testing achieves expected risk w.r.t. Q .
                                                                                    1
valid risk control, as we now formally state.
Proposition 5.1. Let Dcal = {(Xi , Yi )}mi=1 be a set of i.i.d. random variables split into two disjoint
subsets, Dopt and Dtesting . Let ptesting (λ, α) be a valid p-value for a configuration λ, where
P(ptesting (λ, α) ≤ u) ≤ u for all u ∈ [0, 1] over the draw of Dtesting . Then all configurations in
the output set Λ∗ of Algorithm 1 are also simultaneously (α, δ)-risk controlling configurations.

The proof, given in Appendix A, follows from Split FST. Note that for k > 1, the chosen set Λ∗ con-
tains configurations that are simultaneously valid. We are therefore free to use any λ∗i ∈ Λ∗ , as well
as any randomly combined configuration in the convex hull of Λ∗ defined as follows. Consider a ran-
domized strategy, where for each test point, we sample the configuration λ∗j ∈ Λ∗ to use with prob-
ability ∆j , where ∆ lies in the |Λ∗ | − 1 dimensional probability simplex. The resulting combination
is also (α, δ)-risk controlling, and allows for different (average) outcomes on the k free objectives.
Corollary 5.2. Any randomized time-shared use of configurations in Λ∗ is (α, δ)-risk controlling.


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6     A DAPTIVE MULTI - DIMENSIONAL PRUNING
We now turn to a concrete application of our method, in which we demonstrate its effectiveness
for reliably accelerating Transformer models (Vaswani et al., 2017). Here we pair each pruning
“dimension” with a score function that estimates the relative importance of each prunable element
in that dimension. By thresholding scores, we obtain different versions of the model with different
performance. We assume a K-layer Transformer model with W attention heads per layer, and L(X)
input tokens (see Vaswani et al. (2017) for a complete description of the Transformer model).
6.1   C ONFIGURABLE DIMENSIONS
We consider the following adaptive behaviors (see also Appendix B for details):

1. Token pruning. We assign each token with an (after-the-fact) importance score, based on the
   gradient of the output probability w.r.t. the token embedding. To determine token importance at
   run-time, we predict the score at each layer (Modarressi et al., 2022), then remove tokens with
   estimated scores bellow a threshold λtok , yielding a sequence of size Lj (X; λtok ) at the j-th layer.
2. Early exiting. We attach a softmax classifier head to each layer, and exit whenever the predictive
   entropy of its output is below a threshold λlayer . The exit layer is denoted as Kexit (X; λlayer ).
3. Head pruning. Similar to token pruning, we compute an importance score for each attention
   head per layer by the gradient of the loss over the validation set (from training) w.r.t the head
   hidden representation, following Michel et al. (2019). Wj (λhead ) denotes the number of retained
   heads in layer j. Note that this is fixed for all inputs, unlike the previous mechanisms.

6.2   O BJECTIVE FUNCTIONS
We also define several practical objective functions. f (·; λ0 ) denotes the full model without pruning.
Relative computational cost. We define the relative computations cost by the ratio between the
computational cost of the pruned model and the computational cost of the full model:
                                  " PKexit (X;λlayer )                              #
                                     j=1               Wj (λhead ) · Lj (X; λtok )2
                    Qcost (λ) = E              PK                                    .     (5)
                                                                      2
                                                     j=1 W · L(X)
Eq. (5) reflects a simplistic definition that incorporates a quadratic dependency on the sequence
length due to the attention mechanism, and a linear dependency on the number of attention heads.
We also consider total FLOPs (floating-point operations) per forward pass.
Relative accuracy reduction. Speeding up the run-time of a model can also degrade its accuracy.
Define the random variable D(X, Y ; λ) = 1{f (X; λ0 ) = Y } − 1{f (X; λ) = Y }, which is 0
when both model predictions are the same, 1 when the full model is correct while the pruned model
is incorrect, and -1 if the opposite is true. We define the relative accuracy reduction as:
           Qacc (λ) = E [D(X, Y ; λ)] = E [1{f (X; λ0 ) = Y }] − E [1{f (X; λ) = Y }] ,               (6)

i.e, the difference in accuracy between the full and pruned models. In order to exploit p-values
derived from confidence bounds that assume the risk is in [0, 1] (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), we
define D′ (X, Y ; λ) = [D(X, Y ; λ)]+ , which differs only for the rare event that the pruned model is
correct while the full model is not, and is more restrictive since E [D(X, Y ; λ)] ≤ E [D′ (X, Y ; λ)].
Worst-class relative accuracy reduction. In some cases, we would like to control the worst-class
accuracy, or equivalently, that every class accuracy reduction is controlled by the same level:
                     Qacc-class (y; λ) = E [D′ (X, Y ; λ) | Y = y] ≤ α, ∀y ∈ Y.                       (7)
Note that this adds an additional |Y| objectives (that can still be solved efficiently, see Appendix A).
Selective classification abstention rate. Consider a selective classification problem, where the
model is allowed to abstain from making a prediction when it is unsure, based on some threshold τ
on the model’s confidence (we use the probability of the predicted class maxy f (X, y; λ)). In this
case, we re-define the relative accuracy and cost reductions to be conditioned on making a prediction.
We also introduce abstention rate objective (e.g., abstain from prediction at most 20% of the time):

                         Qabstention-rate (λ, τ ) = E 1 max f (X, y; λ) < τ .                      (8)
                                                         y


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) IMDB                (b) AG News                (c) QNLI                  (d) QQP

Figure 3: Two objectives (100 random splits). Relative accuracy reduction is controlled, while com-
putational cost is minimized. Top plots show accuracy differences; bottom plots show relative cost.

7   E XPERIMENTS
Experimental setup. we test our method over five text classification tasks of varied difficulty levels:
IMDB (Maas et al., 2011), AG News (Zhang et al., 2015), QNLI (Rajpurkar et al., 2016), QQP,
MNLI (Williams et al., 2018). We use a BERT-base model (Devlin et al., 2018) with K = 12 layers
and W = 12 heads per layer, and attach a prediction head and a token importance predictor per layer.
Baselines and Evaluation. We present both risk controlling and non-risk-controlling baselines.
Non-risk-controlling baselines: (1) α-constrained, the solution to the constrained optimization
problem in Eq. (21); (2) (α, δ)-constrained, the same as before, but with constraints defined over
p-values, which is equivalent to testing without FWER control. Risk-controlling baselines: (3) 3D
SGT, SGT defined over a 3D graph, see Algorithm F.3; (4) Split FST, the split method proposed in
Angelopoulos et al. (2021), where a set of hypotheses is ordered by increasing estimated p-values.
For fairness, each baseline (including our method) operates over the same predefined grid of config-
urations. We use 6480 configurations in total (18 head, 20 token, and 18 early-exit thresholds). Note
that the recovered Pareto front in this case is restricted to points in this grid, see Algorithm F.1. We
also show the results obtained while using a multi-objective optimizer to demonstrate the actual com-
putationally efficient implementation of our method (rather than brute-force exploration of the grid).
We repeat each experiment over different splits of calibration and test data (50-100 runs in total),
and report the mean over all splits (with 95% CIs) for the configurations selected by each method.
Two objectives (one controlled, one free). We start with a two-objective scenario, where we
wish to control the accuracy reduction (Eq. (6)), while minimizing the cost (Eq. (5)). The average
accuracy reduction and relative cost are presented in Fig. 3 for the risk controlling baselines. We
observe that the proposed method obtains the lowest cost among the risk controlling baselines
for all α values and across all tasks. In particular, it can be seen that Split FST obtains slightly
looser control of relative accuracy reduction, but higher relative computational costs compared
to Pareto Testing. Ordering by p-values alone does not take into account scenarios where several
configurations have similar accuracy, but vary in costs, while the proposed method optimizes the
selection and ordering of configurations in both dimensions. We also see that 3D-SGT performs
well for low α values, but often becomes worse as α increases. A possible factor is that as α
increases, 3D testing is allowed to explore more of the 3D graph, but does so inefficiently—leading
to overall lower rejection rates. Figure 4 shows the difference between the risk controlling and the
non-risk-controlling baselines in terms of satisfying Definition 3.1. In non-risk controlling baselines
(left), the risk exceeds α more frequently than the allowed tolerance level δ = 0.1. By contrast and
as expected, we see that all the risk controlling baselines (right) are always below the tolerance level.
Three objectives (two controlled, one free). We study a scenario with three objectives on MNLI,
where we control both the average accuracy (Eq. (6)) and the worst-class accuracy (Eq. (7)) while
minimizing cost (Eq. (5)). We vary the values of α1 for average accuracy and set α2 = 0.15 for
worst accuracy. Figure 5 reports the results of the three objective functions. It can be seen that when


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: Two-objectives, QNLI (100 splits). Acc. reduction is controlled, cost is minimized. Left:
histogram of acc. reduction, α = 0.05; middle: violin plots of acc. reduction; right: risk violations.


Figure 5: Three-objectives, MNLI (100 random splits): average accuracy is controlled by α1 ∈
{0.025, 0.5, . . . , 0.2}, worst accuracy is controlled by α2 = 0.15, δ = 0.1, and cost is minimized.

α1 is small, testing is dominated by average accuracy (worst accuracy is not tight), and as α1 in-
creases, worst accuracy becomes dominant and average accuracy becomes loosely controlled. Here
too we see that Pareto Testing obtains improved cost reduction with respect to the other baselines.
Results with an off-the-shelf optimizer. On the first scenario with accuracy control and cost
minimization, in Figure D.1 we show a comparison between the proposed method with grid (blue)
and multi-objective optimizer (red to yellow) with different number of function evaluations. For
multi-objective optimizer, we used an implementation (Lindauer et al., 2022) of ParEGO optimiza-
tion algorithm (Knowles, 2006; Cristescu & Knowles, 2015). We observe that even with a small
number of evaluations (e.g., 50), we obtain reasonable results, which further improve as the number
of evaluations increases. The grid option performs better for certain α values, but it requires signifi-
cantly more function evaluations. A more in depth analysis of how the multi-objective optimization
method and the allowed number of evaluations influence testing efficiency is left for future work.
Additional results. We briefly highlight a number of results contained in Appendix D. On the same
“accuracy control” setting, we report FLOPs saved, as an alternative measure for cost improvement.
In addition, we show flipped results for controlling cost while minimizing the relative loss in accu-
racy. We also explore a selective prediction setting with three objectives when one is controlled while
two are free. Specifically, we control the selective accuracy loss (Eq. (17)), while minimizing both
the selective cost (Eq. (16)) and the abstention rate (Eq. (8)). Figure D.2 reports the cost and absten-
tion rate for the chosen configurations by either the proposed method and Split FST. It can be seen
that Pareto Testing selects a richer set of configurations that conveys better cost-coverage trade-offs.

8   C ONCLUSION
Deployment of machine learning models in the real world can frequently demand precise guarantees
that certain constraints will be satisfied, together with good empirical performance on other objec-
tives of interest. In this work, we presented Pareto Testing, a two-stage procedure for multiple risk
control combined with multi-objective optimization. In the first stage, Pareto Testing relaxes all con-
straints, and converts the problem to a standard multi-objective optimization format that can be effi-
ciently solved with off-the-shelf optimizers to yield a Pareto frontier of hyper-parameter configura-
tions affecting model performance. In the second stage, this Pareto frontier is filtered via multiple hy-
pothesis testing to identify configurations that simultaneously satisfy the desired risk constraints with
(specifiably) high probability—while also being effective solutions for the free objectives. Bridging
theory and practice, we demonstrated the effectiveness of our method for reliable and efficient adap-
tive computation of Transformer models on several text classification tasks under various conditions.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers and members of the Barzilay and Jaakkola research groups for
helpful discussions and feedback. B.L.G. is supported in part by the CHE Data Science fellowship,
the Zuckerman-CHE STEM Leadership Program, the Schmidt Futures Israeli Women’s Postdoc-
toral Award and the Technion Viterbi Fellowship. A.F. is supported in part by the NSF Graduate
Research Fellowship. This work is also supported in part by the ML for Pharmaceutical Discovery
and Synthesis (MLPDS) Consortium and the DARPA Accelerated Molecular Discovery program.

R EFERENCES
Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel J Candès, Michael I Jordan, and Lihua
  Lei. Learn then test: Calibrating predictive algorithms to achieve risk control. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.01052, 2021.

Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Stephen Bates, Adam Fisch, Lihua Lei, and Tal Schuster. Conformal
  risk control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02814, 2022.

Jasbir Arora. Introduction to optimum design. Elsevier, 2004.

Ankur Bapna, Naveen Arivazhagan, and Orhan Firat. Controlling computation versus quality for
  neural sequence models. 2020. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2002.07106. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2002.07106.

Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candes, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Predictive
  inference with the jackknife+. The Annals of Statistics, 49(1):486–507, 2021.

Stephen Bates, Anastasios Angelopoulos, Lihua Lei, Jitendra Malik, and Michael Jordan.
  Distribution-free, risk-controlling prediction sets. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 68(6):1–34, 2021.

Syrine Belakaria, Aryan Deshwal, and Janardhan Rao Doppa. Max-value entropy search for multi-
  objective bayesian optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Carlo Bonferroni. Teoria statistica delle classi e calcolo delle probabilita. Pubblicazioni del R
  Istituto Superiore di Scienze Economiche e Commericiali di Firenze, 8:3–62, 1936.

Eric Bradford, Artur M Schweidtmann, and Alexei Lapkin. Efficient multiobjective optimization
  employing gaussian processes, spectral sampling and a genetic algorithm. Journal of global
  optimization, 71(2):407–438, 2018.

Frank Bretz, Willi Maurer, Werner Brannath, and Martin Posch. A graphical approach to sequen-
  tially rejective multiple test procedures. Statistics in medicine, 28(4):586–604, 2009.

Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Once for all: Train one
  network and specialize it for efficient deployment. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.

Antonio Candelieri, Andrea Ponti, and Francesco Archetti. Fair and green hyperparameter optimiza-
  tion via multi-objective and multiple information source bayesian optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.08835, 2022.

Yair Censor. Pareto optimality in multiobjective problems. Applied Mathematics and Optimization,
  4(1):41–59, 1977.

Xiangxiang Chu, Bo Zhang, and Ruijun Xu. Multi-objective reinforced evolution in mobile neural
  architecture search. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 99–113. Springer, 2020.

Cristina Cristescu and Joshua Knowles. Surrogate-based multiobjective optimization: Parego update
  and test. In Workshop on Computational Intelligence (UKCI), volume 770, 2015.

Kalyanmoy Deb. Multi-Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms. John Wiley & Sons,
  2001.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Jin-Dong Dong, An-Chieh Cheng, Da-Cheng Juan, Wei Wei, and Min Sun. Dpp-net: Device-
   aware progressive search for pareto-optimal neural architectures. In Proceedings of the European
   Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 517–531, 2018.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Efficient multi-objective neural architecture
  search via lamarckian evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09081, 2018.
Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. The
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 20(1):1997–2017, 2019.
Saurabh Goyal, Anamitra Roy Choudhury, Saurabh Raje, Venkatesan Chakaravarthy, Yogish Sab-
  harwal, and Ashish Verma. Power-bert: Accelerating bert inference via progressive word-vector
  elimination. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3690–3699. PMLR, 2020.
Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks. 2016.
Yue Guan, Zhengyi Li, Jingwen Leng, Zhouhan Lin, and Minyi Guo. Transkimmer: Transformer
  learns to layer-wise skim. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 7275–7286, 2022.
Chirag Gupta, Aleksandr Podkopaev, and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free binary classification:
  prediction sets, confidence intervals and calibration. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Xuanli He, Iman Keivanloo, Yi Xu, Xiang He, Belinda Zeng, Santosh Rajagopalan, and Trishul
  Chilimbi. Magic pyramid: Accelerating inference with early exiting and token pruning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.00230, 2021.
Sture Holm. A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian journal of statis-
  tics, pp. 65–70, 1979.
Lu Hou, Zhiqi Huang, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, and Qun Liu. Dynabert: Dynamic
  bert with adaptive width and depth. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  9782–9793, 2020.
Xiaoqi Jiao, Yichun Yin, Lifeng Shang, Xin Jiang, Xiao Chen, Linlin Li, Fang Wang, and Qun Liu.
  Tinybert: Distilling bert for natural language understanding. In Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pp. 4163–4174, 2020.
Yaochu Jin and Bernhard Sendhoff. Pareto-based multiobjective machine learning: An overview
  and case studies. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and
  Reviews), 38(3):397–415, 2008.
Florian Karl, Tobias Pielok, Julia Moosbauer, Florian Pfisterer, Stefan Coors, Martin Binder, Lennart
  Schneider, Janek Thomas, Jakob Richter, Michel Lang, et al. Multi-objective hyperparameter
  optimization–an overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07438, 2022.
Sehoon Kim, Sheng Shen, David Thorsley, Amir Gholami, Woosuk Kwon, Joseph Hassoun, and
  Kurt Keutzer. Learned token pruning for transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.00910, 2021.
Joshua Knowles. Parego: A hybrid algorithm with on-line landscape approximation for expensive
  multiobjective optimization problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 10(1):
  50–66, 2006.
Jing Lei, James Robins, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-free prediction sets. Journal of the
   American Statistical Association, 108(501):278–287, 2013.
Jing Lei, Max G’Sell, Alessandro Rinaldo, Ryan J Tibshirani, and Larry Wasserman. Distribution-
   free predictive inference for regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 113
   (523):1094–1111, 2018.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Marius Lindauer, Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, André Biedenkapp, Difan Deng, Car-
 olin Benjamins, Tim Ruhkopf, René Sass, and Frank Hutter. Smac3: A versatile bayesian opti-
 mization package for hyperparameter optimization. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 23:54–1, 2022.
Weijie Liu, Peng Zhou, Zhe Zhao, Zhiruo Wang, Haotang Deng, and Qi Ju. Fastbert: a self-distilling
 bert with adaptive inference time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02178, 2020.
Andrew Maas, Raymond E Daly, Peter T Pham, Dan Huang, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts.
  Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis. In Proceedings of the 49th annual meeting of the
  association for computational linguistics: Human language technologies, pp. 142–150, 2011.
Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. Are sixteen heads really better than one? Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Kaisa Miettinen. Nonlinear multiobjective optimization, volume 12. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2012.
Sewon Min, Jordan Boyd-Graber, Chris Alberti, Danqi Chen, Eunsol Choi, Michael Collins, Kelvin
  Guu, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Kenton Lee, Jennimaria Palomaki, Colin Raffel, Adam Roberts, Tom
  Kwiatkowski, Patrick Lewis, Yuxiang Wu, Heinrich Küttler, Linqing Liu, Pasquale Minervini,
  Pontus Stenetorp, Sebastian Riedel, Sohee Yang, Minjoon Seo, Gautier Izacard, Fabio Petroni,
  Lucas Hosseini, Nicola De Cao, Edouard Grave, Ikuya Yamada, Sonse Shimaoka, Masatoshi
  Suzuki, Shumpei Miyawaki, Shun Sato, Ryo Takahashi, Jun Suzuki, Martin Fajcik, Martin Do-
  cekal, Karel Ondrej, Pavel Smrz, Hao Cheng, Yelong Shen, Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu
  Chen, Jianfeng Gao, Barlas Oguz, Xilun Chen, Vladimir Karpukhin, Stan Peshterliev, Dmytro
  Okhonko, Michael Schlichtkrull, Sonal Gupta, Yashar Mehdad, and Wen-tau Yih. Neurips 2020
  efficientqa competition: Systems, analyses and lessons learned. In Proceedings of the NeurIPS
  2020 Competition and Demonstration Track, 2021.
Ali Modarressi, Hosein Mohebbi, and Mohammad Taher Pilehvar. Adapler: Speeding up inference
  by adaptive length reduction. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 1–15, 2022.
Nafise Sadat Moosavi, Iryna Gurevych, Angela Fan, Thomas Wolf, Yufang Hou, Ana Marasović,
  and Sujith Ravi (eds.). Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Simple and Efficient Natural
  Language Processing, 2021.
Harris Papadopoulos, Kostas Proedrou, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Inductive confidence
  machines for regression. In European Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 345–356. Springer,
  2002.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions
  for machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250, 2016.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy: Be-
 havioral testing of NLP models with CheckList. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generaliza-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.08731, 2019.
Victor Sanh, Lysandre Debut, Julien Chaumond, and Thomas Wolf. Distilbert, a distilled version of
  bert: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019.
Robin Schmucker, Michele Donini, Valerio Perrone, Muhammad Bilal Zafar, and Cédric Archam-
  beau. Multi-objective multi-fidelity hyperparameter optimization with application to fairness. In
  NeurIPS Workshop on Meta-Learning, volume 2, 2020.
Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Tommi Jaakkola, and Regina Barzilay. Consistent accelerated inference
  via confident adaptive transformers. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing, pp. 4962–4979, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tal Schuster, Adam Fisch, Jai Gupta, Mostafa Dehghani, Dara Bahri, Vinh Q Tran, Yi Tay, and
  Donald Metzler. Confident adaptive language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07061, 2022.

Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and Oren Etzioni. Green ai. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(12), 2020.

Amar Shah and Zoubin Ghahramani. Pareto frontier learning with expensive correlated objectives.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1919–1927. PMLR, 2016.

Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu, Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. Mobilebert:
  a compact task-agnostic bert for resource-limited devices. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 2158–2170, 2020.

Surat Teerapittayanon, Bradley McDanel, and Hsiang-Tsung Kung. Branchynet: Fast inference
  via early exiting from deep neural networks. In 2016 23rd International Conference on Pattern
  Recognition (ICPR), pp. 2464–2469. IEEE, 2016.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Vladimir Vovk. On-line confidence machines are well-calibrated. In The 43rd Annual IEEE Sym-
  posium on Foundations of Computer Science., 2002.

Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a random world.
  Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.

Vladimir Vovk, Ivan Petej, and Valentina Fedorova. Large-scale probabilistic predictors with and
  without guarantees of validity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2015.

Vladimir Vovk, Valentina Fedorova, Ilia Nouretdinov, and Alexander Gammerman. Criteria of
  efficiency for conformal prediction. In International Symposium on Conformal and Probabilistic
  Prediction with Applications - Volume 9653, 2016.

Vladimir Vovk, Jieli Shen, Valery Manokhin, and Min-ge Xie. Nonparametric predictive distribu-
  tions based on conformal prediction. In Proceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Conformal and
  Probabilistic Prediction and Applications, 2017.

Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel R Bowman. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for
  sentence understanding through inference. In 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL HLT
  2018, pp. 1112–1122. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2018.

Maciej Wołczyk, Bartosz Wójcik, Klaudia Bałazy, Igor T Podolak, Jacek Tabor, Marek Śmieja,
 and Tomasz Trzcinski. Zero time waste: Recycling predictions in early exit neural networks.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:2516–2528, 2021.

Mengzhou Xia, Zexuan Zhong, and Danqi Chen. Structured pruning learns compact and accurate
 models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00408, 2022.

Ji Xin, Raphael Tang, Jaejun Lee, Yaoliang Yu, and Jimmy Lin. DeeBERT: Dynamic early exiting
   for accelerating BERT inference. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association
   for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2020.

Deming Ye, Yankai Lin, Yufei Huang, and Maosong Sun. Tr-bert: Dynamic token reduction for
  accelerating bert inference. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5798–
  5809, 2021.

Jiahui Yu, Linjie Yang, Ning Xu, Jianchao Yang, and Thomas Huang. Slimmable neural networks.
   In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiang Zhang, Junbo Zhao, and Yann LeCun. Character-level convolutional networks for text clas-
  sification. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.

Yanqi Zhou, Siavash Ebrahimi, Sercan Ö Arık, Haonan Yu, Hairong Liu, and Greg Diamos.
  Resource-efficient neural architect. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.07912, 2018.


A     M ATHEMATICAL DETAILS
We present the proofs for our theoretical claims.
A.1    M AX P - VALUE FOR MULTIPLE RISKS
First we re-state and re-prove that taking the maximum p-value is also a valid p-value.
Lemma A.1. Let pi (λ, α) be a p-value for Hλ,i : Qi (λ) > αi , for each i ∈ {1, . . . , c}. Define
p(λ, α) := max1≤i≤c pi (λ, αi ). Then, for all λ such that Hλ : ∃i where Qi (λ) > αi holds, we
have:
                                          P (p(λ, α) ≤ u) ≤ u                                          (9)


Proof. Let I ⊆ {1, . . . , c} be the set of all true null hypotheses at λ. We have:

             P p(λ, α) ≤ u ≤ P max pi (λ, α) ≤ u
                                           i∈I

                                          \
                                                              !                                       (10)
                                   =P          pi (λ, αi ) ≤ u ≤ max P (p(λ, αi ) ≤ u) .
                                                                   i∈I
                                         i∈I

Since for each i ∈ I, P (pi (λ, αi ) ≤ u) ≤ u, we have maxi∈I P (p(λ, αi ) ≤ u) ≤ u, which implies
P (p(λ, α) ≤ u) ≤ u.


A.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.1
This is direct result of Split FST (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), which we prove here for completeness.


Proof. Since Dopt and Dtesting are disjoint, i.i.d., Dtesting is also i.i.d. w.r.t the returned Pareto
frontier over Dopt . Lemma A.1 then gives that ptesting (λ, α) are super-uniform under Hλ .
We now prove simultaneous (α, δ)-control over Λr . Let Hλ′ be the first true null hypothesis in the
sequence. Given that p(λ′ , α) is a super uniform p-value under Hλ′ , the probability of making a
false discovery at λ′ is bounded by δ. However, if Hλ′ fails to be rejected (no false discovery), then
all other Hλ that follow in the sequence also fail to be rejected (regardless of if Hλ is true or not).
So the probability of making any false discoveries is also bounded by δ.
This implies that the probability that all configurations in Λ∗ ⊆ Λr are risk controlling is at least
1 − δ, which also implies that any configuration in Λ∗ is (α, δ)-risk controlling.


A.3    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 5.2
Proof. We restate our randomized time-sharing strategy: for each test point (X, Y ) we indepen-
                                                                                    ∗
dently sample the configuration λ∗j ∈ Λ∗ to use with probability ∆j , where ∆ ∈ S |Λ | is a point in
                                                  ∗
                                                      n          ∗
                                                                                         o
the |Λ∗ | − 1 dimensional probability simplex S |Λ | = ∆ ∈ R|Λ |
                                                                    P
                                                                       j ∆j = 1, ∆j ≥ 1 .

Given Dcal , Λ∗ is a constant set, and each risk Qi (λ∗j ) = E[qi (X, Y ; λ∗j )] is also a constant for all
λ∗j ∈ Λ∗ and i ∈ {1, . . . , c}. For each Qi , the combined risk of the time-sharing strategy can then


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


be derived as the mean of a mixture model where
                                                ∗
                                              |Λ |
                                              X
                         Qi (λ   share
                                         )=           ∆j Qi (λ∗j )
                                              j=1
                                                                                                   (11)
                                              |Λ∗ |
                                              X
                                          ≤           ∆j max
                                                          ′
                                                             Qi (λ∗j ′ ) = max
                                                                            ′
                                                                               Qi (λ∗j ′ ).
                                                           j                   j
                                              j=1

Let E be the event that all λ∗j ∈ Λ∗ are risk controlling across all Qi at level αi given the draw of
Dcal . Proposition 5.1 gives that this event occurs with probability at least 1 − δ. Therefore,
   P Qi (λshare ) ≤ αi ≥ P(max      Qi (λ∗j ′ ) ≤ αi ) ≥ 1 − δ, ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , c} simultaneously. (12)

                                 ′ j
                      share
Thus we have that λ           is also (α, δ)-risk controlling for any choice of ∆.

A.4   H OEFFDING -B ENTKUS INEQUALITY P - VALUES
The Hoeffding-Bentkus from (Bates et al., 2021) is a combination of Hoeffding and Bentkus in-
equalities:

  p Q̂cal (λ); α, m = min exp{−mh1 (Q̂cal (λ) ∧ α, α)}, eP Binom(m, α) ≤ ⌈mQ̂cal (λ)⌉
                                                                                        (13)
where h1 (a, b) = a log( ab ) + (1 − a) log( 1−a
                                             1−b ).

A.5   W ORST-C LASS O BJECTIVE
The empirical risk for the class-conditioned objective E [D′ (X, Y ; λ)|Y = y] is computed over the
samples in class y:
                               1     X                        y
         Q̂acc-class (y, λ) = y             D′ (X, Y ; λ), Dcal = {(X, Y ) ∈ Dcal |Y = y}     (14)
                             |Dcal |      y
                                         (X,Y )∈Dcal

Note that the per-class risks are of the same type and are bounded by the same α. If furthermore
                                            y         ỹ
classes are approximately balanced, i.e |Dcal | ≈ |Dcal  | ∀y, ỹ ∈ Y, than due to the monotonicity of
the p-value with respect to the empirical risk, we have:

                                                y                                      y
      p(λ, α) = max p Q̂acc-class (y, λ); α, |Dcal | ≈ p max Q̂acc-class (y, λ); α, |Dcal | .     (15)
                  y∈Y                                                    y∈Y

Therefore, instead of |Y| objective functions, one per each class, we can define a single equivalent
empirical objective Q̂acc-worst (λ) = maxy∈Y Q̂acc-class (y, λ).
A.6   S ELECTIVE C LASSIFICATION
Similarly to above derivation for per-class accuracy, for selective classification we define the selec-
tive cost (given selection):

                       Qselect-cost (λ, τ ) = E qcost (X; λ) max f (X, y; λ) ≥ τ                   (16)
                                                                         y

and the same for selective accuracy reduction:

                      Qselect-acc (λ, τ ) = E qacc (X; λ) max f (X, y; λ) ≥ τ                      (17)
                                                                        y

which are evaluated empirically by:
                                                              1     X
                                Q̂select-cost (λ, τ ) =        τ       qcost (X; λ)
                                                            |Dcal |  τ
                                                                     X∈Dcal
                                                         1     X
                                Q̂select-acc (λ, τ ) =    τ       qacc (X; λ)
                                                       |Dcal |  τ    X∈Dcal
       τ
where Dcal = {X ∈ Dcal | maxy f (X, y; λ) ≥ τ }.


                                                               15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     M ULTI - DIMENSIONAL PRUNING
First, we describe the core model units and introduce some essential notation, while keeping the
exact model implementation as general as possible. Second, we describe each of the pruning dimen-
sions, its associated importance score, and the thresholding mechanism.
B.1   T RANSFORMER MODEL
Consider a Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018) with K layers. The input
to the model is given as a sequence of L (for notational simplicity we omit here the dependency of
the length on x) tokens x = (x1 , . . . , xL ), which are first mapped to learneable word embeddings
e = (e1 , . . . , eL ). Tokens are then passed through the model’s layers, with hj = (hj,1 , . . . , hj,L )
denoting the j-th layer hidden representation. Each layer consists of a multi-head attention, with
                                                   PW
W heads producing the combined output aj = w=1 Attnj,w (hj−1 ), which is followed by a feed-
forward network to provide the next layer hidden representation. The last layer is attached to a
classification head with |Y| outputs, where f (x, y) denotes the output of class y. The model is
optimized by minimizing a loss function L computed empirically over the training set.
B.2   T OKEN PRUNING
It is often the case that the input consists of a large amount of tokens that have a negligible contribu-
tion for the prediction task. The idea in token pruning is to identify unimportant tokens and discard
them at some point in the model.
To identify the contribution of each token, we attach to each layer a token importance predictor
stok
  j : X → R based on the token hidden representation hj,l . Following (Modarressi et al., 2022),
we use as importance scores gradient attributions, computed by:
                                             ∂f (x, yc )
                                     rl =                ⊙ el                                       (18)
                                                ∂el            2
where yc is the true label, and ⊙ denotes element-wise product. The token importance predic-
tors in each layer are optimized with a cross-entropy loss, where the labels are the scores, nor-
malised to sum to one. In the j-th layer, tokens with stok   j (xl ) < λ
                                                                          tok
                                                                               are pruned and are not
transferred to next
                n   layer. The  number
                                  o    of tokens remaining    after pruning is  given by Lj (x; λtok ) =
PL Tj             tok         tok
   l=1 j ′ =1 1 sj ′ (xl ) > λ     .

B.3   E ARLY EXITING
Early-exiting is based on the idea that examples vary in their difficulty level, hence, require different
amount of computation to reach to a good prediction. While for simple examples a decision can be
made early on, difficult examples may require going through the full model. We attach a prediction
head fj : X → Y to each layer, trained to predict the labels via the same loss function as the original
model. Following (Liu et al., 2020), we define the importance score based on the prediction head
entropy:
                                              X
                                 slayer
                                  j     (x) =    pj (y|x) log pj (y|x)                               (19)
                                              y∈|Y|

where pj (y|x) are the per-class probabilities provided by the j-th prediction head. Based on this
score, examples with slayer  (x) < λlayer exit in the j-th layer. The exit layer of x is given by
                           j n                                      o
Kexit (x; λlayer ) = arg minj j ∈ {1, . . . , K} slayer
                                                  j     (x) < λlayer .

B.4   H EAD PRUNING
It was shown by Michel et al. (2019) that a significant fraction of attention heads can be removed
with a little impact on the performance. Each attention head (w, j), 1 ≤ j ≤ K, 1 ≤ w ≤ W is
assigned a score shead
                   j (w) according to:

                                                     T           ∂L
                            shead
                             j (w) = Attnj,w (hj−1 )                        .                         (20)
                                                           ∂Attnj,w (hj−1 )


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                Table C.1: Datasets Details

    Dataset   |Y|                  Task                     Train         Val.     Test    Cal. (out of Test)   Full model Acc. [%]

  IMDB        2     Sentiment analysis on movie reviews     20K            5K      10K            5K                    94
 AG News      4           News topic classification         115K           5K      7.6K           5K                    93
  QNLI        2      Question-answer pair classification   ∼ 10K           5K     ∼ 5.5K         3.4K                   92
   QQP        2      Question pair semantic equivalence    ∼ 360K          5K      10K            5K                    91
  MNLI        3          Natural language inference        ∼ 250K        ∼ 150K    30K           10K                    86


Figure D.1: Results of Pareto Testing over AG News with multi-objective optimizer for different
number of evaluations, and with a grid of thresholds. Results are averaged over 50 random splits.
Accuracy reduction is controlled and cost is minimized.



The scores in each layer are normalized to sum to one. Attention heads with shead          j (w) <
λhead are pruned.      The number of heads left after pruning is given by Wj (λhead ) =
PW         head         head
   w=1 1 sj (w) > λ           . Note that this is a fixed pruning, unlike the previous pruning dimen-
sions that vary according to the input x.

C      I MPLEMENTATION AND DATASET DETAILS
Datasets. Splitting specifications and full model performance on each task are contained in Ta-
ble C.1. Note that for IMDB, QQP and MNLI we used a subset of the original dev/test set in order
to expedite evaluation. For MNLI we used the split of (Sagawa et al., 2019).
Prediction Heads. Each prediction head is a 2-layer feed-forward neural network with 32 dimen-
sional hidden states, and ReLU activation. The input is the hidden representation of the [CLS] to-
ken concatenated with the hidden representation of all previous layers, as was proposed in (Wołczyk
et al., 2021).
Token importance predictors. Each token importance predictor is a 2-layer feed-forward neural
network with 32 dimensional hidden states, and ReLU activation. The input is the hidden represen-
tation of each token in the current layer and all previous layers, following (Wołczyk et al., 2021).
Training. The core model is first finetuned on each task. We compute the attention head importance
scores based on validation data. We freeze the backbone model and train the early-exit classifiers
and the token importance predictors on the training data.
Code. Our code will be made available at https://github.com/bracha-laufer/
pareto-testing.

D      A DDITIONAL BASELINES AND RESULTS
Our method is based on the Learn then Test (LTT) framework (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), which is
summarized in Algorithm F.2. We compare our method to two baselines from (Angelopoulos et al.,
2021): 3D-SGT summarised in Algorithm F.3, which is a 3D extension to the 2D Hamming SGT,


                                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure D.2: Three-objectives, AG News - one controlled, two free: accuracy reduction is controlled
by α = 0.05, δ = 0.1, cost and abstention rate are minimized. The coloring is according to accuracy
reduction.


and Split-FST described in Appendix E. Note that we consider a broader setting in which, besides
multiple risk control we wish to optimize additional free objective functions.
In addition, we define two non-risk controlling baselines:
α-constrained - A constrained optimization problem can be defined by:
                                  min qcal
                                       k (λ)                                                         (21)
                                  λ∈Λ

                                    s.t.    Q̂cal
                                              i (λ) < αi , ∀1 ≤ i ≤ c,
                                              T
where qcal           cal              cal
        k (λ) = [Q̂c+1 (λ), . . . , Q̂c+k (λ)] . Directly solving for Eq. (21) over the calibration data,
however, would not necessarily yield a generalizable λ̂ with the desired 1 − δ probability. In other
words, the true risk Qi (λ̂) over test data might exceed αi , possibly with high probability.
(α, δ)-constrained - We simultaneously test all possible configurations with error level δ without
correcting for multiple hypothesis testing.
Moreover, we develop two additional baselines and present their results herein:
Low-Risk Path - similar to Split-FST (and Pareto Testing), this is a dual-stage method, assum-
ing that the calibration data is split into two subsets. In the first stage, we find a solution to the
constrained optimization problem, defined in Eq. (21). Then a low risk path is defined from full
model to the solution. The path is defined over the grid of hyper-parameter combinations, where
in each step we pick a neighbouring hyper-parameter combination (increasing one hyper-parameter
dimension with respect to previous step) with lowest risk among all neighbours. The method is
summarized in Algorithm F.4. Note that as the method defines the path in the hyper-parameter
space, it implicitly assumes that the objective functions are monotonic with respect to each of the
hyper-parameters.
Constrained-Path Testing - This can be considered a variant of the proposed method. When inter-
ested in a single configuration selection for specific α and δ, a cheaper (but not equivalent) approach
would be to solve multiple constrained problems:
                                min        qopt
                                            k (λ)                                                    (22)
                                λ∈Λ

                                 s.t.      Q̂opt
                                             i (λ) < αi − ϵ, ∀1 ≤ i ≤ c,
for a sequence of ϵ values in [0, . . . , mini αi ]. Then, an ordered set of configurations to test is de-
fined by the solutions to Eq. (22) with decreasing values of ϵ. Note that both the constrained and
the full multi-objective variants are equivalent for the case of a single control constraint. How-
ever, when there are multiple constraints Pareto Testing operates on a larger set of hyper-parameter


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     (a) IMDB                                           (b) AG News


                     (c) QNLI                                             (d) QQP

Figure D.3: Shows cost and accuracy trade-offs over test data provided by a grid of 6480 configura-
tions (18 head, 20 token and 18 early-exit thresholds).


combinations, consisting of solutions to:
                                min qopt
                                     k (λ)                                                          (23)
                                λ∈Λ

                                s.t.   Q̂opt
                                         i (λ) < αi − ϵi , ∀1 ≤ i ≤ c,
with ϵi values in [0, . . . , αi ], namely, solving the constrained problem for all possible combinations
of (ϵ1 , . . . , ϵc ).
Pruning model. Figure D.3 shows the accuracy and the relative cost of the proposed adaptive prun-
ing model f for various threshold combinations, computed over test data. We see that the fusion
of all pruning dimensions yields a wide variety of configurations with a clear trade-offs between
accuracy and cost. In addition, the Pareto front consists of different threshold combinations, indi-
cating that the optimal threshold value in each dimension is not fixed and varies with the desired
cost/accuracy level.
Two objectives - accuracy controlled, cost minimized (additional results). Results for additional
baselines are shown in Fig. D.4, including the two non-controlling baselines: α-constrained and
(α, δ)-constrained, and our derived Low-Risk Path baseline. We see that, in many cases, Low-Risk
Path obtains similar cost reduction compared to our proposed method, however, it is inferior for
certain tasks and α values. As expected, both non-risk controlling baselines obtain lower costs
compared to our method. This of course comes with a price of suffering from risk violations that
exceed δ = 0.1, as can be seen in the bottom line bar plots. However, we see that the there is
not a large difference between the cost reductions obtained by our method and the non-controlling
baselines. This indicates that our method, though providing risk control guarantees, as opposed to
the non-controlling baselines, is not overly conservative, and effectively optimizes the free objective
function, leading to significant cost reduction.
We further examine the different aspects of the proposed method. The size of the Pareto optimal set
obtained for each task is shown in Fig. D.5. We see that the size of the Pareto set varies among tasks
and is around 3 − 5% of the original set (6480 configurations for each task), which is a significant


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) IMDB               (b) AG News                (c) QNLI                 (d) QQP
Figure D.4: Additional results for two-objectives - accuracy reduction is controlled by
α ∈ {0.025, 0.5, . . . , 0.2}, δ = 0.1, cost is minimized. Top row: accuracy reduction; mid-
dle row: relative cost; last row: rate of risk-violations. Results are averaged over 100 random splits
to calibration and test.


Figure D.5: Additional results for two-objectives: accuracy reduction and cost. Sizes of the Pareto
set for each task.



reduction of the hypotheses space. To demonstrate the variation across splits we show the violin
plots in Figure D.7. We observe that our method obtains lower variance compared to Spit FST. This
may be due to the fact that Split FST orders the hypothesis according to p-values only, and similar
p-values can correspond to varying costs. Our method has slightly higher variance compared to
3D SGT, which may be attributed to the additional level of randomization caused by calibration set
splitting. Figure D.6 compares the sizes of the validated configurations returned by either Pareto
Testing and Split FST, showing that our methods leads to larger sets of valid configurations. In
Fig. D.8, we show the results of our method for different sizes of Dopt . We see that as expected the
performance improves as the size of Dopt increases, and that a size of 500 points is already sufficient
to obtain stable performance.
Two objectives - cost controlled, relative accuracy loss minimized. We evaluated the opposite
scenario where the relative cost is controlled, while accuracy reduction is minimized. Note that for
3D-SGT and Low-Risk Path we start testing from the empty model (lowest cost risk) towards the
full model. The accuracy reductions of all methods are summarized in Table D.1. We observe that as
opposed to accuracy reduction, here the results of all methods are similar (except for Low-Risk Path).
Two objectives - accuracy controlled, FLOPs minimized. We experimented with a different cost
measure in terms of FLOPs speed-up, which can be considered as a more practical measure, tailored


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         (a) IMDB                (b) AG News                (c) QNLI                 (d) QQP
Figure D.6: Additional results for two-objectives - accuracy reduction is controlled by
α ∈ {0.025, 0.075, 0.125, 0.2}, δ = 0.1, cost is minimized. Compare sizes of validated
configurations for Pareto Testing and Split FST (computed over 20 random trials).


         (a) IMDB                (b) AG News                (c) QNLI                 (d) QQP

Figure D.7: Additional results for two-objectives - accuracy reduction is controlled by
α ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.15}, δ = 0.1, cost is minimized. Top: violin plots for accuracy reduction;
bottom: violin plots for relative cost (computed over 100 random splits).

to the specific architecture being used. Results are summarized in Table D.2. We see that the
proposed method almost always obtains the best speed-ups, which is inline with our other results.
Three objectives - accuracy/worst accuracy controlled, cost minimized. Results for additional
baselines are shown in Fig. D.9. Here too, our method performs the best. In this scenario,
Constrained-Path Testing obtains similar results while Low-Risk Path is significantly worse.
Three objectives - accuracy and abstention rate controlled, cost minimized. We use the same
setup of selective classification described in §7. Note that combining τ with the other three prun-
ing dimensions, we obtain a four dimensional hyper-parameter space, where there is a complex
interplay between the hyper-parameters and the risk functions. As τ increases we expect to get
better accuracy-cost trade-offs since we remove difficult examples. In addition, abstention rate is
monotonic with respect to τ but is also influenced by the pruning dimension in an uncharacterized
manner.
Here we control both accuracy reduction and abstention rate, while minimizing cost. Since the risk
functions are not necessarily monotonic with respect to all hyper-parameters, Low-Risk Path is not
relevant. Moreover, since here we have a 4D hyper-parameter space, 3D SGT cannot be applied.
Results are summarized in Fig. D.10, where all methods obtain similar results.

E    FAMILY- WISE ERROR RATE CONTROL
Let Λg denote a set of possible configurations to test, and Λr ⊆ Λg denote the set of rejected
hypotheses. When performing multiple hypothesis testing (MHT), a FWER-controlling procedure
accounts for controlling the probability of making one or more false discoveries, i.e. falsely rejecting
at least one true null hypothesis:
                                        P (|Λr ∩ Λ0 | ≥ 1) ≤ δ                                     (24)
where Λ0 ⊆ Λg is the set of configurations for which the null hypothesis is true.


                                                  21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (a) IMDB                     (b) AG News                      (c) QNLI                   (d) QQP

Figure D.8: Additional results for two-objectives - accuracy reduction is controlled by
α ∈ {0.025, 0.05, . . . , 0.2}, δ = 0.1, cost is minimized. Top: accuracy reduction; bottom:
relative cost for different sizes of Dopt (computed over 100 random splits to calibration and test).

Table D.1: Two-objective scenario: relative cost is controlled by α ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.3}, δ = 0.1,
accuracy reduction is minimized. Shows accuracy reduction. Results are averaged over 100 random
splits to calibration and test.

    Method                  α = 0.1                                α = 0.2                           α = 0.3
                  IMDB   Ag News   QNLI      QQP    IMDB      Ag News     QNLI      QQP    IMDB   Ag News   QNLI      QQP
    3D-SGT        0.05    0.04        0.14   0.09     0.03        0.02       0.09   0.06   0.02    0.00        0.05   0.03
   Split FST      0.05    0.04        0.15   0.10     0.02        0.02       0.09   0.06   0.02    0.01        0.06   0.03
 Low-Risk Path    0.26    0.10        0.22   0.25     0.17        0.05       0.26   0.11   0.16    0.01        0.12   0.05
 Pareto Testing   0.05    0.04        0.13   0.09     0.02        0.02       0.08   0.06   0.02    0.01        0.05   0.03


We briefly describe several possible procedures, some of which exploit a-priori known structure in
the hypotheses set.
Bonferroni Correction. This is the simplest procedure for counteracting the multiple testing prob-
lem, while being also the most conservative. The set of rejected hypotheses retrieved by the Bonfer-
roni correction (Bonferroni, 1936), is given by:
                               HBF = Hλ : pcal (λ, α) < δ/|Λg |

                                                                                                (25)

Fixed Sequence Testing. Multiplicity correction can be avoided when relying on a pre-defined
ordering of the hypotheses. In FST, the hypotheses are sequentially tested with the same error
budget, until failing to reject for the first time. Denoting by Hλ(1) , . . . , Hλ(|Λg |) the ordered set of
hypotheses, FST yields the following set of rejected hypotheses (Holm, 1979):
                            HF ST = {H (j) : j < J}, J = min{j : p(j) ≥ δ}.                                           (26)
                                                                         j

This procedure is advantageous in the case that there is a natural ordering of the hypotheses from
the most likely to be rejected to the least likely one. For example, it can be applied in our problem
when n = 1 and the hypotheses are ordered by threshold values from low to high.
Sequential Graphical Testing SGT (Bretz et al., 2009) can be viewed as an extension to FST,
where the relation between the hypotheses is richer than just a sequential path, and is therefore pa-
rameterized by a directed graph G. The graph’s nodes are null hypotheses, and the edges connecting
between them specify the way the error budget propagates from one node to the other. Each node
is allocated an initial error budget. Each time an hypothesis is rejected, the procedure reallocates
the error budget from node i to the rest of the nodes according to the edge’s weights, and the graph
is modified. Several possible graph structures were proposed in (Angelopoulos et al., 2021) for the
case of a two-dimensional grid of hypotheses. One option is a ‘Hamming graph’ in which the ini-


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table D.2: FLOPs Speed-Up. Accuracy Reduction is controlled by level α, while Flops Speed-Up
is maximized. Results are averaged over 10 random splits to calibration and test.

    Method                   α = 0.025                             α = 0.05                           α = 0.1
                  Ag News   IMDB    QNLI    QQP     Ag News       IMDB    QNLI    QQP     Ag News   IMDB    QNLI    QQP
   3D-SGT          ×2.34    ×1.71   ×1.38   ×1.89    ×2.89        ×4.45   ×1.59   ×2.16    ×3.12    ×4.45   ×1.99   ×2.71
   Split FST       ×2.11    ×1.69   ×1.35   ×1.66    ×2.38        ×1.99   ×1.50   ×2.15    ×2.80    ×4.18   ×1.89   ×2.69
 Low-Risk Path     ×2.38    ×3.86   ×1.37   ×1.85    ×2.95        ×4.2    ×1.56   ×2.16    ×3.65    ×4.20   ×1.94   ×2.73
 Pareto Testing   ×2.42     ×4.82   ×1.37   ×1.86    ×3.00    ×4.82       ×1.59   ×2.18   ×3.65     ×4.82   ×2.02   ×2.86


       (a) Accuracy Difference               (b) Worst Accuracy Difference                  (c) Relative Cost

Figure D.9: Three-objective scenario, MNLI - two controlled, one free: average accuracy is con-
trolled by α1 ∈ {0.025, 0.5, . . . , 0.2}, worst accuracy is controlled by α2 = 0.15, δ = 0.1, cost is
minimized without control. Results are averaged over 100 random splits to calibration and test.


tial error budget is allocated to the bottom-right node, and the error budget is propagated outward.
Another option is ‘Fallback’, where the error budget is split between each possibility in the first
dimension. An FST is then performed for a fixed value on the first dimension, and progressing in
the other dimension.
Split Fixed Sequence Testing. Proposed in (Angelopoulos et al., 2021), Split-FST can be utilized
when there is no clear structural relationship between the hypotheses for defining a graph for SGT.
The core idea is to split the calibration data in two subsets, where the first split is used to learn
the graph, while the other is used for testing. Specifically, they propose to define a sequence of
p-values β ranging from 0 to 1. Then, for each β, find the hypothesis where the p-values of all risks
(computed over the first split) are the closest (in vector infinity norm) to β. Based on this ordering,
FST can be then performed over the second split.


                                                             23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Accuracy Difference              (b) Abstention Rate                (c) Relative Cost

Figure D.10: Three-objective scenario, AG News - two controlled, one free: average accuracy is
controlled by α1 ∈ {0.025, 0.5, . . . , 0.2}, abstention rate is controlled by α2 = 0.1, δ = 0.1, cost is
minimized. Results are averaged over 100 random splits to calibration and test.


F    A LGORITHMS

Algorithm F.1 Recover Pareto Optimal Set
Definitions: Λ is the hyper-parameters search space. G1 , . . . , Gr is a set of r objective functions.
B is the maximum number of function evaluations. Optimizer is a multi-objective optimization
algorithm.

 1: function PARETO O PTIMAL S ET(Λ, G1 , . . . , Gr )
 2:    if Optimizer = Brute-Force then
 3:        Λg ← uniformly sample B configurations in Λ
 4:        Λpar ← N ON D OMINATED(Λg , G1 , . . . , Gr )
 5:    else
 6:        Λpar ← Optimizer(Λ, G1 , . . . , Gr , B)
        return Λpar
 7: function N ON D OMINATED(Λg , G1 , . . . , Gr )
 8:    Λo ← Λg
 9:    for λ ∈ Λg do
10:        for λ′ ∈ Λg , λ′ ̸= λ do
11:            d=0
12:            for i ∈ {1, . . . , r} do
13:                if Gi (λ′ ) ≤ Gi (λ) then
14:                    d=d+1
15:            if d = r then
16:                Λo = Λo /λ
17:                break
        return Λo


                                                   24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm F.2 Learn then Test (Single Objective)
Definitions: configurable model f adapted by n thresholds λ = (λ1 , . . . , λn ), calibration data
Dcal of size m, objective function Q, user-specified control limit α and tolerance level δ, a set of
hyper-parameter combinations Λg .

 1: function C ALIBRATION(Dcal , Λg , α, δ)
 2:    for λ ∈ Λg do
 3:        Associate the null hypothesis:
                                                  Hλ : Q(λ) ≥ α                                               (27)
 4:          Compute the empirical risk over Dcal :
                                              1     X
                                 Q̂cal (λ) =                         q(X, Y ; λ)                              (28)
                                             m
                                                       (X,Y )∈Dcal

 5:          Compute Hoeffding p-value (or Hoeffding-Bentkus p-value (13)):
                                                                            2
                                                            −2m(α−Q̂cal (λ))

                        pcal (λ, α) = p Q̂cal (λ); α, m = e                 +                                 (29)

 6:     Recover a subset of thresholds Λr ⊆ Λg for which the null hypothesis is rejected, by apply-
    ing a FWER controlling procedure.
 7:     return Λr


Algorithm F.3 3D Graph Testing
Definitions: configurable model f adapted by n thresholds λ = (λ1 , . . . , λn ), calibration data
Dcal of size m, objective functions Q1 , . . . , Qc , user-specified control limits α = (α1 , . . . , αc ) and
tolerance level δ, a grid of I ×J ×K thresholds Λg = {λ11 , . . . , λI1 }×{λ12 , . . . , λJ2 }×{λ13 , . . . , λK
                                                                                                               3 },
λi,j,k = (λi1 , λj2 , λk3 ), 3D graph W with I ×J ×K nodes and weights Wi′ ,j ′ ,k′ →i,j,k determining the
P propagation, A an I × J × K matrix with initial error budget for each configuration, satisfying
error
   i,j,k Ai,j,k = δ.
 1: function CALIBRATE(Dcal , α, A, W)
 2:       for λ ∈ Λg do
                                                        1
                For λ ∈ Λg compute Q̂cal
                                                          P
 3:                                         i (λ) = m        (X,Y )∈Dcal qi (X, Y ; λ).
 4:             For λ ∈ Λg compute, compute p-values pcal (λ, α) = max1≤i≤c p Q̂cal          i (λ); α  i , m    .
                                  cal

 5:       Λr ← S GT W, p (λ, α) .
 6:       return Λr
 7: function S GT(W, pcal (λ, α))
 8:       I = {1, . . . , I} × {1, . . . , J} × {1, . . . , K}
 9:       Λr ← {}
10:       i∗ , j ∗ , k ∗ = arg min(i,j,k)∈I pcal (λi,j,k , α)/Ai,j,k
11:       while |I| ≥ 1 do
12:             if pcal (λi,j,k , α) < Ai∗ ,j ∗ ,k∗ then
                                      ∗ ∗ ∗
13:                   Λr ← Λr ∪ λi ,j ,k
                                  ∗ ∗ ∗
14:                   I ← I/(i , j , k )
15:                   Ai,j,k ← Ai,j,k + Ai∗,j∗,k∗ Wi∗,j∗,k∗→i,j,k , ∀(i, j, k) ∈ I
16:             i∗ , j ∗ , k ∗ = arg min(i,j,k)∈I pcal (λi,j,k , α)/Ai,j,k
          return Λr


                                                        25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm F.4 Shortest-Path Testing
Definitions: configurable model f adapted by n thresholds λ = (λ1 , . . . , λn ), Dcal =
Dopt ∪ Dtesting is a calibration set of size m, split into optimization and (statistical) testing sets
of size m1 and m2 , respectively, objective functions Q1 , . . . , Qc , user-specified control limits
α = (α1 , . . . , αc ) and tolerance level δ, hyper-parameter resolution γ = (γ1 , . . . , γn ), where γj is
the resolution in the j-th dimension, λmin consists of the minimum values of all thresholds, λmax
consists of the maximum values of all thresholds.

 1: function O PTIMIZATION(Dopt , α)
 2:    Define the constrained problem (21).
 3:    Apply constrained optimization to find optimal configuration λopt .
 4:    Λopt ← C REATE PATH (λmin , λopt , γ) ∪ C REATE PATH (λopt , λmax , γ).
 5:    return Λopt
 6: function C REATE PATH(λstart , λend , γ)
 7:    λ(0) ← λstart
 8:    i←1
 9:    while λ(i) ̸= λend do
10:        pmin ← ∞
11:        for j ∈ {1, . . . , n} do
                  (i)      (i)
12:             λ̃j ← λj + γj
                    (i)
13:             if λ̃j > λend
                            j then
14:                  Continue
15:             else
                               (i)          (i)          (i)
16:                  λnext ← λ1 , . . . , λ̃j , . . . , λn
17:               if popt (λnext , α) < pmin then
18:                   λ(i) ← λnext
19:                   pmin ← popt (λnext , α)
20:        i←i+1
       return λ(0) , . . . , λ(i)
21: function C ALIBRATION(Dtesting , Λopt , α, δ)                               ▷ Same as in Algorithm 1


                                                       26
