Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D IAGNOSING AND R ECTIFYING V ISION M ODELS
USING L ANGUAGE

 Yuhui Zhang, Jeff Z. HaoChen, Shih-Cheng Huang, Kuan-Chieh Wang,
 James Zou, Serena Yeung
 Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
 {yuhuiz, jhaochen, mschuang, wangkua1, jamesz, syyeung}@stanford.edu



                                             A BSTRACT

         Recent multi-modal contrastive learning models have demonstrated the ability to
         learn an embedding space suitable for building strong vision classifiers, by lever-
         aging the rich information in large-scale image-caption datasets. Our work high-
         lights a distinct advantage of this multi-modal embedding space: the ability to
         diagnose vision classifiers through natural language. The traditional process of
         diagnosing model behaviors in deployment settings involves labor-intensive data
         acquisition and annotation. Our proposed method can discover high-error data
         slices, identify influential attributes and further rectify undesirable model behav-
         iors, without requiring any visual data. Through a combination of theoretical ex-
         planation and empirical verification, we present conditions under which classifiers
         trained on embeddings from one modality can be equivalently applied to embed-
         dings from another modality. On a range of image datasets with known error
         slices, we demonstrate that our method can effectively identify the error slices and
         influential attributes, and can further use language to rectify failure modes of the
         classifier.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent models trained using multi-modal contrastive learning have leveraged large-scale datasets of
aligned image-caption pairs to obtain shared embedding spaces that capture rich visual and textual
features. The learned image and text encoders resulting from multi-modal contrastive learning have
been demonstrated to be effective feature extractors that can be used to train strong single-modality
classifiers (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2021). In this work, we show how visual
classification models obtained through multi-modal contrastive learning, as described above, offer a
significant additional advantage: the ability to use language to probe and diagnose the behavior of
the vision models.
Model diagnosis aims to gain a systematic and comprehensive understanding of when and why mod-
els fail. This is a critical quality assurance process to prevent unexpected and catastrophic failures
of models in high-stake settings. A growing body of work has proposed methods for addressing this
need. For example, error slice discovery methods aim to find subsets of inputs with similar charac-
teristics where the model performs significantly worse (d’Eon et al., 2022; Eyuboglu et al., 2022).
Interpretability methods aim to understand the black-box process of model prediction and thus the
reasons why models fail for certain inputs (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Koh et al.,
2020). In addition, model diagnosis is relevant to model auditing, an important topic that also deals
with identifying model failures and sensitive attributes (Raji et al., 2020), and has a broad societal
impact in terms of AI accountability and integration (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018; Mitchell et al.,
2019; Gebru et al., 2021).
While these prior efforts have made progress in vision model diagnosis, they all suffer from a critical
Achilles’ heel — susceptibility to lack of visual data. Curated training and test sets from the same
data distribution are typically used to develop vision models. Even if models achieve perfect per-
formance on these datasets, their performance can degrade drastically when deployed in-the-wild,
due to distribution shifts (Koh et al., 2021; Wiles et al., 2022). Yet most existing model diagnosis
methods require visual examples of failure modes (e.g., present in the test set) to discover them. As


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                Discover Error Slices
  Image                                         Training                                         Waterbird in land             Landbird in water
Embedding                                       Waterbird or
                                                                                                    Acc: 32%                       Acc: 65%
                                                 Landbird?


                                                               Classifier
                                                                                Identify Influential Attributes
                                                                                                                 +31% Ocean
                                                                                                          +7% Lake            Influential Attributes
                                                                                   Forest -15%                                    for Waterbird
                 Western gull   Cardinal in                                     Bamboo -19%
  Text             in lake.      ocean.
                                                                                Rectify Model Misbehaviors
Embedding      Fish crow
               in forest.
                            Gadwall crow
                             in bamboo.
                                              Diagnosing &                                       Waterbird in land             Landbird in water
                                               Rectifying                                           Acc: 56%                       Acc: 83%


Figure 1: Overview of our approach, DrML, that diagnoses and rectifies vision models using
language. Our approach leverages the shared image and text representation space learned by multi-
modal contrastive learning. We find that classifiers trained on embeddings from one modality can be
equivalently applied to embeddings from another modality, despite the fact that embeddings from
these two modalities are distinctly separated. This cross-modal transferability phenomenon enables
us to diagnose a vision model by training it on the image embedding space and probing it with text
embeddings. The use of language allows us to generate a large set of diverse and novel inputs to
discover error slices, identify influential attributes, and rectify model misbehaviors.


a result, using these methods is reliant on efforts to collect large-enough datasets to cover all data
distributions and potential failure modes of interest, which is often impractical or infeasible.
The goal of our work is to circumvent this need to collect test data representing all data distributions
of interest, and instead use natural language input to diagnose vision classifiers. It is often easier
to generate a set of diverse natural language inputs by combining known attributes and prompt gen-
erators than to collect a set of image inputs representing the same desired concepts. We observe
that vision classifiers trained on image embeddings from a shared image-text embedding space sug-
gest the possibility of leveraging text embeddings as a proxy for image embeddings. Multi-modal
contrastive losses are frequently used to learn such shared embedding spaces. However, while these
losses encourage image and text embeddings to be closer for aligned pairs than for mismatched pairs,
there is no guarantee that in practice, using text embeddings as input into a vision classifier trained
on the image embeddings will result in the same predictions. In this work, we first verify that text
inputs can indeed work as good proxies to image inputs trained on a shared image-text embedding
space obtained through contrastive learning. We refer to this as cross-modal transferability.
Based on the phenomenon of cross-modal transferability, we then present DrML for Diagnosing and
Rectifying Vision Models using Language. We show that DrML can use language to diagnose vision
models in two different ways: discovering error slices including concepts for which we have no
visual data, and identifying attributes that have the greatest impact on model predictions. Finally, we
present a method that uses language to rectify undesirable behaviors without requiring the collection
of more visual data. Figure 1 illustrates our framework for diagnosing and rectifying vision models
using language. On three image datasets representing the three most common types of model failure
modes, we demonstrate that DrML can effectively identify error slices and influential attributes, and
can further rectify these model failure modes using language.
In summary, our contributions are:
 1. We present a theoretical explanation of when cross-modal transferability happens (Section 2.1),
    and empirically verify that the assumptions required by the analysis is true in practice across a
    range of multi-modal contrastive models and datasets (Section 3.2).
 2. We propose DrML, a framework for diagnosing vision models using natural language, includ-
    ing error slice discovery and influential attribute identification. We empirically validate DrML
    by simulating common types of failure modes using the Waterbirds (Sagawa et al., 2020), Fair-
    Face (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021), and dSpitesV (Matthey et al., 2017) datasets, and show the
    effectiveness of our method in identifying known error slices and influential attributes.
 3. We further demonstrate that DrML can rectify undesirable model behaviors and improve model
    performance with respect to the identified error slices and influential attributes, by fine-tuning
    the vision classifier using text embeddings constructed from the diagnosis process.


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     A PPROACH
We first define basic notations used in this paper. Given a pre-trained multi-modal contrastive model,
along with an image X ∈ X or text Y ∈ Y as input, we can obtain their l2 -normalized embeddings
                                               d                                d
x or y from the image encoder fx ∶ X ↦ R or the text encoder fy ∶ Y ↦ R , respectively, where
                                                                                                d
d is the dimension of the shared multi-modal embedding space. We can build classifiers h ∶ R ↦ C
such as a linear layer or multi-layer perception on the shared embedding space to predict the label
c ∈ C given an image embedding or text embedding. We focus on the case of vision classifiers
trained using image embeddings.

2.1   T EXT E MBEDDINGS AS P ROXIES FOR I MAGE E MBEDDINGS

The core of our work hinges on the ability to use text as a proxy for image inputs, thereby enabling
us to use language to diagnose vision models. Here we describe our approach to analyze if this is
feasible in practice — are text inputs good proxies for images in contrastive representation space?
Cross-modal Transferability. To answer the question, we first define cross-modal transferability.
Let PD be the joint data distribution over image-text pairs. For X, Y ∼ PD , we denote x = fx (X)
and y = fy (Y ) the corresponding image and text embeddings respectively. We say that a vision
classifier h achieves cross-modal transferability when it outputs similar predictions on x and y. In
other words, the difference across the prediction pair is small:
                                     Ex,y [D(h(x), h(y))] ≈ 0,
where D(⋅, ⋅) measures the difference between predictions, e.g. the 0-1 loss D(u, v) = 1u≠v .
Modality Gap. While intuition suggests that embeddings of a matched image-caption pair should
be close, recent work shows instead that the embeddings are approximately clustered per modality
Liang et al. (2022). They refer to the distance between these clusters as the modality gap. We define
the individual-level modality gap g as the difference between image and text embeddings for a single
pair, and the class-level gap gc as the average difference between image and text embeddings for a
given class c ∈ C. Formally, the modality gap definitions are written as:
                               g = x − y and gc = xc − yc , where
                      xc = EX∼PD (X∣c) [fx (X)], yc = EY ∼PD (Y ∣c) [fy (Y )].

Modality Gap Geometry. We take a closer look at the modality gap geometry across a range of
multi-modal contrastive models and datasets, presented in detail in Section 3.2, and empirically find
that the following hold true:
 1. The modality gap between corresponding image and text embeddings can be approximated by
    a constant vector, particularly at the class level. We verify this by computing distributions
    over ∥g∥ (magnitude) and cos(g, Eg [g]) (direction).
 2. The modality gap is orthogonal to the span of image embeddings and text embeddings, and
    image embeddings and text embeddings have zero mean in the subspace orthogonal to the
    modality gap. We verify this by computing distributions over cos(x − Ex [x], Eg [g]) (or-
    thogonality) and Ex [x − x g g ]i (center), where g = Eg [g]/∥Eg [g]∥ and i ∈ [d]. The
                                T ′ ′                      ′

    subscript i denotes indexing the i-th dimension of the vector.
Cross-modal Transferability under Modality Gap. The above findings with respect to the geome-
try of the modality gap indicate that the classifier input between training and cross-modal evaluation
only differs in a constant g, i.e., h(x) ≈ h(y + g). Intuitively, since the modality gap g is an
orthogonal constant to the span of embeddings, the weight matrix of the learned classifier should
also be orthogonal to g. Hence the prediction of the classifier is not affected by g. This intuition
explains why we observe strong cross-modal transferability under modality gap in practice, across
different multi-modal contrastive models trained on different datasets. These results are presented
in Section 3.2. In the following Proposition 2.1, we further theoretically prove that a linear classifier
trained with a regularized quadratic loss is guaranteed to be orthogonal to the modality gap and
hence achieves cross-modal transferability. The formal statement and proof are in Appendix A.2.
                                                                                                       d
Proposition 2.1 (Informal version of Proposition A.1). Suppose there exists a gap vector g ∈ R
such that every pair of image embedding x and caption embedding y satisfies g = x − y, the gap

                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


g is orthogonal to the span of image embeddings, and the image embeddings have zero mean in
the subspace orthogonal to g. Then, any linear function minimizing a regularized quadratic loss on
image embeddings achieves the same loss on text embeddings, enabling cross-modal transferability.

Cross-modal Transferability by Closing the Modality Gap. The observation that the modality
gap approximates a constant provides us another perspective to achieve cross-modal transferability
— by closing the modality gap so that there is no inconsistency when feeding embeddings from
another modality. We propose a simple technique to close the modality gap so that the gap becomes
zero. During training, instead of feeding x to the model h, we feed it with x − Ex [x]. During
cross-modal evaluation, we feed y − Ey [y] instead of y. With this strategy, we close the gap and
observe additional improvements in cross-modal transferability compared to training with the gap.

2.2   D IAGNOSING V ISION M ODELS USING L ANGUAGE

Having established that text embeddings can be good proxies for image embeddings (Section 2.1 and
3.2), we now describe DrML, which uses natural language inputs for diagnosing vision classifers.

Discovering Error Slices through Language. Deep learning models often make systematic errors
on subgroups of inputs with similar attributes, referred to as error slices and formally defined as:
                                    S = {S ⊆ X ∣e(S) ≫ e(X )},
where X is a test set of images and e(⋅) is the model’s error rate on the set of input images. However,
collecting a large enough test set that covers different image distributions is a fundamental challenge.
The collected test set often only covers a small percentage of model failure modes (i.e., error slices)
in the wild. In contrast, language inputs are easy to generate.
Our proposed method, DrML, is capable of discovering error slices through language inputs. DrML
works as follows:
  1. We define an attribute set A related to the task.
  2. Given a specific attribute subset F ⊆ A, we use different prompt generators
              A
     p ∈ P ∶ 2 ↦ Y to map attribute combinations to text inputs.
In this way, we can combine a wide range of attributes with different prompts to collect a diverse and
novel set of text inputs. The generated text set Y is typically much more diverse than the available
image test set X , allowing the discovery of more comprehensive and unseen error slices.
Importantly, DrML has two distinctive benefits over the typical approach of using an image test set.
First, DrML only requires minimal effort to define a meaningful set of attributes to generate the input
set, circumventing the human cost of data collection. Second, the combination of defined attributes
naturally defines human-interpretable data slices, whereas image-based slice discovery methods do
not directly provide a text summary of the error slice.

Identifying Influential Attributes through Language. Interpreting what attributes influence
model predictions is crucial for understanding why models fail. Since language is directly inter-
pretable by humans, we perform counterfactual analysis using language to understand which at-
tributes or concepts most impact model predictions. With A defined as the attribute set, we aim to
identify a subset of attributes that significantly influences model predictions to any given class c:
                                      Ac = {a ∈ A∣sc (a) ≫ 0},
where sc (⋅) is the influence of an attribute to class c. We measure the influence by Shapley value,
a widely-used interpretation tool in machine learning (Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Ghorbani & Zou,
2019), which computes average prediction change with the presence and absence of this attribute:
                                     ∣F∣!(∣A∣ − ∣F∣ − 1)!
                 sc (a) =     ∑                           (pc (F ∪ {a}) − pc (F)),
                            F ⊆A\{a}
                                            ∣A∣!

where pc (⋅) is the average predicted probability of class c on a set of inputs with certain attributes.
With natural language, we can easily compose a large set of inputs with and without that attribute and
feed them to the model to calculate the influence. For example, to compute the influence of attribute


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


“ocean” on class “waterbird”, we can generate various text inputs such as “A photo of species on
the ocean” and “A photo of species”, and compute the average difference of the model predicted
probabilities of “waterbird”. Note that it is particularly challenging to identify influential attributes
using image inputs because it requires an extensive collection of images with attribute annotations.
Connection. Discovering error slices and identifying influential attributes are important comple-
mentary applications, with the same ultimate goal —— diagnosing the model. Error slice discovery
finds specific subgroups about when the model fails, while attributes provide abstract explanations
of why the model fails. Meanwhile, figuring out influential attributes helps discover error slices,
because attributes provide information about the space of potential error slices, and vice versa.

2.3   R ECTIFYING V ISION M ODELS USING L ANGUAGE

In addition to discovering errors during model diagnosis, how to rectify these errors is a practical
but challenging problem, which is seldomly addressed in existing works about the model diagnosis.
Our finding about cross-modal transferability enables us to rectify undesirable behaviors of vision
classifiers through language. Here we propose a simple solution where we generate additional data
that the model fails using language and continue training the model on these synthesized data.
Given the error slices S = {S ⊆ X ∣e(S) ≫ e(X )} discovered, we aim to rectify model perfor-
mance on these error slices by minimizing ∣S∣. For each S ∈ S defined by a list of attributes, we
generate a large set of natural language inputs related to this slice YS through attribute composi-
tion and prompt manipulation (Appendix B) and continue training the model on these text inputs
YS . We continue training the model using the same hyperparameters as if the model is trained on
corresponding images, since we have proved that texts are effective proxies of images. This simple
strategy significantly improves model performances on corresponding image error slices with mini-
mal impact on other data, and has a distinct advantage that no visual data is required for rectification.

3     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we first demonstrate that text embeddings are good proxies for image embeddings
in multi-modal contrastive representation space (Section 3.2). Based on that, we demonstrate how
DrML successfully discovers error slices (Section 3.3), identifies influential attributes (Section 3.4),
and further rectifies model misbehaviors on three datasets (Section 3.5).

3.1   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Model Architecture. We use CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) as the shared multi-modal embedding
space. For classifiers built on CLIP’s embeddings, we use linear layers and multi-layer perceptrons.
Datasets. For cross-modality transferability (Section 3.2), we use the MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al.,
2014), which includes both captions and object annotations for each image. The task is a multi-label
classification problem of predicting the presence of 80 objects based on images or captions. For
model diagnosis and rectification, we simulate the three common types of model failures. For spuri-
ous correlation, we use the Waterbirds dataset (Sagawa et al., 2020) which asks a model to classify
if a given bird image is a waterbird or a landbird. The training data contains a spurious correlation
between bird species and backgrounds — 95% of waterbirds appear in the water, and 95% of land-
birds appear on the land. For underrepresented data, we use FairFaces (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021)
which contains face images from 9 age groups and 7 race groups. The task is gender classification.
To simulate the underrepresentation of minority groups, we sample races in proportion to the demo-
graphics of the state of Montana for our training set. For unseen data, we use dSpritesV (Matthey
et al., 2017) which contains images of shapes with different colors, sizes, and positions. The task
is to classify the shape in an image. To simulate errors caused by unseen data, we only use images
with orange triangles or green squares during training. More details are shown in the Appendix B.

3.2   A RE T EXT E MBEDDINGS G OOD P ROXIES FOR I MAGES E MBEDDINGS ?

We have provided theoretical explanations in Section 2.1 that a classifier’s boundary is transferable
across modalities if the modality gap satisfies certain geometric conditions. Here we first verify these
conditions and then show empirically that closing the modality gap can improve transferability.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Magnitude                       Direction             Orthog-        Center
        Model
                                  Individual      Class          Individual        Class       onality
        CLIP COCO (2021)         1.18 ± 0.03      0.88 ± 0.04   0.70 ± 0.06    0.94 ± 0.04    0.00 ± 0.06   0.00 ± 0.02
        CLIP ImageNet (2021)          -           1.00 ± 0.02        -         0.83 ± 0.05    0.00 ± 0.06   0.00 ± 0.03
        ConVIRT (2022)           1.22 ± 0.10           -        0.67 ± 0.09         -         0.02 ± 0.10   0.00 ± 0.02
        VideoCLIP (2021)         1.35 ± 0.03           -        0.79 ± 0.04         -         0.00 ± 0.06   0.00 ± 0.02
        CLASP (2021)             1.33 ± 0.04           -        0.79 ± 0.12         -         0.03 ± 0.13   0.00 ± 0.02


Table 1: Geometry analysis of modality gap for various multi-modal contrastive represen-
tation spaces. The modality gap approximates a constant vector, indicated by the magnitude and
direction distributions. Modality gap is also orthogonal to the span of embeddings from two modal-
ities, and embeddings’ centers for both two modalities are zero vectors in the subspace orthogonal
to the gap, indicated by the orthogonality and center distributions. Based on our theoretical anal-
ysis, these findings suggest that cross-modal transferability is widely established in multi-modal
contrastive learning. ± connects mean and standard deviation. Detailed distributions in Figure 3.

                                           Evaluation on Image               Evaluation on Text
          Modality Gap         Model                                                                     Consistency↑
                                         Loss↓    mF1↑      MF1↑          Loss↓    mF1↑      MF1↑
                -              Random    0.6939      0.0655     0.0443    0.6938     0.0696   0.0437        0.8644
                               Linear    0.0501      0.7276     0.6790    0.1188     0.5642   0.5429        0.9637
             Default
                               MLP       0.0480      0.7523     0.7158    0.0888     0.6350   0.6135        0.9789
                               Linear    0.0498      0.7280     0.6777    0.0719     0.6554   0.6168        0.9842
             Closing
                               MLP       0.0483      0.7495     0.7130    0.0885     0.6503   0.6358        0.9806


Table 2: Cross-modal transferability in multi-modal contrastive representation learning. We
train a classifier using CLIP’s image embeddings and test the trained classifier using text embed-
dings on the MS-COCO multi-label classification dataset. Despite the modality gap, classification
boundaries learned from one modality are transferable to another modality. Closing the modality
gap further improves cross-modal transferability without harm to in-modal evaluation. Notations:
mF1 - Micro F1, MF1 - Macro F1, Random - A randomly initialized linear classifier.

Modality Gap Geometry. In Table 1, we first show that the modality gap can be well approxi-
mately by a constant vector. For instance, on MS-COCO, the class-level gaps between image and
text embeddings extracted from CLIP (ViT-B/32) have almost the same magnitude (0.88 ± 0.04) and
direction (cosine similarity 0.94 ± 0.04). We then show that the modality gap is orthogonal to the
span of image embeddings and text embeddings, and embeddings have zero mean in the subspace or-
thogonal to modality gap. This is supported by the near-zero means with low standard deviations in
“orthogonality” and “center” columns. Our findings here show that the assumptions required by our
theory of cross-modal transferability (Section 2.1) hold true in practice across various datasets and
contrastive multi-modal models, suggesting that cross-modal transferability should be a pervasive
phenomenon in multi-modal contrastive learning.
Cross-modal Transferability. Table 2 shows the image-to-text transfer results on the MS-COCO
validation set. Based on our theory, we indeed find that cross-modality transferability is possi-
ble regardless of the modality gap. For instance, we find that an image-embeddings-trained linear
classifier capable of achieving 67.90% macro F1 score can maintain 54.29% macro F1 score us-
ing text embeddings as inputs, and the consistency between predictions using images and texts is
96.37%. Similarly, text-to-image transfer is also possible, which is shown in Appendix Table 7.
While there exists slight degradation in performance under cross-modal evaluation, the difference
in performance is relatively small, and the cross-modal transfer performance is much higher than
random classification. The same finding is observed when using multi-layer perceptrons that learn
non-linear features. As shown in the bottom half of Table 2, closing the modality gap further im-
proves cross-modal transferability. The linear classifier achieves 9.12%, 7.39%, and 2.05% absolute
improvements on micro F1, macro F1, and prediction consistency for image-to-text transfer without
harm to in-modality evaluation. The improvements using MLP are smaller but consistent.
Are Generated Language Prompts Good Predictors of Error Slices? Here we further investigate
whether our generated language prompts are good predictors of the error rate of a given data slice.
We do so by looking at the correlation between performances on generated prompts and correspond-
ing image slices. A strong correlation indicates that we can perform error slice discovery using text
as proxies, which circumvents the challenges of collecting image data.


                                                                 6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              Waterbirds             FairFace              dSpritesV
       Method
                                          Spearman    Pearson   Spearman    Pearson   Spearman     Pearson
       (Base): Gen 1 Image (Prob)          0.5822     0.5608     0.3884     0.3361     0.3059      0.3119
       (Base): Gen 20 Images (Prob)        0.6034     0.5938     0.4288     0.5411     0.4557      0.5309
       (1): Generate 1 Text for Slice      0.4167     0.4355     0.0801     0.0957     0.6278      0.6723
       (2): (1) + Use Label Probability    0.5899     0.5773     0.2065     0.1760     0.7071      0.7481
       (3): (2) + Prompt Engineering       0.6462     0.6721     0.5669     0.7024     0.6998      0.7595
       (Ours): (3) + Prompt Ensemble       0.6465     0.6776     0.5614     0.7227     0.7028      0.7918


Table 3: Correlation analysis of model performance on image and text slices. Correlation
can be improved by using label probability instead of label accuracy on text predictions, generating
better text through prompt engineering and ensemble. Our approach outperforms the baseline text-
to-image generation model by a large margin. The best or near-best results are bolded.

We treat each attribute subset F ⊆ A as a slice. For each slice, we generate a set of text inputs
YF using prompt generators P and select all the images XF with attributes F. We compute the
Spearman and Pearson correlation between model performances on YF and XF . Table 3 shows
strong correlation between image and text slices. Furthermore, correlation can be improved by: 1)
using the average probability of the label on text predictions instead of accuracy, 2) generating better
text inputs via prompt engineering which composes attributes into a more fluent sentence, and 3)
prompt ensemble that uses different prompts to generate more diverse inputs (details in Appendix B).
As baselines for comparison, we use the state-of-the-art text-to-image generation model (Rombach
                                                                                          ′
et al., 2022) t ∶ Y ↦ X to generate a set of (we use 1 or 20 in our experiment) images XF from text
                                                    ′
prompts YF and compute correlations between XF and XF . Our method outperforms this baseline
by a large margin and does not utilize significant computational time and cost typically required for
the image generation process. Samples of the generated image samples are shown in Appendix C.
Even while significant progress has been made in text-to-image generation, generating high-fidelity
images that maintain the original semantics is still challenging.
In summary, combining the empirical findings presented in this section and the theoretical results
in Section 2.1, we show that text inputs can act as good proxies for image inputs, enabling us to
diagnose vision classifiers using generated language prompts.

3.3   D ISCOVERED E RROR S LICES

The strong correlation between the performances on text and image slices allows us to confidently
run image slice discovery algorithm using text inputs. In this study, we use a simple error slice
discovery method of sorting slices by their performances. We further marginalize attributes by
merging similar slices into larger slices. In Table 4, we summarize the most essential discovered
error slices by our language-based approach on the three datasets, each representing one of the three
typical model failure patterns under distribution shifts (Wiles et al., 2022).
For Waterbird, the top identified error slices are waterbirds in land and landbirds in water, which
correctly corresponded to errors are caused by spurious correlations present in the dataset. For Fair-
Face, the African American population is among the top identified error slice, which also reflects
their underrepresentation in our training set. For dSpitesV, our method correctly identifies green tri-
angles and orange square as critical error slices. Additionally, pink triangle slices are also correctly
identified, since they were never seen in the training data. By using images to verify our discov-
ered slices, our method not only correctly identifies the most critical error slices but also accurately
predicts the slice performances on images.
In Appendix C, we report results from the state-of-the-art slice discovery baseline
DOMINO (Eyuboglu et al., 2022). When evaluated using datasets with the same distribution as
the training set, DOMINO can only discover slices present in the dataset, and could not discovery
errors caused by distribution shifts.

3.4   I DENTIFIED I NFLUENTIAL ATTRIBUTES

In Table 5, we report the most influential attributes to a specific class on the same three datasets.
These attributes provide a high-quality interpretation of how models predict and why they fail. For


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Waterbirds                           FairFace                           dSpritesV
              Slice             Text     Image    Slice           Text     Image     Slice                Text         Image
              Wbird in L       0.3258   0.3233    Black         0.9134     0.8997    Green triangle        0.1641      0.0616
              Lbird in W       0.7029   0.6524    Indian        0.9268     0.9446    Orange square         0.2990      0.0337
              Wbird in W       0.9306   0.9549    Asian         0.9305     0.9381    Pink triangle         0.5044      0.9861
              Lbird in L       0.9957   0.9979    White         0.9427     0.9597    Red triangle          0.5651      0.9954


Table 4: Discovered error slices using language. With the images used for validation, our method
succeeds in discovering important error slices (bolded) and accurately predicts model performances
on image slices. Notations: Image - model accuracy using real image inputs, Text-predicted accu-
racy using text inputs as a proxy, W - water, L - land.
                   Waterbirds (waterbird)                        FairFace (female)                  dSpritesV (triangle)
                    Attribute             Influence             Attribute       Influence           Attribute        Influence
                   Ocean                     0.3062                Very old          0.0229                Orange           0.3736
                   Lake natural              0.0713                Young             0.0161                Red             -0.0470
          Place                                           Age                                   Color
                   Forest broadleaf         -0.1540                Little           -0.0079                Pink            -0.1181
                   Bamboo forest            -0.1931                Infant           -0.0171                Green           -0.3321


Table 5: Identified influential attributes using language. We show top 2 most positively and
negatively influential attributes, which provide insights into how models predict and why they fail.
                              Waterbirds                                                            FairFace
 Slice            Original    Rectify    Lonly    JTT           GDRO       Slice     Original    Rectify   Lonly           JTT       GDRO
 Wbird in L       0.3233      0.5564    0.5639   0.5865         0.7368     Black      0.8997      0.9075      0.8920      0.8920     0.9017
 Lbird in W       0.6524      0.8271    0.7747   0.7468         0.8155     Asian      0.9381      0.9390      0.9290      0.9390     0.9384
 Wbird in W       0.9549      0.9700    0.9023   0.9248         0.9474     Indian     0.9446      0.9439      0.9301      0.9406     0.9453
 Lbird in L       0.9979      0.9893    0.9443   0.9764         0.9443     White      0.9597      0.9626      0.9424      0.9602     0.9588


Table 6: Rectified model performances on discovered error slices. We continue training models
on language inputs corresponding to error slices (bolded) and observe significant performance im-
provements on these slices. GDRO not directly comparable because attribute annotations required.

example, one of the most influential attributes for waterbird classification is “ocean” with an influ-
ence value of 0.3062, indicating that the model predicted probability of waterbird increases by 0.3
on average when “ocean” is present in a bird image. Since the attribute “place” should not affect pre-
dictions, this shows an obvious error of the model. Similar findings apply to the attribute “color” for
dSpitesV. But what is more interesting is that the color “pink” is never seen during training but will
bias the model to predict “square” with 0.1 increased probability. On FairFace, no attribute is found
to significantly influence model prediction; thus, no obvious spurious correlations were learned.

3.5      R ECTIFIED M ODEL M ISBEHAVIORS

In Table 6, we report performances of original models and rectified models. On both Waterbirds
and FairFace dataset, our simple method of continue training the model on text inputs significantly
improves model performances on error slices with minor influences on other slices. We also perform
ablation by only training the model on all the language inputs from scratch (Lonly), and find that
continuing to train the pre-trained image model achieves better results, but even training only with
language can also work reasonably.
Our approach rectifies model misbehaviors caused by spurious correlation and underrepresented data
by correcting the data bias. Another series of methods to tackle these errors are robust training tech-
niques, such as GDRO (Sagawa et al., 2020) and JTT (Liu et al., 2021), which explicitly optimizes
each slice’s performance during training. Our method outperforms JTT. While GDRO performs
similarly to ours, it requires attribute annotations on images, which is highly time-consuming and
cost-prohibitive for most real-world applications. Moreover, GDRO and JTT cannot fix errors on
unseen data, while ours can, because our rectifying process requires no visual data.

4     R ELATED W ORK & D ISCUSSION

Multi-modal Contrastive Learning. Many recent works in vision-language contrastive learning,
such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021), and Florence (Yuan et al., 2021),


                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


have leveraged large image-caption datasets to obtain embedding spaces that capture rich visual and
textual features. As a result, the learned image and text encoders are demonstrated to be strong
uni-modal classifiers. In this work, we show how vision models obtained through multi-modal
contrastive learning offer another significant advantage — model diagnosis and rectification.
Multi-modal Contrastive Representation Space Geometry. Although multi-modal contrastive
learning minimizes the distance between embeddings for matched pairs, prior work has shown that
embeddings from two modalities are distinctively separated in the embedding space, which is re-
ferred to as modality gap (Liang et al., 2022). In this work, we further analyze the modality gap
geometry and connect it to the cross-modal transferability phenomenon. Our finding is related
to several recent works built on multi-modal contrastive representation spaces, such as DALL-E
2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), ClipCap (Mokady et al., 2021), and other works (Cohen et al., 2022; Gal
et al., 2022). They found that trained models can directly take cross-modal embeddings but worse
than same-modal embeddings. We not only explain this but provide a straightforward solution to im-
prove transferability, which can be applied to all future works built upon multi-modal embeddings.
Slice Discovery. Many recent works aim to understand model systematic errors by finding subsets
of inputs with similar characteristics where the model performs significantly worse. This is referred
to as slice discovery (Chung et al., 2019; Singla et al., 2021; d’Eon et al., 2022; Eyuboglu et al.,
2022; Jain et al., 2022a). However, these algorithms fail to address the most fundamental challenge
for slice discovery — the lack of data. These works are only able to find errors that exist in the
dataset. Our work circumvents the data challenge by performing slice discovery on the text space.
Interpretation. Many model interpretation methods have been proposed, including attribution-
based (Ribeiro et al., 2016; Lundberg & Lee, 2017; Shrikumar et al., 2017) and concept-based (Ghor-
bani et al., 2019b; Koh et al., 2020). While these methods help in understanding the model prediction
process, the outputs are complicated for humans to understand and inconsistent across models and
algorithms (Ghorbani et al., 2019a; Jain et al., 2022b; Joshi et al., 2021). Others require modi-
fications in model architectures or complex post-processings (Ghorbani et al., 2019b; Koh et al.,
2020). In contrast, language is inherently understandable by humans and simple to construct. In this
work, we interpret the model prediction process by identifying the most influential attributes using
language, which provides us meaningful interpretations without pre-processing or post-processing.
Algorithm Fairness. Ensuring algorithmic fairness is key to avoiding potential harm to our soci-
ety (Hovy & Spruit, 2016; Zou & Schiebinger, 2018). Methods for improving the fairness of ma-
chine learning algorithms is an ongoing active area of work (Bolukbasi et al., 2016; Sagawa et al.,
2020; Sohoni et al., 2020; Ramaswamy et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021). Among these, a notable solu-
tion is to correct data bias, as model bias stems from data bias. In this work, we show that language
can be used to correct data bias by generating additional data, hence improving model fairness.
Limitations. While our work introduces a novel and effective approach for diagnosing and rectify-
ing visual classifiers, there are additionally important areas for future work. First, since we assume
vision classifiers are built using an image-text embedding space trained through multi-modal con-
trastive learning, our method can also inherit limitations from the contrastive model and pre-training
dataset. For example, although we aim to leverage large and general-purpose image-caption datasets
in pre-training, the encoders may still not appropriately embed out-of-distribution examples far from
what the contrastive model was trained on. Misaligned or inaccurate pre-training data can also af-
fect encoder quality. Additionally, it is challenging to diagnose low-level visual attributes that are
difficult to describe in words, such as texture or object orientation (Leclerc et al., 2021). We con-
sider these fruitful directions for future work. Our method will also benefit from improvements in
multi-modal contrastive pre-training as these methods are improved.

5   C ONCLUSION
Our work reveals a valuable advantage of using vision classifiers built on top of multi-modal em-
bedding spaces learned through contrastive learning – the ability to diagnose and rectify the vision
classifiers using natural language inputs. We first use a combination of theoretical analysis and ex-
perimental findings to verify that cross-modal transferability exists; namely, that text inputs can act
as good proxies for image inputs. This then allows us to propose and validate a framework for diag-
nosing and rectifying vision classifiers using natural language inputs. Our work suggests promising
new directions both for achieving reliable and trustworthy computer vision models, and for the use
of cross-modal transferability in other problem domains.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS S TATEMENT
One of the main contributions of our work is an approach for diagnosing and rectifying vision clas-
sifiers trained using embeddings from a multi-modal contrastive model. We showcase experimental
results on identifying error slices and influential attributes. For example, our method can detect
failures caused by the lack of representation of certain races in the training set. In our FairFace
experiments, the prediction of gender (i.e., the label “female”) given an image was affected by race
(e.g., the race “black”). We further show that we can rectify this behavior using our approach. Hence,
we see our work as a contribution to the broader community concerned with model accountability
and model auditing, and to improving the responsible integration of AI into society.
However, it is also important to be aware of potential negative impacts brought about by our findings.
One can imagine an adversary who extends our approach and uses it to their advantage, perhaps
reinforcing racial or gender biases by fine-tuning a vision model using biased language prompts. Our
work also inherits limitations from the contrastive model and pre-training datasets used to obtain
the image and text encoders, as described in the Discussion section of our paper. We hope that
this statement raises awareness both of the importance of better model diagnosis and rectification
methods and of future directions of work to address limitations and potential negative impacts.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide open-source implementation of our work at https://github.com/
yuhui-zh15/drml. The implementations will enable researchers to reproduce all the ex-
periments described here as well as run their own analyses on additional multi-modal models and
datasets.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Tolga Bolukbasi, Kai-Wei Chang, James Y Zou, Venkatesh Saligrama, and Adam T Kalai. Man is to
  computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? debiasing word embeddings. In Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commer-
  cial gender classification. In Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT),
  2018.
Yeounoh Chung, Tim Kraska, Neoklis Polyzotis, Ki Hyun Tae, and Steven Euijong Whang. Slice
  finder: Automated data slicing for model validation. In International Conference on Data Engi-
  neering (ICDE), 2019.
Niv Cohen, Rinon Gal, Eli A Meirom, Gal Chechik, and Yuval Atzmon. ” this is my unicorn, fluffy”:
  Personalizing frozen vision-language representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01694, 2022.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
   2009.
Greg d’Eon, Jason d’Eon, James R Wright, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. The spotlight: A general
  method for discovering systematic errors in deep learning models. In Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT), 2022.
EleutherAI. Clasp: Contrastive language aminoacid sequence pretraining, 2021. URL https:
  //github.com/MicPie/clasp.
Sabri Eyuboglu, Maya Varma, Khaled Kamal Saab, Jean-Benoit Delbrouck, Christopher Lee-
  Messer, Jared Dunnmon, James Zou, and Christopher Re. Domino: Discovering systematic errors
  with cross-modal embeddings. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2022.
Rinon Gal, Yuval Alaluf, Yuval Atzmon, Or Patashnik, Amit H Bermano, Gal Chechik, and Daniel
  Cohen-Or. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image generation using textual
  inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618, 2022.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé Iii, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64
  (12):86–92, 2021.
Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2019.
Amirata Ghorbani, Abubakar Abid, and James Zou. Interpretation of neural networks is fragile. In
 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 2019a.
Amirata Ghorbani, James Wexler, James Y Zou, and Been Kim. Towards automatic concept-based
 explanations. In Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019b.
Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-supervised
   deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. In Conference on Neural Information Processing
   Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Dirk Hovy and Shannon L Spruit. The social impact of natural language processing. In Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2016.
Saachi Jain, Hannah Lawrence, Ankur Moitra, and Aleksander Madry. Distilling model failures as
  directions in latent space. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14754, 2022a.
Saachi Jain, Hadi Salman, Eric Wong, Pengchuan Zhang, Vibhav Vineet, Sai Vemprala, and Alek-
  sander Madry. Missingness bias in model debugging. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations (ICLR), 2022b.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
  Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
  with noisy text supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Gargi Joshi, Rahee Walambe, and Ketan Kotecha. A review on explainability in multimodal deep
  neural nets. IEEE Access, 9:59800–59821, 2021.
Kimmo Karkkainen and Jungseock Joo. Fairface: Face attribute dataset for balanced race, gender,
  and age for bias measurement and mitigation. In Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision (WACV), 2021.
Pang Wei Koh, Thao Nguyen, Yew Siang Tang, Stephen Mussmann, Emma Pierson, Been Kim,
  and Percy Liang. Concept bottleneck models. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2020.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.
Guillaume Leclerc, Hadi Salman, Andrew Ilyas, Sai Vemprala, Logan Engstrom, Vibhav Vineet, Kai
  Xiao, Pengchuan Zhang, Shibani Santurkar, Greg Yang, et al. 3db: A framework for debugging
  computer vision models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03805, 2021.
Weixin Liang, Yuhui Zhang, Yongchan Kwon, Serena Yeung, and James Zou. Mind the gap: Un-
 derstanding the modality gap in multi-modal contrastive representation learning. In Conference
 on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2014.
Evan Z Liu, Behzad Haghgoo, Annie S Chen, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa,
  Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. Just train twice: Improving group robustness without training
  group information. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2021.
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
Loic Matthey, Irina Higgins, Demis Hassabis, and Alexander Lerchner. dsprites: Dis-
  entanglement testing sprites dataset, 2017. URL https://github.com/deepmind/
  dsprites-dataset/.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben Hutchinson,
 Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards for model reporting. In
 Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT), 2019.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, and Amit H Bermano. Clipcap: Clip prefix for image captioning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.09734, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, Andrew Smart, Rebecca N White, Margaret Mitchell, Timnit Gebru, Ben
   Hutchinson, Jamila Smith-Loud, Daniel Theron, and Parker Barnes. Closing the ai accountabil-
   ity gap: Defining an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic auditing. In Conference on
   Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT), 2020.
Vikram V Ramaswamy, Sunnie SY Kim, and Olga Russakovsky. Fair attribute classification through
  latent space de-biasing. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
  2021.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. ” why should i trust you?” explaining
 the predictions of any classifier. In International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
 Mining (KDD), 2016.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2017.
Sahil Singla, Besmira Nushi, Shital Shah, Ece Kamar, and Eric Horvitz. Understanding failures
  of deep networks via robust feature extraction. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
Nimit Sohoni, Jared Dunnmon, Geoffrey Angus, Albert Gu, and Christopher Ré. No subclass left
  behind: Fine-grained robustness in coarse-grained classification problems. In Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Hu Xu, Gargi Ghosh, Po-Yao Huang, Dmytro Okhonko, Armen Aghajanyan, Florian Metze, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Christoph Feichtenhofer. Videoclip: Contrastive pre-training for zero-shot
  video-text understanding. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
  ing (EMNLP), 2021.
Lu Yuan, Dongdong Chen, Yi-Ling Chen, Noel Codella, Xiyang Dai, Jianfeng Gao, Houdong Hu,
  Xuedong Huang, Boxin Li, Chunyuan Li, et al. Florence: A new foundation model for computer
  vision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11432, 2021.
Yuhao Zhang, Hang Jiang, Yasuhide Miura, Christopher D Manning, and Curtis P Langlotz. Con-
  trastive learning of medical visual representations from paired images and text. In Machine Learn-
  ing for Healthcare (MLHC), 2022.
James Zou and Londa Schiebinger. Design ai so that it’s fair. Nature, 559(7714):324–326, 2018.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


OVERVIEW OF A PPENDIX
In this appendix, we supplement additional details of theory, datasets, experiments, and baselines.

        • In Appendix A, we provide more details about the modality gap geometry, a theoretical
          proof of cross-modal transferability given the modality gap, additional cross-modal trans-
          ferability results on MS-COCO and ImageNet.
        • In Appendix B, we provide details of four datasets (MS-COCO, Waterbirds, FairFace, and
          dSpritesV) used in our experiments, including data preprocessing, attributes, and prompts.
          We also provide the model and experimental details.
        • In Appendix C, we provide two baseline methods. First, we present the result using text-to-
          image generation for model diagnosis, which sometimes fails to generate fidelity images
          given text prompts. Second, we present the baseline method for slice discovery using
          DOMINO, which fails when error slices are absent in the dataset.

A     C ROSS - MODAL T RANSFERABILITY
A.1     M ODALITY G AP G EOMETRY

Figure 2 shows the modality gap phenomenon in various multi-modal contrastive learning models,
where inputs from two modalities are embedded at arm’s length in their shared representation space.
This phenomenon is caused by the combined effect of model initialization and optimization. Deep
neural networks have the cone effect — encoders will only map inputs to a small cone of the entire
representation space. Therefore, two cones will be created for a multi-modal model with two en-
coders. As a sequence, the modality gap occurs at the initialization stage. During optimization, the
contrastive loss will preserve the gap due to mismatched data (Liang et al., 2022).

                                          CLIP              VideoCLIP                ConVIRT                    CLASP
                                    Natural Image - Text   Natural Video - Text   Medical Image - Text   Amino-acid Sequence - Text


           UMAP
                  UMAP 2


                           UMAP 1


           SVD
                  SVD 2


                           SVD 1



Figure 2: Modality gap for multi-modal contrastive learning. Embeddings from two modalities
are visualized using UMAP and SVD. Figure credit: Liang et al. (2022).

Figure 3 shows four statistics that reveal important properties of the modality gap geometry.
    • The modality gap approximates a constant vector, particularly at the class level. We verify
      this by computing distributions over ∥g∥ (magnitude) and cos(g, Eg [g]) (direction). g is the
      gap between embeddings of paired data from two modalities.
    • The modality gap is orthogonal to the span of embeddings, and embeddings have zero mean
      in the subspace orthogonal to the modality gap. We verify this by computing distribu-
      tions over cos(x − Ex [x], Eg [g]) (orthogonality) and Ex [x − x g g ]i (center), where
                                                                        T ′ ′

      g = Eg [g]/∥Eg [g]∥ and i ∈ [d] denoting i-th dimension of the vector.
        ′


Based on our theoretical analysis in the next section, these findings suggest that cross-modal trans-
ferability is widely established in multi-modal contrastive learning.


                                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Geometry analysis of modality gap for various multi-modal contrastive represen-
tation spaces. The modality gap approximates a constant vector, indicated by the magnitude and
direction distributions. Modality gap is also orthogonal to the span of embeddings from two modal-
ities, and embeddings’ centers for both two modalities are zero vectors in the subspace orthogonal
to the gap, indicated by the orthogonality and centering distributions.
                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2   T HEORETICAL P ROOF FOR C ROSS -M ODAL T RANSFERABILITY

In this section, we expand and formally discuss what is in section 2.1. We theoretically explain
the intriguing cross-modal transferability phenomenon. We explain why the modality gap in the
multi-modal representation space does not prevent cross-modal transferability because of the unique
geometry of the modality gap.
                                  ∣C∣
For class c ∈ [∣C∣], let ec ∈ {0, 1} be a one-hot vector such that the c-th dimension is 1 and other
dimensions are 0. We define the following balanced target label vector ẽc ∶= ec − Ec′ [ec′ ], where
the expectation is over the distribution of classes on the image domain.
                                                                            ∣C∣×d
We consider learning a linear function hW (u) = W u, where W ∈ R           is the weight matrix
and u ∈ R is the image or text embedding. Given hW (u) and a label c, we consider the following
           d

quadratic loss:
                                                                        2
                              Lquad (hW (u), c) = ∥hW (u) − ẽc ∥2 .

The following proposition shows that when the gap between image and caption embeddings is the
same for all image-caption pairs and is orthogonal to the embedding span for each modality, a linear
model trained to minimize the quadratic loss on one modality transfers to the other modality without
loss of accuracy.
                                                          d
Proposition A.1. Suppose there exists a gap vector g ∈ R such that every pair of image embedding
x and caption embedding y satisfies g = x − y. Suppose the gap g is orthogonal to the span of
                       T      T ′                                   ′
image features (i.e., g x = g x for two image embeddings x and x ), and the image features have
zero mean in the subspace orthogonal to g (i.e., Ex [Πg (x)] = 0 where Πg (x) projects the vector
x to the subspace orthogonal to g). Then, for any λ > 0 and linear function hW (u) that minimizes
the regularized quadratic loss Ex,c [Lquad (hW (x), c)] + λ∥W ∥F , we have that
                                                                2


                                         hW (x) = hW (y)

Thus, cross-modal transferability happens.

                                  T       T   ′                                  ′
Proof of Proposition A.1. Since g x = g x for all image features x and x , we can find a τ ∈ R
such that x = Πg (x) + τ g. Notice that
                                              2
Ex,c [Lquad (hW (x), c)] = Ex,c [∥W x − ẽc ∥2 ]
                                                    2                                                  2
                        = ∥Ex [W x] − Ec [ẽc ]∥2 + Ex,c [∥(W x − ẽc ) − (Ex [W x] − Ec [ẽc ])∥2 ]
                                                    2                                2
                        = ∥Ex [W x] − Ec [ẽc ]∥2 + Ex,c [∥W Πg (x) − ẽc ∥2 ]
                                                                2                           2
                        = ∥W Ex [Πg (x)] + τ W g − Ec [ẽc ]∥2 + Ex,c [∥W Πg (x) − ẽc ∥2 ].

Since Ex [Πg (x)] = 0 and Ec [ẽc ] = 0, the first term reduces to τ ∥W g∥2 . Notice that the second
                                                                    2        2

term in the loss decomposition only involves W ’s components that are orthogonal to g. Thus the
minimization of the second term is independent of the minimization of the first term. As a result,
any W that minimizes the regularized quadratic loss must satisfy W g = 0.
For a pair of image and text features x, y, since x−y = g and W g = 0, we have hW (x) = hW (y),
which finishes the proof.

A.3   A DDITIONAL C ROSS - MODAL T RANSFERABILITY R ESULTS

MS-COCO. In the main paper, we only report image-to-text transfer, where we train a classifier
on image embeddings and test on text embeddings. Here we report the full results, including text-
to-image transfer, in Table 7.

ImageNet. In the main paper, we report cross-modal transferability on the MS-COCO dataset.
Here we report cross-modal transferability results using the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al., 2009).
We split ImageNet validation set into 40K / 10K images for training / evaluation. We apply OpenAI


                                                   16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                 In-Modal Evaluation                Cross-Modal Evaluation         Consist
   Model     Transfer
                         M        Loss↓   mF1↑     MF1↑       M       Loss↓   mF1↑     MF1↑         ency↑
  Random         -           I   0.6939   0.0655     0.0443   T      0.6938     0.0696    0.0437   0.8644
                                          Default Modality Gap
              I→T        I       0.0501   0.7276 0.6790 T            0.1188     0.5642    0.5429   0.9637
   Linear
              T →I       T       0.0580   0.6983 0.6631 I            0.1572     0.5320    0.4833   0.9527
              I→T        I       0.0480   0.7523 0.7158 T            0.0888     0.6350    0.6135   0.9789
      MLP
              T →I       T       0.0572   0.7119 0.6826 I            0.0750     0.6359    0.5929   0.9795
                                          Closing Modality Gap
              I→T        I       0.0498   0.7280 0.6777 T            0.0719     0.6554    0.6168   0.9842
   Linear
              T →I       T       0.0578   0.6988 0.6628 I            0.0660     0.5782    0.4767   0.9858
              I→T        I       0.0483   0.7495 0.7130 T            0.0885     0.6503    0.6358   0.9806
      MLP
              T →I       T       0.0573   0.7073 0.6763 I            0.0685     0.6603    0.6173   0.9801

Table 7: Cross-modal transferability in multi-modal contrastive representation learning. We
train a classifier using CLIP’s image embeddings and test the trained classifier using text embed-
dings, vice versa, on the MS-COCO multi-label classification dataset. Despite the modality gap,
classification boundaries learned from one modality are transferable to another modality. Closing
the modality gap further improves cross-modal transferability without harm to in-modal evaluation.
Notations: I - Image, T - Text, M - Modality, mF1 - Micro F1, MF1 - Macro F1, Random - A
randomly initialized linear model.


CLIP’s 80 prompts to 1000 ImageNet class names and get 80K texts, and we split them into 64K /
16K for training / evaluation. All the experimental settings are the same as MS-COCO experiments.
Results are shown in Table 8.
Again, despite the modality gap, we find that the classification boundaries learned from one modality
are transferable to the other modality. When a linear classifier is trained on image embeddings and
achieves 70.86% image classification accuracy, directly feeding the text embeddings to the trained
classifier achieves 85.24% accuracy. The transfer from text to image is much worse than from
image to text, because the texts we used are generated from prompts and thus lack diversity to train
a classifier with good decision boundaries. Closing the modality gap improves the transferability in
most cases.

                                                    Image-to-Text       Text-to-Image
                     Split
                                                   Linear    MLP       Linear    MLP
                                         Default Modality Gap
                     In-Modal Evaluation       0.7086 0.6687           0.9974    0.9951
                     Cross-Modal Evaluation 0.8524 0.7758              0.4953    0.4552
                                        Closing Modality Gap
                     In-Modal Evaluation      0.7048 0.6683            0.9978    0.9949
                     Cross-Modal Evaluation 0.8754 0.7892              0.5050    0.4438

Table 8: Cross-modal transferability in multi-modal contrastive representation learning using
the ImageNet dataset. We split ImageNet validation set 50K images to 40K / 10K for training and
evaluation. Texts are generated using OpenAI’s 80 prompts multiply by 1000 class names.



A.4    T HEORETICAL I NTUITION FOR M ODALITY G AP AND C ROSS -M ODAL
       T RANSFERABILITY

In this section, we provide theoretical insights about the intriguing modality gap and cross-modal
transferability phenomenon. We show that after optimizing multi-modal contrastive loss, there is a
modality gap between image embeddings and text embeddings, and there is a linear classifier trained
on image embeddings that is guaranteed to generalize to text embeddings regardless of the modality
gap.


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Basic Notations. Given an image x and a text z, we use an image encoder f (⋅) and a text encoder
g(⋅) to map them to the shared D-dimensional representation space. We denote f (x) ∈ R as
                                                                                            D
                                 D
image embedding and g(z) ∈ R as text embedding. Given N images and M texts, we denote the
                                                 N ×D
concatenated image embedding matrix as F ∈ R            and concatenated text embedding matrix as
       M ×D
G∈R         , which is shown in the following equation:

                        ⎡
                        ⎢ f (x1 ) ⎤
                                 T
                                   ⎥                    ⎡
                                                        ⎢ g(z1 ) ⎤
                                                                T
                                                                  ⎥
                        ⎢
                        ⎢          ⎥
                                   ⎥                    ⎢
                                                        ⎢         ⎥
                                                                  ⎥
                     F =⎢          ⎥                  G=⎢         ⎥
                                        N ×D                           M ×D
                        ⎢
                        ⎢    ...   ⎥
                                   ⎥ ∈R                 ⎢
                                                        ⎢   ...   ⎥
                                                                  ⎥ ∈R                             (1)
                        ⎢
                        ⎢          ⎥                    ⎢         ⎥
                        ⎣f (xN ) ⎥                      ⎣g(zM ) ⎥
                                                        ⎢
                                 T                              T
                                   ⎦                              ⎦


Image-Text Connection Graph. Given an image x and a text z, we denote the probability of
(x, z) being an image-text pair as p(x, z). With the probability definition, we have ∑x,z p(x, z) = 1.
                                                                                N ×M
Given N images and M texts, we denote the probability matrix as P ∈ R                . Note that the
probability matrix P is a sparse matrix with most elements as zero, because most image-text pairs
are mismatched and cannot be collected (e.g., a cat image with a dog caption). P can be viewed as
the adjacency matrix of a bi-particle graph G = ({x, z}, {p(x, z)}), where all the images and texts
are the vertices of the graph and their connection probabilities are the edges. The adjacency matrix
of this graph can be written as the following equation:

                                   ⎡
                                   ⎢ p(x1 , z1 ) ... p(x1 , zM ) ⎤⎥
                                   ⎢                              ⎥
                                P =⎢
                                   ⎢
                                   ⎢     ...     ...      ...     ⎥
                                                                  ⎥
                                                                  ⎥                                (2)
                                   ⎢
                                   ⎢                              ⎥
                                   ⎣ p(x   ,
                                         N 1 z ) ... p(x N M ⎥
                                                            , z ) ⎦

We have the following theorem which shows the connection between multi-modal contrastive learn-
ing with the partitioning of the connection graph defined above. This result can be viewed as a
simple generalization of the results in HaoChen et al. (2021) to the multi-modal setting.
Theorem 1 (Equivalence of Multi-modal Contrastive Loss and Graph Partitioning). With the mild
assumption that every image and every text pair has equal presence probability ∀x ∶ px =
∑z p(x, z) = N1 , ∀z ∶ pz = ∑x p(x, z) = M  1
                                              , minimizing the multi-modal contrastive loss in
Equation 3 is equivalent to minimizing ∥P − F G ∥F :
                                                  T   2



                                         T                               T       2
                  L = −2Ex,z [f (x) g(z)] + N M Ex∼Px ,z∼Pz [(f (x) g(z)) ]                        (3)


Proof of Theorem 1.     The following equation proves Theorem 1:

                                 T   2
                  min ∥P − F G ∥F
                                             T               T       2               2
                = min ∑ −2p(x, z)f (x) g(z) + ∑ (f (x) g(z)) + ∑ p(x, z)
                       x,z                         x,z                   x,z
                                             T               T       2
                = min ∑ −2p(x, z)f (x) g(z) + ∑ (f (x) g(z))
                       x,z                         x,z
                                                                                                   (4)
                                             T                1 1       T     2
                = min ∑ −2p(x, z)f (x) g(z) + N M ∑               (f (x) g(z))
                       x,z                                x,z
                                                              N M
                                     T                                   T       2
                = min −2Ex,z [f (x) g(z)] + N M Ex∼Px ,z∼Pz [(f (x) g(z)) ]


Connection to CLIP Contrastive Loss. Given N images and N texts, with the assumption ∀i, j ∶
p(xi , zj ) = N1 1[i = j], the CLIP contrastive loss is shown in Equation 5 and is very similar to the
contrastive loss in Equation 3.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     LCLIP
       ⎡
       ⎢        exp (f (xi ) g(zi ))
                            T
                                               exp (f (xi ) g(zi )) ⎤
                                                           T
                                                                     ⎥
   1   ⎢                                                             ⎥
     ∑⎢⎢
       ⎢
                                                                     ⎥
                                                                     ⎥
                                             ∑j exp (f (xj ) g(zi )) ⎥
  =      − log                         − log
   N i ⎢
       ⎢       ∑j exp (f (xi ) g(zj ))
                              T                              T       ⎥
                                                                     ⎥
       ⎣                                                             ⎦
   1             T                           T                           T
  = ∑ [−2f (xi ) g(zi ) + log ∑ exp (f (xi ) g(zj )) + log ∑ exp (f (xj ) g(zi ))]
   N i                          j                              j

      −2          T         1                      T                              T
  =      ∑ f (xi ) g(zi ) +   (∑ log ∑ exp (f (xi ) g(zj )) + ∑ log ∑ exp (f (xj ) g(zi )))
      N i                   N i      j                        i     j

                   T                                        T                           ′ T
  = − 2Ex,z [f (x) g(z)] + Ex∼Px ,z∼Pz [log ∑ exp(f (x) g(z )) + log ∑ exp(f (x ) g(z))]
                                                                  ′

                                                    ′                           ′
                                                z                           x
                                                                                                  (5)

Let us now consider the modality gap phenomenon in the above mentioned contrastive learned
representation space.
Proposition 1 (Modality Gap). After optimizing the multi-modal contrastive loss defined in Equa-
tion 3, image embedding and text embeddings will be separated in the shared presentation space,
causing the modality gap phenomenon.

Proof of Proposition 1. Since optimizing the multi-modal contrastive loss defined in Equation 3
is equivalent to minimizing ∥P −F G ∥F , achieving the minima of ∥P −F G ∥F does not indicate
                                      T 2                                      T 2

image embeddings F and text embeddings G are close in the embedding space. For instance, since
for any scalar c > 0, we can scale F by a factor of c and G by a factor of 1/c without changing the
contrastive loss, we know that there exist many solutions that both achieve the minimal loss and also
exhibit modality gap.
Now we consider the cross-modal transferability phenomenon on downstream classification prob-
lems using the above mentioned contrastive learned representations. We first introduce the following
notations for the downstream task’s labels.

Labels of Images and Texts. Given an image x with the label yx ∈ [C], where C is the number
of classes, we denote its one-hot representation as eyx = [1[yx = 1], ..., 1[yx = C]] . Given N
                                                                                       T

images, we denote the image label matrix as Yx = [eyx1 , ..., eyxN ] ∈ {0, 1}
                                                       T       T              N ×C
                                                                                   . We use similar
notations yz , eyz , Yz for the text.
We make the following assumption which says the label of a text can be predicted by the labels of
the images that it is paired with.
Assumption 1. With the definition of connection probablity matrix P , image label matrix Yx and
                                T     1
text label matrix Yz , we have P Yx = M Yz .

Intuition of Assumption 1. In most realistic settings, the connection between an image and a text
                                                                                      1
p(x, z) > 0 if yx = yz and p(x, z) = 0 if yx ≠ yz . Therefore, ∀z ∶ ∑x p(x, z)eyx = M   eyz . The
following equation proves the matrix form:

       ⎡ p(x1 , z1 ) ... p(xN , z1 ) ⎤    ⎡
                                          ⎢ eyx1 ⎤
                                             T
                                                 ⎥   ⎡
                                                     ⎢ ∑i p(xi , z1 )eyxi ⎤
                                                                       T
                                                                          ⎥       ⎡ eT ⎤
 T     ⎢
       ⎢
       ⎢
                                        ⎥
                                        ⎥
                                        ⎥
                                          ⎢
                                          ⎢
                                          ⎢
                                                 ⎥
                                                 ⎥
                                                 ⎥
                                                     ⎢
                                                     ⎢
                                                     ⎢
                                                                          ⎥
                                                                          ⎥
                                                                          ⎥   1 ⎢ ⎢
                                                                                  ⎢
                                                                                  ⎢
                                                                                      yz1 ⎥
                                                                                          ⎥
                                                                                          ⎥
                                                                                          ⎥   1
P Yx = ⎢
       ⎢     ...      ...      ...      ⎥
                                        ⎥ ⎢
                                          ⎢  ... ⎥
                                                 ⎥ = ⎢
                                                     ⎢        ...         ⎥
                                                                          ⎥ =   ⋅ ⎢
                                                                                  ⎢   ... ⎥
                                                                                          ⎥ =   ⋅ Yz
       ⎢
       ⎢            )                 ) ⎥
                                        ⎥ ⎢
                                          ⎢      ⎥
                                                 ⎥   ⎢
                                                     ⎢                    ⎥
                                                                          ⎥   M   ⎢
                                                                                  ⎢       ⎥
                                                                                          ⎥   M
       ⎣ p(x 1 , zM   ... p(x N  , zM     ⎢e
                                             T
                                                 ⎥
                                        ⎦ ⎣ yxN ⎦ ⎣ i⎢ ∑ p(x  , z    )e
                                                             i M yxi ⎦
                                                                        T
                                                                          ⎥       ⎢ e
                                                                                      T
                                                                                  ⎣ yzM ⎦ ⎥
                                                                                                 (6)
Proposition 2 (Cross-modal Transferability). After optimizing the multi-modal contrastive loss in-
troduced in Equation 3 with infinite encoder dimension D = ∞, we can find a linear classifier that
only uses image representations but is transferable to text representations. More specifically, the
                                 T        D×C
weight of the linear layer is M F Yx ∈ R      , which can be viewed as a class-mean classifier.


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                         T
Proof of Proposition 2. After optimizing the contrastive loss, we have P = F G (Theorem 1).
                 Yz (Assumption 1), we have G(M F Yx ) = M (F G ) Yx = M P Yx = Yz .
       T       1                                     T               T T         T
With P Yx = M
                                             T
The following equation explains why M F Yx is a class-mean classifier:
                                         ⎡
                                         ⎢ eyx1 ⎤
                                             T
                                                ⎥
                                         ⎢
                                         ⎢      ⎥
M F Yx = M [f (x1 ) ...
      T                                  ⎢ ... ⎥
                                f (xN )] ⎢      ⎥
                                                ⎥ = M [∑x f (x)1[yx = 1]       ... ∑x f (x)1[yx = C]]
                                         ⎢
                                         ⎢      ⎥
                                                ⎥
                                         ⎢
                                         ⎢ e
                                            T   ⎥
                                                ⎥
                                         ⎣ yx ⎦
                                             N
                                                                                                       (7)
Intuitively, the class-mean linear head is very similar to the trained linear head. For instance, learning
the linear head with one step of gradient descent starting from zero initialization would recover
the class-mean linear head. We study the class-mean linear head here because it’s more amenable
to theoretical analysis. This provides intuition why cross-modal transferability can be achieved
regardless of the modality gap.

B     DATASETS AND E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
In this section, we report details of four datasets: MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014), Waterbirds (Sagawa
et al., 2020), FairFace (Karkkainen & Joo, 2021), and dSpritesV (Matthey et al., 2017), and details
of two major experiments.

B.1       DATA P RE - PROCESSING

MS-COCO. We follow the standard MS-COCO dataset split, which includes 118K / 5K images
for training / validation. Each image is annotated with multiple objects from 80 categories and five
human-written captions. We randomly select one caption from five captions. Therefore, we have
118K / 5K image-caption pairs with multiple labels for training / validation.

Waterbirds. We follow the standard Waterbirds dataset split, which includes 4.8K / 1.2K images
for training / validation. Data samples can be viewed in Figure 6 and 7.

FairFace. We resample the training set using the demographics from the state of Montana, which
includes 92.8% White, 6.4% Indian, 0.5% Asian, and 0.3% Black. The final dataset contains 17K /
11K images for training / validation. Data samples can be viewed in Figure 6 and 7.

dSpritesV. We use our own scripts to reproduce a variant of the dSprites dataset and name it
dSpritesV. We use six colors (red, pink, orange, green, cyan, blue), four locations (upper left, upper
right, lower left, lower right), and three sizes (small, medium, large) to create triangles and squares
with a scale ranging from 0.8 to 1.2. Each attribute is uniformly sampled, and we synthesize 10K
images. We only use 80% orange triangle and 80% green square for training. Finally, it has 1.3K /
8.7K images for training / validation. Data samples can be viewed in Figure 6 and 7.

B.2       ATTRIBUTES

Here we list the known attributes during the data collection of the three datasets. We do not cherry-
pick attributes and just use these attributes for our experiments.

Waterbirds.      Two attributes are used: species (200 values) and places (4 places).

FairFace.      Three attributes are used: races (7 values), ages (9 values), and genders (2 values).

dSpritesV. Three attributes are used: colors (6 values), size (3 values), and shapes (2 values).

B.3       P ROMPT E NGINEERING

We use the prompt engineering techniques proposed in CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) for our experi-
ments.


                                                    20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Waterbirds. We use “{species}, {place}.” as the raw prompt, and “a photo of a {species} in the
{place}.” as the engineered prompt. Therefore, we can generate 200 × 4 = 800 text inputs.

FairFace. We use “{age adjective}, {race}, {gender}.” as the raw prompt, and “a photo of a
{race} {age adjective} {gender}.” as the engineered prompt. Therefore, we can generate 7 × 9 × 2 =
126 text inputs. The age adjectives are infant (0-2), little (3-9), teenage (10-19), young (20-29), adult
(30-39), middle-aged (40-49), senior (50-59), elderly (60-69), and very old (more than 70).

dSpritesV. We use “{size}, {color}, {shape}.” as the raw prompt, and “{size} {color} {shape}.”
as the engineered prompt. Therefore, we can generate 3 × 6 × 2 = 36 text inputs.

B.4   P ROMPT E NSEMBLE

We use OpenAI CLIP’s 80 prompts (Radford et al., 2021) to augment text inputs by 80 times. Parts
of them are shown in Figure 4.

B.5   E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

Model Details. Unless explicitly stated, we use CLIP (ViT-B/32) for all experiments, encoding
images and texts in the same 512-dimensional space. Linear layer maps input dimension 512 to the
number of classes. Multi-layer perception uses the hidden size as 512.

Cross-modal Transferability Training Details. For each image-caption pair, we use CLIP’s im-
age and text encoder (Radford et al., 2021) to get its image embedding and text embedding. We do
not use image augmentation techniques during training and inference. We train the linear model or
multi-layer perception for 25 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of 0.001.
During training, CLIP’s image and text encoder are fixed. We pick the best model based on the
lowest validation loss on the training modality.

Classifiers Training Details. For each image in the dataset, we use CLIP’s image encoder (Rad-
ford et al., 2021) to get its image embedding. We do not use image augmentation techniques during
training and inference. We train the linear model or multi-layer perception for 25 epochs using the
Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of 0.001. During training, CLIP’s image encoder is fixed.
We pick the best model based on the lowest validation loss on images.

Model Rectification Training Details. For each text from error slices generated by attribute com-
position and prompt engineering, we use CLIP’s text encoder (Radford et al., 2021) to get its text
embedding. We continue training the pre-trained linear model or multi-layer perception for 10
epochs using the Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of 0.001. During training, CLIP’s text
encoder is fixed. We pick the best model based on the lowest validation loss on texts.

B.6   D ISCUSSION : I S USING ATTRIBUTES AN A PPROPRIATE C HOICE FOR M ODEL
      D IAGNOSIS ?

In this work, we heavily rely on attributes for model diagnosis and rectification. A natural question
is what is the rationale for using attributes in these processes, and how much will attribute selection
affect the validity of our method.
We first clarify that in our experiments, we did not cherry-pick attributes and just used the known
attributes from the data curation process of the three datasets. More broadly, we believe attributes
are useful for model diagnosis, because it is not hard to define a meaningful set of attributes given
a specific task; there are many known attributes given any dataset, and sometimes there may be
specific attributes of interest for which we wish to test model vulnerability. For example, for a self-
driving car application, we can easily come up with attributes such as weather, traffics, pedestrians,
buildings, etc. For any class in ImageNet classification, such as guitar, it is straightforward to think
about its color, material, location, size, etc. We agree that an initial set of chosen attributes may not
be perfect for reflecting all the essential errors, and better attribute selection can reveal more model


                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


vulnerabilities. Therefore, this process can be improved with human involvement to iteratively
design better attributes based on the model feedback, which can be useful for future works.
While attribute selection is important and may require human involvement, our method is still very
useful because we provide an easy way to test the model under many cases. Like software testing,
there is generally no free lunch for model diagnosis, and it is impossible to design a general diagnosis
framework for any task without any prior knowledge. We have already significantly reduced the
diagnosis cost compared to previous works. Previous works all assume a large collection of labeled
images is available for model testing, which is unrealistic given the extreme difficulty of collecting
diverse image inputs and the cost of data annotation. Our method instead provides a way to test
sensitive attributes for which you may even have no image data. For any specific task, it is always
much easier to come up with a meaningful set of attributes and then generate a large collection of
novel text inputs by combining different attributes than collecting corresponding images, thanks to
the easy-to-manipulate and compositional nature of the language modality. More importantly, the
combination of defined attributes naturally defines human-interpretable data slices, whereas image-
based slice discovery methods do not directly provide a text summary of the error slice.
Finally, we hope to clarify that one of the main contributions of our work is to theoretically and em-
pirically demonstrate a pervasive phenomenon in multi-modal contrastive learning —— cross-modal
transferability, which allows texts to be effective proxies for images. Our method performance, in
terms of correlation strength between model performances on images and corresponding texts, is
independent of attribute selection. It is just more errors can be discovered with more human in-
volvement in this process. Moreover, it is possible to collect a large set of text inputs in a different
way to diagnose vision models instead of using the attribute-based combination. For example, one
may be able to prompt large language models such as GPT-3 in a few-shot fashion to generate a
large set of descriptions of certain classes, and then feed these inputs into vision models for diag-
nosis. We leave this to future work. Overall, diagnosing vision models using text modality is much
more desirable than image modality, because language enables us to easily generate realistic and
diverse inputs with better control and manipulation.


C     BASELINES

C.1   L ANGUAGE - BASED V ISION M ODEL D IAGNOSIS BASELINE : T EXT- TO -I MAGE
      G ENERATION

In Figure 5, we show the baseline method to diagnose vision models using language — text-to-image
generation. The method generates real images to test models using the text-to-image generation
model.
From the results, we can understand why this baseline is worse than our method, which does not
require explicitly generating images. While significant progress has been made in the text-to-image
generation field, state-of-the-art text-to-image generation models (Rombach et al., 2022) still fail to
generate fidelity images.
In addition, text-to-image generation is computationally expensive, requiring thousands of more
computations than our approach.

C.2   E RROR S LICE D ISCOVERY BASELINE : DOMINO

In Figure 6 and 7, we show the discovered error slices using the baseline slice discovery method,
DOMINO (Eyuboglu et al., 2022).
In real-world applications, it is unrealistic to assume a large set of labeled images from different
distributions is available. Therefore, the most critical challenge for slice discovery is data. In this
work, we circumvent the data challenge by using language to synthesize extensive test examples.

C.3   M ODEL R ECTIFICATION BASELINES : GDRO AND JTT

Our approach rectifies model misbehaviors by correcting the data bias. Another series of methods to
tackle these errors are robust training techniques, such as GDRO (Sagawa et al., 2020) and JTT (Liu


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


et al., 2021), which explicitly optimizes each slice’s performance during training. Compared to
them, one of the distinct advantages of our approach is that we do not require any visual data during
the rectification process. Both GDRO and JTT require image data present in the training set. There-
fore, they cannot fix errors on unseen data. GDRO even requires attribute annotations on images,
which is highly time-consuming and cost-prohibitive for most real-world applications. Moreover,
our method can also be combined with robust training techniques when image data and attribute
annotations are available, and we leave this to future work.
Here we provide implementation details of GDRO and JTT:

GDRO. We reproduce GDRO on our datasets by adopting the official GDRO loss implementation
to our code base. We use all the same hyperparameters they use in the paper, where important
hyperparameters include l2 penalty strength α = 0.2 and group adjustment γ = 0.1. We train a
linear classifier for 25 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of 0.001. During
training, CLIP’s image encoder is fixed. We pick the best model based on the lowest validation loss.

JTT. We reproduce JTT on our datasets by implementing the algorithm by ourselves. We use all
the same hyperparameters they use in the paper. We also perform a hyperparameter search on the
upsampling weight λup ∈ {5, 20, 50}, which is a very important hyperparameter based on the paper.
The best λup is 20 for Waterbirds and 5 for FairFace. We train a linear classifier for 25 epochs using
the Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of 0.001 for round 1 and round 2. During training,
CLIP’s image encoder is fixed. We pick the best model based on the lowest validation loss.


                                                 23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


openai_imagenet_template = [
    lambda c: f"a bad photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of many {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a sculpture of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of the hard to see {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a low resolution photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a rendering of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"graffiti of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a bad photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a cropped photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a tattoo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"the embroidered {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of a hard to see {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a bright photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of a clean {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of a dirty {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a dark photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a drawing of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of my {c}.",
    lambda c: f"the plastic {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of the cool {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a close-up photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a black and white photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a painting of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a painting of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a pixelated photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a sculpture of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a bright photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a cropped photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a plastic {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of the dirty {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a jpeg corrupted photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a blurry photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a good photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a rendering of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a {c} in a video game.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of one {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a doodle of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a close-up photo of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"the origami {c}.",
    lambda c: f"the {c} in a video game.",
    lambda c: f"a sketch of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a doodle of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a origami {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a low resolution photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"the toy {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a rendition of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of the clean {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of a large {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a rendition of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of a nice {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a photo of a weird {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a blurry photo of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a cartoon {c}.",
    lambda c: f"art of a {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a sketch of the {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a embroidered {c}.",
    lambda c: f"a pixelated photo of a {c}.",
]

Figure 4: A subset of the 80 prompts form OpenAI we use to augment text inputs for prompt
ensembling.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

           Text prompt             Well generated examples              Poorly generated examples


            “A photo of a
          Chuck will Widow
             in the lake
              natural.”


           “A photo of a
          Shiny Cowbird in
            the bamboo
              forest.”


  Well-generated examples (columns 2-3) are realistic and correctly reflect the bird species and background
location described in the text prompts. Poorly generated images either do not include the bird species (column
4) or are noticeably unnatural (column 5). Specifically, the top image in column 5 includes a bird with lobster
                      claws as its head — a rather unusual phenomenon in the real world

           Text prompt             Well generated examples               Poorly generated examples


           “The face of a
             white adult
              woman.”


         “The face of a east
           asian teenage
                boy.”


     Well-generated examples (columns 2-3) are realistic and correctly reflect the ethnicity and age group
   described in the text prompts. Poorly generated images include more than one person (column 4), do not
include the person’s face (column 5 bottom), or are noticeably unrealistic (column 5 top). For instance, the top
  image in column 5 includes a woman with arms protruding out of her chest, which is rare in the real world.

           Text prompt             Well generated examples              Poorly generated examples


            “Large green
              triangle.”


             “Small red
              square.”


  Well-generated examples (columns 2-3) correctly reflect the shape and color described in the text prompt.
    Poorly generated images either include incorrect shapes (column 4-5 top) or are misinterpreted due to
 polysemy (column 4-5 bottom). For instance, the phrase ”red square” was misinterpreted by our model as a
                                          historic site in Moscow.

Figure 5: Text-to-image generation results on Waterbirds, FairFace, and dSpitesV using the state-
of-the-art generation model (Rombach et al., 2022).

                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             Top 5 Images With the Lowest Correct Class   Top 3 DOMINO Generated Text
                                                 Prediction Probability In Each Slice       Descriptions For Each Slice


                                                                                             1. a photo of the coast guard
   Top 3 Worst Performing Slices   Slice 1                                                  2. a photo of coast guard
                                                                                            3. a photo of west coast guard
       DOMINO Discovered


                                                                                            1. a photo of a horned owl
                                   Slice 2                                                  2. a photo of the forest
                                                                                            3. a photo of a redwood


                                                                                            1. a photo of the forest
                                   Slice 3                                                  2. a photo of a horned owl
                                                                                            3. a photo of a mammoth



For in-distribution Waterbird, the text descriptions generated from DOMINO do not elucidate which attributes
 are causing misclassifications. In addition, some of the descriptions are incorrectly generated. For instance,
                        ”coast guards” are not present in any of the photos in Slice 1.

                                             Top 5 Images With the Lowest Correct Class   Top 3 DOMINO Generated Text
                                                 Prediction Probability In Each Slice       Descriptions For Each Slice


                                                                                            1. a photo of an orphan girl
                                   Slice 1                                                  2. a photo of a young girl
   Top 3 Worst Performing Slices


                                                                                            3. a photo of our little girl
       DOMINO Discovered


                                                                                             1. a photo of her sixteenth
                                                                                                birthday
                                   Slice 2                                                   2. a photo of her eighteenth
                                                                                                birthday
                                                                                             3. a photo of a young girl



                                                                                            1. a photo of a mysterious man
                                                                                            2. a photo of a compelling man
                                   Slice 3
                                                                                            3. a photo of an undisclosed
                                                                                               man


  For in-distribution Fairface, DOMINO is unable to discover the correct error slices. Instead of slices for
 minority groups, DOMINO discovered slices for the prevalent ethnic group in the dataset. Furthermore, the
                      generated descriptions failed to include the key attribute — race.

                                             Top 5 Images With the Lowest Correct Class   Top 3 DOMINO Generated Text
                                                 Prediction Probability In Each Slice       Descriptions For Each Slice


                                                                                            1. a photo of the slogan
                                                                                               appears
                                   Slice 1
   Top 3 Worst Performing Slices


                                                                                            2. a photo of the slogan
                                                                                            3. a photo of the masthead
       DOMINO Discovered


                                                                                            1. a photo of outfielders
                                   Slice 2                                                  2. a photo of a masonic lodge
                                                                                            3. a photo of a masonic


                                                                                            1. a photo of height difference
                                   Slice 3                                                  2. a photo of a plumber
                                                                                            3. a photo of the alphabet



For in-distribution dSpritesV, DOMINO failed to discover the most critical error slices - slices with spurious
 correlations (orange squares & green triangles) and slices with unseen data (pink triangle). The generated
                            descriptions also do not reflect images in the slices.


Figure 6: Discovered error slices on in-distribution Waterbirds, FairFace, and dSpitesV datasets
using the state-of-the-art slice discovery method DOMINO (Eyuboglu et al., 2022). DOMINO is
unable to discover most of the top error slices. The generated text descriptions often do not reflect
images in the slice accurately.
                                                                       26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             Top 5 Images With the Lowest Correct Class   Top 3 DOMINO Generated Text
                                                 Prediction Probability In Each Slice       Descriptions For Each Slice



                                                                                            1. a photo of the forest
   Top 3 Worst Performing Slices   Slice 1                                                  2. a photo of a horned owl
                                                                                            3. a photo of a mammoth
       DOMINO Discovered


                                                                                            1. a photo of a redwood
                                   Slice 2                                                  2. photo of the forest
                                                                                            3. a photo of the woodland


                                                                                             1. a photo of the forest
                                   Slice 3                                                   2. a photo of a horned owl
                                                                                             3. a photo of a mammoth



 For out-of-distribution Waterbird, DOMINO was unable to generate text that clearly defines the source of
misclassification for each slice. Moreover, the some of the descriptions do not accurately describe the images.
                         For example, ”mammoths” are never included in any images.

                                             Top 5 Images With the Lowest Correct Class   Top 3 DOMINO Generated Text
                                                 Prediction Probability In Each Slice       Descriptions For Each Slice


                                                                                            1. a photo of a boy
                                                                                            2. a photo of a small boy
                                   Slice 1
   Top 3 Worst Performing Slices


                                                                                            3. a photo of a younger
                                                                                               brother
       DOMINO Discovered


                                                                                            1. a photo of an orphan girl
                                                                                            2. a photo of an adolescent
                                   Slice 2                                                     girl
                                                                                            3. a photo of a creole girl



                                                                                            1. a photo of her eighteenth
                                                                                               birthday
                                   Slice 3
                                                                                            2. a photo of our little girl
                                                                                            3. a photo of lottie


  For out-of-distribution Fairface, DOMINO is able to discover the some correct error slices. However, the
generated descriptions failed to provide any insights as to why the model fail for these slices. Specifically, the
                    generated descriptions do not include keywords for the race attribute.

                                             Top 5 Images With the Lowest Correct Class   Top 3 DOMINO Generated Text
                                                 Prediction Probability In Each Slice       Descriptions For Each Slice


                                                                                            1. a photo of national
                                                                                               geographic society
                                   Slice 1
   Top 3 Worst Performing Slices


                                                                                            2. a photo of orange juice
                                                                                            3. a photo of the upgrade logo
       DOMINO Discovered


                                                                                            1. a photo of orange juice
                                                                                            2. a photo of an orange
                                   Slice 2                                                  3. a photo of a nickelodeon
                                                                                               logo



                                                                                            1. a photo of the emerald
                                                                                            2. a photo of the emerald
                                   Slice 3
                                                                                               necklace
                                                                                            3. a photo of ginger ale


   For out-of-distribution dSpritesV, DOMINO is able to discover slices with spurious correlation (orange
squares & green triangles). However, the generated text descriptions do not include attributes that contribute to
 the spurious correlation. Additionally, DOMINO did not discover slices with unseen data (pink triangles).


Figure 7: Discovered error slices on out-of-distribution Waterbirds, FairFace, and dSpitesV
datasets using the state-of-the-art slice discovery method DOMINO (Eyuboglu et al., 2022).
DOMINO was able to capture some, but not all, error slices. Furthermore, artificially generating
out-of-distribution data for evaluation remains challenging in real-world settings.
                                                                       27
