C AUSAL R EASONING IN THE P RESENCE OF L ATENT
C ONFOUNDERS VIA N EURAL ADMG L EARNING
 Matthew Ashman2∗ , Chao Ma1∗, Agrin Hilmkil1 , Joel Jennings1 , Cheng Zhang1
 1
   Microsoft Research Cambridge 2 University of Cambridge
 mca39@cam.ac.uk , {chaoma,agrinhilmkil,joeljennings,chezha}@microsoft.com



                                                A BSTRACT

             Latent confounding has been a long-standing obstacle for causal reasoning from
             observational data. One popular approach is to model the data using acyclic di-
             rected mixed graphs (ADMGs), which describe ancestral relations between vari-
             ables using directed and bidirected edges. However, existing methods using AD-
             MGs are based on either linear functional assumptions or a discrete search that is
             complicated to use and lacks computational tractability for large datasets. In this
             work, we further extend the existing body of work and develop a novel gradient-
             based approach to learning an ADMG with non-linear functional relations from
             observational data. We first show that the presence of latent confounding is iden-
             tifiable under the assumptions of bow-free ADMGs with non-linear additive noise
             models. With this insight, we propose a novel neural causal model based on au-
             toregressive flows for ADMG learning. This not only enables us to determine
             complex causal structural relationships behind the data in the presence of latent
             confounding, but also estimate their functional relationships (hence treatment ef-
             fects) simultaneously. We further validate our approach via experiments on both
             synthetic and real-world datasets, and demonstrate the competitive performance
             against relevant baselines.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Learning causal relationships and estimating treatment effects from observational studies is a funda-
mental problem in causal machine learning, and has important applications in many areas of social
and natural sciences (Pearl, 2010; Spirtes, 2010). They enable us to answer questions in causal na-
ture; for example, what is the effect on the expected lifespan of a patient if I increase the dose of
X drug? However, many existing methods of causal discovery and inference overwhelmingly rely
on the assumption that all necessary information is available. This assumption is often untenable in
practice. Indeed, an important, yet often overlooked, form of causal relationships is that of latent
confounding; that is, when two variables have an unobserved common cause (Verma & Pearl, 1990).
If not properly accounted for, the presence of latent confounding can lead to incorrect evaluation of
causal quantities of interest (Pearl, 2009).
Traditional causal discovery methods that account for the presence of latent confoundings, such as
the fast causal inference algorithm (FCI) (Spirtes et al., 2000) and its extensions (Colombo et al.,
2012; Claassen et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2021), rely on uncovering an equivalence class of acyclic
directed mixed graphs (ADMGs) that share the same conditional independencies. Without additional
assumptions, however, these methods might return uninformative results as they cannot distinguish
between members of the same Markov equivalence class (Bellot & van der Schaar, 2021). More
recently, causal discovery methods based on structural causal models (SCMs) (Pearl, 1998) have
been developed for latent confounding (Nowzohour et al., 2017; Wang & Drton, 2020; Maeda &
Shimizu, 2020; 2021; Bhattacharya et al., 2021). By assuming that the causal effects follow specific
functional forms, they have the advantage of being able to distinguish between members of the
same Markov equivalence class (Glymour et al., 2019). Yet, existing approaches either rely on
restrictive linear functional assumptions (Bhattacharya et al., 2021; Maeda & Shimizu, 2020; Bellot
& van der Schaar, 2021), and/or discrete search over the discrete space of causal graphs (Maeda &
    ∗
        Equal contribution. This work is done when Matthew Ashman was an intern at Microsoft Research.


                                                       1
Shimizu, 2021) that are computationally burdensome and unintuitive to use. As a result, modeling
non-linear causal relationships between variables in the presence of latent confounders in a scalable
way remains an outstanding task.
In this work, we seek to utilize recent advances in differentiable causal discovery (Zheng et al.,
2018; Bhattacharya et al., 2021) and neural causal models (Lachapelle et al., 2019; Morales-Alvarez
et al., 2022; Geffner et al., 2022) to overcome these limitations. Our core contribution is to extend
the framework of differentiable ADMG discovery for linear models (Bhattacharya et al., 2021) to
non-linear cases using neural causal models. This enables us to build scalable and flexible meth-
ods capable of discovering non-linear, potentially confounded relationships between variables and
perform subsequent causal inference. Specifically, our contributions include:

    1. Sufficient conditions for ADMG identifiability with non-linear SCMs (Section 4). We
       assume: i) the functional relationship follows non-linear additive noise SCM; ii) the effect
       of observed and latent variables do not modulate each other, and iii) all latent variables con-
       found a pair of non-adjacent observed nodes. Under these assumptions, the underlying ground
       truth ADMG causal graph is identifiable. This serves as a foundation for designing ADMG
       identification algorithms for flexible, non-linear SCMs based on deep generative models.

    2. A novel gradient-based framework for learning ADMGs from observational data (Sec-
       tion 5). Based on our theoretical results, we further propose Neural ADMG Learning (N-
       ADMG), a neural autoregressive-flow-based model capable of learning complex non-linear
       causal relationships with latent confounding. N-ADMG utilizes variational inference to ap-
       proximate posteriors over causal graphs and latent variables, whilst simultaneously learning
       the model parameters via gradient-based optimization. This is more efficient and accurate than
       discrete search methods, allowing us to replace task-specific search procedures with general
       purpose optimizers.

    3. Empirical evaluation on synthetic and real-world datasets (Section 6). We evaluate N-
       ADMG on a variety of synthetic and real-world datasets, comparing performance with a num-
       ber of existing causal discovery and inference algorithms. We find that N-ADMG provides
       competitive or state-of-the-art results on a range of causal reasoning tasks.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Causal discovery with latent confounding. Constraint-based causal discovery methods in the
presence of latent confounding have been well-studied (Spirtes et al., 2000; Zhang, 2008; Colombo
et al., 2012; Claassen et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2021). Without further assumptions, these approaches
can only identify a Markov equivalence class of causal structures (Spirtes et al., 2000). When certain
assumptions are made on the data generating process in the form of SCMs (Pearl, 1998), additional
constraints can help identify the true causal structure. In the most general case, additional non-
parametric constraints have been identified (Verma & Pearl, 1990; Shpitser et al., 2014; Evans,
2016). Further refinement can be made through the assumption of stricter SCMs. For example, in
the linear Gaussian additive noise model (ANM) case, Nowzohour et al. (2017) proposes a score-
based approach for finding an equivalent class of bow-free acyclic path diagrams. Both Maeda &
Shimizu (2020) and Wang & Drton (2020) develop Independence tests based approach for linear
non-Gaussian ANM case, with Maeda & Shimizu (2021) extending this to more general cases.


Differentiable characterization of causal discovery. All aforementioned approaches employ a
search over a discrete space of causal structures, which often requires task-specific search proce-
dures, and imposes a computational burden for large-scale problems. More recently, (Zheng et al.,
2018) proposed a differentiable constraint on directed acyclic graphs (DAG), and frames the graph
structure learning problem as a differentiable constrained optimization task in the absence of latent
confounders. This is further generalized to the latent confounding case (Bhattacharya et al., 2021)
through differentiable algebraic constraints that characterize the space of ADMGs. Nonetheless, this
work is limited in that it only considers linear Gaussian ANMs.


                                                  2
3     BACKGROUND
3.1   S TRUCTURAL C AUSAL M ODELS IN THE A BSENCE OF L ATENT C ONFOUNDINGS

Unlike constraint-based approaches such as the PC algorithm, SCMs capture the asymmetry be-
tween causal direction through functional assumptions on the data generating process, and have been
central to many recent developments in causal discovery (Glymour et al., 2019). . Given a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) G on nodes {1, . . . , D}, SCMs describe the random variable x = (x1 , . . . , xD )
by xi = fi (xpa(i;G) , ϵi ), where ϵi is an exogenous noise variable that is independent of all other
variables in the model, pa(i; G) denotes the set of parents of node i in G, and fi describes how xi
depends on its parents and the noise ϵi . We focus on additive noise SCMs, commonly referred to as
additive noise models (ANMs), which take the form
         xi = fi (xpa(i;G) , ϵi ) = fi (xpa(i;G) ) + ϵi ,   or    x = fG (x) + ϵ     in vector form.     (1)
                                                       n
This induces a joint observation distribution pθ (x |G), where θ denotes the parameters for functions
{fi }. Under the additive noise model in Equation 1, the DAG G is identifiable assuming causal
minimality and no latent confounders (Peters et al., 2014).

3.2   G RAPHICAL R EPRESENTATION OF L ATENT C ONFOUNDERS U SING ADMG S

One of the most widely-used graphical representations of causal relationships involving latent con-
founding is the so-called acyclic directed mixed graph (ADMGs). ADMGs are an extension of
DAGs, that contain both directed edges (→) and bidirected edges (↔) between variables. More
concretely, the directed edge xi → xj indicates that xi is an ancestor of xj , and the bidirected edge
xi ↔ xj indicates that xi and xj share a common, unobserved ancestor (Richardson & Spirtes,
2002; Tian & Pearl, 2002). An ADMG G over a collection of D variables x = (x1 , . . . , xD ) can be
described using two binary adjacency matrices: GD ∈ RD×D , for which an entry of 1 in position
(i, j) indicates the presence of the directed edge xi → xj , and GB ∈ RD×D , for which an entry of
1 in position (i, j) indicates the presence of the bidirected edge xi ↔ xj . Throughout this paper,
we will use the graph notation G to indicate the tuple G = {GD , GB }. When using ADMGs to
represent latent confounding, causal discovery amounts to learning the matrices GD and GB .
Similar to a DAG, an SCM can be specified to describe the causal relationships implied by an ADMG
through the so-called magnification process. As formulated in (Peña, 2016), whenever a bidirected
edge xi ↔ xj is present according to GB in an ADMG, we will explicitly add a latent node um to
represent the latent parent (confounder) of xi ↔ xj . Then, the SCM of xi can be written as x by
xi = fi (xpa(i;GD ) , upa(i;GB ) ) + ϵi , where upa(i;GB ) denotes the latent parents of xi in the set of all
latent nodes u = (u1 , . . . , uM ) added in the magnification process. In compact form, we can write:
                                           [x, u] = fG (x, u) + ϵ.                                       (2)
The ‘magnified SCM’ will serve as a practical device for learning ADMGs in this paper. Similar to
DAGs, magnified SCMs induce an observational distribution on x, denoted by pθ (xn ; G). Note that
given an ADMG, the magnified SCM is not unique as latent variables may be shared. For example,
x1 ↔ x2 , x2 ↔ x3 , x3 ↔ x1 can be magnified as both {x1 ← u1 → x2 , x2 ← u2 → x3 , x3 ←
u3 → x1 } and {u1 → x1 , u1 → x2 , u1 → x3 }. Therefore, ADMG identifiability does not imply
the structural identifiability of the magnified SCM. In this paper, we focus on ADMG identifiability.

3.3   D EALING WITH G RAPH U NCERTAINTY

Additive noise SCMs only guarantee DAG identifiability in the limit of infinite data. In the finite
data regime, there is inherent uncertainty in the causal relationships. The Bayesian approach to
causal discovery accounts for this uncertainty in a principled manner using probabilistic modeling
(Heckerman et al., 2006), in which one’s belief in the true causal graph is updated using Bayes’
rule. This approach is grounded in causal decision theory, which states that rational decision-makers
maximize the expected utility over a probability distribution representing their belief in causal graphs
(Soto et al., 2019). We can model the causal graph G jointly with observations x1 , . . . , xN as
                                                                  N
                                                                  Y
                                pθ (x1 , . . . , xN , G) = p(G)         pθ (xn |G)                       (3)
                                                                  n=1


                                                       3
where θ denotes the parameters of the likelihood relating the observations to the underlying causal
graph. In general, the posterior distribution pθ (G|x1 , . . . , xN ) is intractable. One approach to
circumvent this is variational inference (Jordan et al., 1999; Zhang et  al., 2018), in which we seek

an approximate posterior qϕ (G) that minimises the KL-divergence KL qϕ (G)||pθ (G|x1 , . . . , xN ) .
This can be achieved through maximization of the evidence lower bound (ELBO), given by
                                N
                                X
                      LELBO =         Eqϕ (G) [log pθ (xn |G)] − KL [qϕ (G)||p(G)] .                    (4)
                                n=1
An additional convenience of this approach is that the ELBO serves as a lower bound to the marginal
log-likelihood pθ (x1 , . . . , xN ), so it can also be maximized with respect to the model parameters θ
to find the parameters that approximately maximize the likelihood of the data (Geffner et al., 2022).

4    E STABLISHING ADMG S I DENTIFIABILITY U NDER N ON - LINEAR SCM S
To build flexible methods that are capable of discovering causal relationships under the presence of
latent confounding, we first need to establish the identifiability of ADMGs under non-linear SCMs.
The concept of structural identifiability of ADMGs is formalized in the following definition:
Definition 1 (ADMG structural identifiability). For a distribution pθ (x; G), the ADMG G =
{GD , GB } is said to be structurally identifiable from pθ (x; G) if there exists no other distribution
pθ′ (x; G′ ) such that G ̸= G′ and pθ (x; G) = pθ′ (x; G′ ).
Assuming that our model is correctly specified and pθ0 (x; G0 ) denotes the true data generating
distribution, then ADMG structural identifiability guarantees that if we find some pθ (x; G) =
pθ0 (x; G0 ) (by e.g., maximum likelihood learning), we can recover G = G0 . In this section,
we seek to establish sufficient conditions under which the ADMG identifiability is satisfied. Let
x = (x1 , . . . , xD ) be a collection of observed random variables, and u = (u1 , . . . , uM ) be a col-
lection of unobserved (latent) random variables. Our first assumption is that data generating process
can be expressed as a specific non-linear additive noise SCM, in which the effect of the observed
and latent variables do not modulate each other, see the functional form below:
Assumption 1. We assume that the data generating process takes the form
                              [x, u]⊤ = fGD ,x (x; θ) + fGB ,u (u; θ) + ϵ                        (5)
where each element of ϵ is independent of all other variables in the model and θ denotes the param-
eters of the non-linear functions fGD ,x and fGB ,u .
This assumption is one of the elements that separate us from previous work of (Bhattacharya et al.,
2021; Maeda & Shimizu, 2020) (linearity   P is assumed) and (Maeda & P     Shimizu, 2021) (effects are
assumed to be fully decoupled, xi =           f
                                            m im m(x    ∈  x pa(i;GD ) ) +   k gik (uk ∈ upa(i;GB ) ) +
ϵi ). As discussed in Section 3.2, the discovery of an ADMG between observed variables amounts
to the discovery of their ancestral relationships. Therefore, the mapping between ADMGs and
their magnified SCMs is not one-to-one, which might cause issues when designing causal discovery
methods using SCM-based approaches. To further simplify the underlying latent structure (without
losing too much generality), our second assumption assumes that every latent variable is a parent-
less common cause of a pair of non-adjacent observed variables:
Assumption 2 (Latent variables confound pairs of non-adjacent observed variables). For each latent
variable uk in the data generating process, there exists a non-adjacent pair xi and xj that is unique
to uk , such that xi ← uk → xj .
Arguments for Assumption 2 are made by (Pearl & Verma, 1992), who show that this family of
causal graphs is very flexible, and can produce the same conditional independencies amongst the
observed variables in any given causal graph. Therefore, it has been argued that without loss of
generality, we can assume latent variables to be exogenous, and have exactly two non-adjacent
children. 1 This assumption also implies that we can specify a magnified SCM to the ADMG as
shown in Section 3.2, which allows us to evaluate and optimize the induced likelihood later on.
    1
      Meanwhile, Evans (2016) show that this graph family cannot induce all possible observational distribu-
tions. In Appendix E we show that in the linear non-Gaussian ANM case there exist certain constraints on
marginal distributions that cannot be satisfied under Assumption 2. Nonetheless, we could not derive such
constraints for the non-linear case.


                                                     4
Given Assumptions 1 and 2, we now provide three lemmas which allow us to identify the ADMG
matrices, GD and GB . These lemmas extend the previous results in Maeda & Shimizu (2021)
under our new assumptions above. Note that all gi and gj functions in the lemmas denote functions
satisfying the residual faithfulness condition (Maeda & Shimizu (2021)), as detailed in Appendix A.
Lemma 1 (Case 1). Given Assumptions 1 and 2, then [GB ]i,j = 1 and [GD ]i,j = 0 if and only if

                             ∀gi , gj , [(xi − gi (x−i ) (xj − gj (x−j )].


                                                         |=
                                                                                                   (6)
Lemma 2 (Case 2). Given Assumptions 1 and 2, then [GB ]i,j = 0 and [GD ]i,j = 0 if and only if
                          ∃gi , gj , [(xi − gi (x−(i,j) ) (xj − gj (x−(i,j) ))].


                                                         |=
                                                                                                   (7)
Lemma 3 (Case 3). Given Assumptions 1 and 2, then [GB ]i,j = 0 and [GD ]i,j = 1 if and only if

                            ∀gi , gj , [(xi − gi (x−(i,j) ) (xj − gj (x−j )]


                                                             |=
                                                                                                   (8)
                            ∃gi , gj , [(xi − gi (x−i ) (xj − gj (x−(i,j) ))]


                                                        |=
                                                                                                   (9)

Since each case leads to mutually exclusive conditional independence/dependence constraints, for
any pθ (x; G) specified under the assumptions above, there cannot exist some pθ′ (x; G′ ) such that
G ̸= G′ and pθ (x; G) = pθ′ (x; G′ ), thus structural identifiability is satisfied. This gives our ADMG
identifiability result:
Proposition 1 (Identifiability of ADMGs under non-linear SCMs). Assume Assumptions 1 to 2 hold.
Then, GD and GB are identifiable for the data generating process specified in Equation 5.

Whilst theoretically we could test for these conditions stated in Lemmas 1 to 3 directly, a more
efficient approach is to use differentiable maximum likelihood learning. Assuming the model is cor-
rectly specified, then ADMG identifiability ensures the maximum likelihood estimate recovers the
true graph in the limit of infinite data (Section 5.5). Hence, we can design the ADMG identification
algorithms via maximum likelihood learning.

5     N EURAL ADMG L EARNING
Whilst we have outlined sufficient conditions under which the underlying ADMG causal structure
can be identified, this does not directly provide a framework through which causal discovery and
inference can be performed. In this section, we seek to formulate a practical framework for gradient-
based ADMG identification. Three challenges that remain are: 1. How can we parameterize the
magnified SCM models for ADMG to enable learning flexible causal relationships? 2. How can
we optimise our model in the space of ADMG graphs as assumed in Section 4? 3. How do we
learn the ADMG causal structure efficiently, whilst accounting for the missing data (u) and graph
uncertainties in the finite data regime? In this section, we present Neural ADMG Learning (N-
ADMG), a novel framework that addresses all three challenges.

5.1   N EURAL AUTO - REGRESSIVE F LOW PARAMETERIZATION

We assume that our model used to learn ADMGs from data is correctly specified. That is, it can be
written in the same magnified SCM form as in Equation 5:
                             [x, u]⊤ = fGD ,x (x; θ) + fGB ,u (u; θ) + ϵ.                         (10)

Following Khemakhem et al. (2020), we factorise the likelihood pθ (xn , un |G) induced by Equa-
tion 10 in an autoregressive manner. We can rearrange Equation 10 as
                 ϵ = v − fGD ,x (x; θ) − fGB ,u (u; θ) := gG̃ (v; θ) = v − fG̃ (v; θ)             (11)
where v = (x, u) ∈ RD+M , and G̃ is the magnified adjacency matrix on v, defined as G̃i,j ∈ {0, 1}
if and only if vi → vj . This allows us to express the likelihood as
                                                              D+M
                                                               Y
                       pθ (vn |G) = pϵ (gG̃ (vn ; θ)) =             pϵi (gG̃ (vn ; θ)i ).         (12)
                                                              i=1


                                                    5
Note that we have omitted the Jacobian-determinant term as it is equal to one since G̃ is acyclic
(Mooij et al., 2011). Following Geffner et al. (2022), we adopt an efficient, flexible parameterization
for the functions fi taking the form (consistent with Assumption 1)
                                                                               
                                     XD                           M
                                                                  X
                     fi (v) = ξ1,i      G̃j,i ℓj (vj ) + ξ2,i    G̃j,i ℓj (vj )                (13)
                                      vj ∈x                         vj ∈u
where ξ1,i , ξ2,i and ℓi (i = 1, ..., D + M ) are MLPs. A naïve implementation would require training
3(D +M ) neural networks. Instead, we construct these MLPs so that their weights are shared across
nodes as ξ1,i (·) = ξ1,i (ei , ·), ξ2,i (·) = ξ2,i (ei , ·) and ℓi (·) = ℓ(ei , ·), with ei ∈ RD+M a trainable
embedding that identifies the output and input nodes respectively.

5.2   ADMG L EARNING VIA M AXIMIZING E VIDENCE L OWER B OUND

Our ADMG identifiability theory in Section 4 suggests that the ground truth ADMG graph can, in
principle, be recovered via maximum likelihood learning of pθ (x|G). However, the aforementioned
challenges remain: given a finite number of observations x1 , . . . , xN , how do we deal with the
corresponding missing data u1 , . . . , uN while learning the ADMG? How do we account for graph
uncertainties and ambiguities in the finite data regime? To address these issues, N-ADMG takes
a Bayesian approach toward ADMG learning. Similar to Section 3.3, we may jointly model the
distribution over the ADMG causal graph G, the observations x1 , . . . , xN , and the corresponding
latent variables u1 , . . . , uN , as
                                                                     N
                                                                     Y
                           pθ (x1 , u1 , . . . , xN , uN , G) = p(G)   pθ (xn , un |G)         (14)
                                                                 n=1
where pθ (xn , un |G) is the neural SCM model specified in Section 5.1, θ denotes the corre-
sponding model parameters, and p(G) is some prior distribution over the graph. Our goal is to
learn both the model parameters θ and an approximation to the posterior qϕ (u1 , . . . , uN , G) ≈
pθ (u1 , . . . , uN , G|x1 , . . . , xN ). This can be achieved jointly using the variational inference frame-
work (Zhang et al., 2018; Kingma         P & Welling, 2013), in which we maximize the evidence lower
bound (ELBO) LELBO (θ, ϕ) ≤ n log pθ (xn ) given by
                                          "N                                   #
                                            X
                                                                      n n
             LELBO (θ, ϕ) = Eqϕ (G)             Eqϕ (un |G) [log pθ (x |u , G)] − KL [qϕ (G)||p(G)]
                                     n=1
                                     "N                                      #                           (15)
                                      X
                         − Eqϕ (G)         KL [qϕ (un |xn , G))||pθ (un |G)] .
                                     n=1

In the following sections, weQdescribe our choice of the graph prior p(G), and approximate pos-
terior qϕ (u1 , . . . , uN , G) = n qϕ (un |xn , G)qϕ (G). We will also demonstrate that maximizing
LELBO (θ, ϕ) recovers the true ADMG causal graph in the limit of infinite data. See Section 5.5.

5.3   C HOICE OF P RIOR OVER ADMG G RAPHS

As discussed in Section 3.2, the ADMG G can be parameterized by two binary adjacency matri-
ces, GD whose entries indicate the presence of a directed edge, and GB whose edges indicate the
presence of a bidirected edge. As discussed in Section 4, a necessary assumption for structural iden-
tifiability is that each latent variable is a parent-less confounder of a pair of non-adjacent observed
variables. This further implies that the underlying ADMG must be bow-free (both a directed and a
bidirected edge cannot exist between the same pair of observed variables). This constraint can be
imposed by leveraging the bow-free constrain penalty introduced by Bhattacharya et al. (2021),
                           h(GD , GB ) = trace eGD − D + sum (GD ◦ GB )

                                                                                                   (16)
which is non-negative and zero only if (GD , GB ) is a bow-free ADMG. As suggested in Geffner
et al. (2022), we implement the prior as
              p(G) ∝ exp −λs1 ∥GD ∥2F − λs2 ∥GB ∥2F − ρh(GD , GB )2 − αh(GD , GB )

                                                                                                   (17)
where the coefficients α and ρ are increased whilst maximizing LELBO (θ, ϕ), following an aug-
mented Lagrangian scheme (Nemirovski, 1999). Prior knowledge about the sparseness of the graph
is introduced by penalizing the norms ∥GD ∥2F and ∥GB ∥2F with scaling coefficients λs1 and λs2 .


                                                      6
5.4   C HOICE OF VARIATIONAL A PPROXIMATION

We seek to approximate the intractable true posterior pθ (u1 , . . . , uN , G|x1 , . . . , xN ) using the vari-
ational distribution qϕ (u1 , . . . , uN , G). We assume the following factorized approximate posterior
                                                                  N
                                                                  Y
                              qϕ (u1 , . . . , uN , G) = qϕ (G)         qϕ (un |xn ).                     (18)
                                                                  n=1

For qϕ (G), we use a product of Bernoulli distributions for each potential directed edge in GD and
bidirected edge in GB . For GD , edge existence and edge orientation are parameterized separately
using the ENCO parameterization (Lippe et al., 2021). For qϕ (un |xn ), we apply amortized VI
as in VAE literature (Kingma & Welling, 2013), where qϕ (un |xn ) is parameterized as a Gaussian
distribution whose mean and variance is determined by passing the xn through an inference MLP .

5.5   M AXIMIZING LELBO (θ, ϕ) R ECOVERS THE G ROUND T RUTH ADMG

In Section 4, we have proved the structural identifiability of ADMGs. In this section, we further
show that under certain assumptions, maximizing LELBO (θ, ϕ) recovers the true ADMG graph (de-
noted by G0 ) in the infinite data limit. This result is stated in the following proposition:
Proposition 2 (Maximizing LELBO (θ, ϕ) recovers the ground truth ADMG). Assume that:

• Assumptions 1 and 2 (hence the identifiability of ADMGs) holds for the model pθ (x; G).
• The model is correctly specified (∃θ∗ such that pθ∗ (x; G0 ) recovers the data-generating process).
• Regularity condition: for all θ and G we have Ep(x;G0 ) [| log pθ (x; G)|] < ∞.
• The variational family of qϕ (u|x, G) is flexible enough, i.e., it contains pθ (u|x, G).

Then, the solution (θ′ , qϕ′ (G)) that maximizes LELBO (θ, ϕ) satisfies qϕ′ (G) = δ(G = G0 ).

The proof of Proposition 2 can be found in Appendix B, which justifies performing causal discovery
by maximizing ELBO of the N-ADMG model. Once the model has been trained and the ADMG has
been recovered, we can use the N-ADMG to perform causal inference as detailed in Appendix C.

6     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate N-ADMG in performing both causal discovery and causal inference on a number of
synthetic and real-world datasets. Note that we run our model both with and without the bow-free
constraint, identified as N-BF-ADMG (our full model) and N-ADMG (for ablation purpose), respec-
tively. We compare the performance of our model against five baselines: DECI (Geffner et al., 2022)
(which we refer to as N-DAG for consistency), FCI (Spirtes et al., 2000), RCD (Maeda & Shimizu,
2020), CAM-UV (Maeda & Shimizu, 2021), and DCD (Bhattacharya et al., 2021). We evaluate the
causal discovery performance using F1 scores for directed and and bidirected adjacency. The ex-
pected values of these metrics are reported using the learned graph posterior (which is deterministic
for RCD, CAM-UV, and DCD). Causal inference is evaluated using the expected ATE as described
in Appendix C. We evaluate the causal inference performance of the causal discovery benchmarks by
fixing q(G) to either deterministic or uniform categorical distributions on the learned causal graphs,
then learning a non-linear flow-based ANM by optimizing Equation 15 in an identical manner to
N-ADMG. A full list of results and details of the experimental set-up are included in Appendix F.
Our implementation will be available at https://github.com/microsoft/causica.

6.1   S YNTHETIC F ORK -C OLLIDER DATASET

We construct a synthetic fork-collider dataset consisting of five nodes (Figure 1a). The data-
generating process is a non-linear ANM with Gaussian noise. Variable pairs (x2 , x3 ), and (x3 , x4 )
are latent-confounded, whereas (x4 , x5 ) share a observed confounder. We evaluate both causal dis-
covery and inference performances. For discovery, we evaluate F-score measure on both GD and
GB . For causal inference, we choose x4 as the treatment variable taking and x2 , x3 and x5 as the


                                                       7
             x2             x1                    x2           x1                  x2            x1


      x3             x4           x5         x3           x4        x5        x3            x4        x5

             (a) Ground truth.                    (b) N-BF-ADMG.             (c) N-ADMG (no constraint).
             x2             x1                    x2           x1                  x2            x1


      x3             x4           x5         x3           x4        x5        x3            x4        x5

                  (d) RCD.                             (e) DCD.                     (f) CAM-UV.

                          Figure 1: ADMG identification results on fork-collider dataset.


response variables, and evaluate ATE RMSE to benchmark performance. It is therefore crucial that
discovery methods do not misidentify latent confounded variables as having a direct cause between
them, as this would result in biased ATE estimates.
Figure 1b-1f visualizes the causal dis- Table 1: Causal discovery and inference results for the
covery results of different methods, and fork-collider dataset. The table shows the mean and stan-
Table 1 summarizes both discovery and dard error results across five different random seeds.
inference metrics. While no meth-
ods can fully recover the ground truth M ETHOD               GD F SCORE GB F SCORE ATE RMSE
graph, our method N-BF-ADMG-G and
CAM-UV achieved the best overall per-       N-BF-ADMG-G         0.64 (0.06)    0.93 (0.07) 0.022 (0.003)
                                            N-ADMG-G            0.49 (0.02)    0.99 (0.00) 0.239 (0.067)
formance.      N-BF-ADMG-G and N-
                                            N-DAG-G             0.50 (0.00)    0.00 (0.00) 0.046 (0.025)
ADMG-G on average are able to recover FCI                       0.00 (0.00)    0.75 (0.00) 0.072 (0.015)
all bidirected edges from the data, while RCD                   0.00 (0.00)    0.54 (0.00) 0.206 (0.029)
CAM-UV can only recover half of the CAM-UV                      0.80 (0.00)    0.67 (0.00) 0.017 (0.003)
latent variables. Without the bow-free DCD                      0.00 (0.00)    0.67 (0.00) 0.208 (0.064)
constraint, N-ADMG-G discovers a di-
rected edge from x4 to x3 , which results in poor ATE RMSE performance. On the other hand,
DAG-based method (N-DAG-G) is not able to deal with latent confounders, resulting in the poor
f-scores in both GD and GB . Linear ANM-based methods (RCD and DCD) perform significantly
worse than other methods, resulting in 0 f-scores for directed matrices and largest ATE errors. This
demonstrates the necessity for introducing non-linear assumptions.

6.2        R ANDOM C ONFOUNDED ER S YNTHETIC DATASET

We generate synthetic datasets from ADMG extension of Erdős-Rényi (ER) graph model
(Lachapelle et al., 2019). We first sample random ADMGs from ER model, and simulate each
variable using a randomly sampled nonlinear ANM. Latent confounders are then removed from the
training set. See Appendix G.2 for details. We consider the number of nodes, directed edges and
latent confounders triplets (d, e, m) ∈ {(4, 6, 2), (8, 20, 6), (12, 50, 10)}. The resulting datasets are
identified as ER(d, e, m). Figure 2 compares the performance of N-ADMG with the baselines. All
variants of N-ADMG outperform the baselines for most datasets, highlighting its effectiveness rel-
ative to other methods (even those that employ similar assumptions). Similar to the fork-collider
dataset, we see that methods operating under the assumption of linearity perform poorly when the
data-generating process is non-linear. It is worth noting that even when the exogenous noise of N-
ADMG is misspecified, its still exceeds that of other methods in most cases. This robustness is a
desirable property as in many settings the form of exogenous noise is unknown.

6.3        I NFANT H EALTH AND D EVELOPMENT P ROGRAM (IHDP) DATASET

For the real-world datasets, we evaluate treatment effect estimation performances on infant health
and development program data (IHDP). This dataset contains measurements of both infants and
their mother during real-life data collected in a randomized experiment. The main task is to estimate
the effect of home visits by specialists on future cognitive test scores of infants, where the ground


                                                          8
Figure 2: Causal discovery results for synthetic ER datasets. For readability, the N-ADMG results
are connected with lines. The figure shows mean results across five randomly generated datasets.


truth outcomes are simulated as in (Hill, 2011). To make the task more challenging, additional con-
foundings are introduced by removing a subset (non-white mothers) of the treated population. More
details can be found in Appendix G.3. We first perform causal discovery to learn the underlying
ADMG of the dataset, and then perform causal inference. Since the true causal graph is unknown,
we evaluate the causal inference performance of each method by estimating the ATE RMSE.
Apart from the aforementioned baselines, here we introduce four more methods: PC-DWL (PC algo-
rithm for discovery, DoWhy (Sharma et al., 2021) linear adjustment for inference); PC-DwNL (PC
for discovery, DoWhy double machine learning for inference); N-DAG-G-DwL (N-DAG Gaussian
for discovery, linear adjustment for inference); and N-DAG-S-DwL (N-DAG Spline for discovery,
linear adjustment for inference). Results are summarized in Figures 3a to 3c. Generally, models with
non-Gaussian exogenous assumptions tend to have lower ATE estimation errors; while models with
linear assumptions (RCD and DCD) have the worst ATE RMSE. Interestingly, the DoWhy-based
plug-in estimators tend to worsen the performances of SCM models. However, regardless of the
assumptions made on exogenous noise, our method (N-BF-ADMG-G and N-BF-ADMG-S) consis-
tently outperforms all other baselines with the same noise. It is evident that for causal inference in
real-world datasets, the ability of N-BF-ADMG to handle latent confoundings and nonlinear causal
relationships becomes very effective.


 (a) Gaussian exogenous noise.        (b) Spline exogenous noise.           (c) DoWhy baselines.

Figure 3: Causal inference results for the IHDP dataset. The figure shows mean ± standard error
results across five random initialisations.



7   C ONCLUSION A ND F UTURE W ORK

In this work, we proposed Neural ADMG Learning (N-ADMG), a novel framework for gradient-
based causal reasoning in the presence of latent confounding for nonlinear SCMs. We established
identifiability theory for nonlinear ADMGs under latent confounding, and proposed a practical
ADMG learning algorithm that is both flexible and efficient. In future work, we will further extend
our framework on how to more general settings (e.g., the effect from observed and latent variables
can modulate in certain forms; latent variables can confound adjacent variables; etc), and how to im-
prove certain modelling choices such as variational approximation qualities over both causal graph
and latent variables


                                                  9
R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
A number of efforts have been made/will be made for the sake of reproducibility. First, we open
source our package in our github page github.com/microsoft/causica/tree/v0.0.0. In
addition, in this paper we included clear explanations of any assumptions and a complete proof of
the claims in the Appendix, as well as model settings and hyperparameters. All datasets used in this
paper are either publicly available data, or synthetic data whose generation process is described in
detail.

R EFERENCES
Alexis Bellot and Mihaela van der Schaar. Deconfounded score method: Scoring dags with dense
  unobserved confounding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15106, 2021.
Rohit Bhattacharya, Tushar Nagarajan, Daniel Malinsky, and Ilya Shpitser. Differentiable causal
  discovery under unmeasured confounding. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 2314–2322. PMLR, 2021.
Ruichu Cai, Feng Xie, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Triad constraints for learning
  causal structure of latent variables. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Wenyu Chen, Mathias Drton, and Ali Shojaie. Causal structural learning via local graphs. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2107.03597, 2021.
Tom Claassen, Joris M Mooij, and Tom Heskes. Learning sparse causal models is not NP-hard. In
  Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 172–
  181, 2013.
Diego Colombo, Marloes H Maathuis, Markus Kalisch, and Thomas S Richardson. Learning high-
  dimensional directed acyclic graphs with latent and selection variables. The Annals of Statistics,
  pp. 294–321, 2012.
Alexander D’Amour. On multi-cause approaches to causal inference with unobserved counfound-
  ing: Two cautionary failure cases and a promising alternative. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and
  Masashi Sugiyama (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on Ar-
  tificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 89 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
  3478–3486. PMLR, 16–18 Apr 2019.
Robin J Evans. Graphs for margins of Bayesian networks. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, 43
  (3):625–648, 2016.
Tomas Geffner, Javier Antoran, Adam Foster, Wenbo Gong, Chao Ma, Emre Kiciman, Amit Sharma,
  Angus Lamb, Martin Kukla, Nick Pawlowski, et al. Deep end-to-end causal inference. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.02195, 2022.
Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. Review of causal discovery methods based on graph-
  ical models. Frontiers in genetics, 10:524, 2019.
David Heckerman, Christopher Meek, and Gregory Cooper. A bayesian approach to causal discov-
  ery. In Innovations in Machine Learning, pp. 1–28. Springer, 2006.
Jennifer L Hill. Bayesian nonparametric modelling for causal inference. Journal of Computational
  and Graphical Statistics, 20(1):217–240, 2011.
Michael I Jordan, Zoubin Ghahramani, Tommi S Jaakkola, and Lawrence K Saul. An introduction
 to variational methods for graphical models. Machine learning, 37(2):183–233, 1999.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoen-
   coders and nonlinear ICA: A unifying framework. In International Conference on Artificial In-
   telligence and Statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational Bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.


                                                10
Sébastien Lachapelle, Philippe Brouillard, Tristan Deleu, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Gradient-based
  neural DAG learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.02226, 2019.
Phillip Lippe, Taco Cohen, and Efstratios Gavves. Efficient neural causal discovery without acyclic-
  ity constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10483, 2021.
Christos Louizos, Uri Shalit, Joris M Mooij, David Sontag, Richard Zemel, and Max Welling.
  Causal effect inference with deep latent-variable models. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 30, 2017.
Takashi Nicholas Maeda and Shohei Shimizu. RCD: Repetitive causal discovery of linear non-
  gaussian acyclic models with latent confounders. In International Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence and Statistics, pp. 735–745. PMLR, 2020.
Takashi Nicholas Maeda and Shohei Shimizu. Causal additive models with unobserved variables.
  In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 97–106. PMLR, 2021.
Sara Mohammad-Taheri, Robert Ness, Jeremy Zucker, and Olga Vitek. Do-calculus enables causal
  reasoning with latent variable models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06626, 2021.
Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, Tom Heskes, and Bernhard Schölkopf. On causal discovery with
  cyclic additive noise model. Advances in neural information processing systems 24, 2011.
Pablo Morales-Alvarez, Wenbo Gong, Angus Lamb, Simon Woodhead, Simon Peyton Jones, Nick
  Pawlowski, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Cheng Zhang. Simultaneous missing value imputation and
  structure learning with groups. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
A Nemirovski. Optimization II. Numerical methods for nonlinear continuous optimization. 1999.
Christopher Nowzohour, Marloes H Maathuis, Robin J Evans, and Peter Bühlmann. Distributional
  equivalence and structure learning for bow-free acyclic path diagrams. Electronic Journal of
  Statistics, 11(2):5342–5374, 2017.
Judea Pearl. Graphs, causality, and structural equation models. Sociological Methods & Research,
  27(2):226–284, 1998.
Judea Pearl. Causal inference in statistics: An overview. Statistics surveys, 3:96–146, 2009.
Judea Pearl. An introduction to causal inference. The International Journal of Biostatistics, 6(2):
  1–62, 2010.
Judea Pearl. On measurement bias in causal inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1203.3504, 2012.
Judea Pearl and Thomas S Verma. A statistical semantics for causation. Statistics and Computing,
  2(2):91–95, 1992.
Jose M Peña. Learning acyclic directed mixed graphs from observations and interventions. In
  Conference on Probabilistic Graphical Models, pp. 392–402. PMLR, 2016.
Jonas Peters, Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal discovery with
  continuous additive noise models. 2014.
Rajesh Ranganath and Adler Perotte. Multiple causal inference with latent confounding. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1805.08273, 2018.
Thomas Richardson and Peter Spirtes. Ancestral graph Markov models. The Annals of Statistics, 30
  (4):962–1030, 2002.
Amit Sharma, Vasilis Syrgkanis, Cheng Zhang, and Emre Kıcıman. Dowhy: Addressing challenges
 in expressing and validating causal assumptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13518, 2021.
Ilya Shpitser, Robin J Evans, Thomas S Richardson, and James M Robins. Introduction to nested
   markov models. Behaviormetrika, 41(1):3–39, 2014.


                                                 11
Mauricio Gonzalez Soto, David Danks, Hugo J Escalante Balderas, and L Enrique Sucar. Choos-
 ing with unknown causal information: Action-outcome probabilities for decision making can be
 grounded in causal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11752, 2019.
Peter Spirtes. Introduction to causal inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11(5), 2010.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, and David Heckerman. Causation, prediction,
  and search. MIT press, 2000.
Jin Tian and Judea Pearl. A general identification condition for causal effects. In Aaai/iaai, pp.
   567–573, 2002.
Dustin Tran and David M Blei. Implicit causal models for genome-wide association studies. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1710.10742, 2017.
Thomas Verma and Judea Pearl. Equivalence and synthesis of causal models. In Proceedings of the
  Sixth Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 255–270, 1990.
Y Samuel Wang and Mathias Drton. Causal discovery with unobserved confounding and non-
  Gaussian data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.11131, 2020.
Yixin Wang and David M Blei. The blessings of multiple causes. Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 114(528):1574–1596, 2019.
Cheng Zhang, Judith Bütepage, Hedvig Kjellström, and Stephan Mandt. Advances in variational
  inference. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 41(8):2008–2026,
  2018.
Jiji Zhang. On the completeness of orientation rules for causal discovery in the presence of latent
   confounders and selection bias. Artificial Intelligence, 172(16-17):1873–1896, 2008.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep K Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. DAGs with no tears: Continu-
  ous optimization for structure learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018.
Xun Zheng, Chen Dan, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric Xing. Learning sparse non-
  parametric DAGs. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 3414–
  3425. PMLR, 2020.


                                                12
                                             APPENDIX
A     P ROOF OF L EMMAS 1 TO 3
First we describe the residual faithfulness condition inherited from (Maeda & Shimizu, 2021) in our
Lemmas 1 to 3:
Definition 2 (Residual faithfulness condition). We say that nonlinear functions gi , gj satisfies the
residual faithfulness condition, if: for any two arbitrary subset of x, denote by M and N , when both
(xi −gi (M )) and (xi −gj (M )) have terms involving the same exogenous noise ϵk , then (xi −gi (M ))
and (xi − gj (M )) are mutually dependent.

Next, we provide the proof for Lemmas 1 to 3 in Section 4. To prove those lemmas, we need the
help of the following lemma, which extends Lemma A in (Maeda & Shimizu, 2021), except we
don’t assume any form for gi other than non-linearity.
Lemma 4. Let s(xi ) denote an arbitrary function of xi . The residual of s(xi ) regressed onto x−i
cannot be independent of ϵi :
                                   ∀gi , [s(xi ) − gi (x−i ) ϵi ].


                                                                             |=
                                                                                               (19)

Proof. Assume that [s(xi )−gi (x−i ) ϵi ] holds, then x−i must contain at least one descendent of xi
                                             |=


as it must have dependence on the noise ϵi to cancel effect of ϵi in s(xi ). We can express gi (x−i ) as
ui (ϵ). Since gi operates on variables defined by non-linear transformations of the exogenous noise
terms, we cannot express ui as ai (ϵ−i ) + bi (ϵi ). x−i contains a descendent of xi , so ϵ−i includes at
least one noise term ϵk that satisfies xi ϵk (i.e. is not in xi ). Thus, terms containing ϵi cannot be
                                                  |=


fully removed from s(xi ) − gi (x−i ) and so [s(xi ) − gi (x−i ) ϵi ] does not hold.
                                                                                  |=

A.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Proof. Define gi and gj as gi (x−i ) = fi,x (pax (i))+gi′ (x−i ) and gj (x−j ) = fj,x (pax (j))+gi′ (x−j )
respectively. Then, Equation 6 becomes equivalent to
              ∀gi′ , gj′ , [(fi,u (pau (i)) + ϵi − gi′ (x−i )             (fj,u (pau (j)) + ϵj − gj′ (x−j )].
                                                                     |=


                                                                                                                        (20)

Given Lemma 4 and following the same arguments as in Maeda & Shimizu (2021), this is equivalent
to
                         (fi,u (pau (i)) + ϵi ) (fj,u (pau (j)) + ϵj ).
                                                              |=


                                                                                           (21)
Since ϵi ϵj , we have
        |=


             (fi,u (pau (i))        ϵj ) ∨ (ni        fj,u (pau (j))) ∨ (fi,u (pau (i))
                               |=



                                                 |=


                                                                                           |=


                                                                                                fj,u (pau (j))).        (22)
The first implies the existence of an unobserved mediator between xj and xi , the second implies the
existence of an unobserved mediator between xi and xj , and the third implies the existence of an
unobserved confounder. Given the assumption of latent variables being confounders and minimality,
this indicates the presence of a latent confounder and no direct cause between xi and xj .

A.2    P ROOF OF L EMMA 2

Proof. When Equation 7 holds, Equation 6 does not. Thus, there is no unobserved confounder
between xi and xj . Assume that xj is a direct cause of xi , and that Equation 7 is satisfied for gi
and gj . xi contains a nonlinear function of ϵj that cannot be removed by gi (x−(i,j) ), thus (xi −
gi (x−(i,j) )) ϵj . Similarly, (xj − gj (x−(i,j) )) ϵi . Thus, we have [(xi − gi (x−(i,j) ) (xj −
             |=


                                                                |=


                                                                                                                   |=


gj (x−(i,j) ))] which contradicts our initial assumption. The same arguments apply when xi is a
direct cause of xj , implying that there can be no causal relationship between xi and xj .

A.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3

Proof. When Equation 9 holds, Equation 6 does not and so there is no latent confounder between xi
and xj . When Equation 8 holds, Equation 7 does not hold and so there is a direct causal relationship
between xi and xj .


                                                               13
Assume that xj is a direct cause of xi . Define g1 (x−i ) = fi,x (pax (i)) and g2 (x−(i,j) ) =
fj,x (pax (j)), giving xi − gi (x−i ) = fi,u (pau (i)) + ϵi and xj − gj (x−(i,j) ) = fj,u (pau (j)) +
ϵj . When there is no latent confounder, fi,u (pau (i)) fj,u (pau (j)). Thus, (fi,u (pau (i)) +


                                                                 |=
    |=
ϵi ) (fj,u (pau (j)) + ϵj ) hods and Equation 9 is satisfied.
Now, assume that xi is a direct cause of xj . Using Lemma 4, we have
                                        ∀gi , [(xi − gi (x−i ) ϵi ].


                                                                 |=
                                                                                                         (23)
Similarly, since xj is a function of xi we also have
                                     ∀gj , [(xj − gj (x−(i,j) ) ϵi ].


                                                                  |=
                                                                                                         (24)
Collectively, this implies
                              ∀gi , gj , [(xi − gi (x−i ) (xj − gj (x−i,j )]


                                                            |=
                                                                                                         (25)
which contradicts Equation 9. Thus, if Equation 9 is satisfied then xj is a direct cause of xi .

B        P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2
To prove Proposition 2, we need the following lemma:
Lemma 5. Assume a variational distribution qϕ (G) over a space of graphs Gϕ , where each graph
G ∈ Gϕ has a non-zero associated weight wϕ (G). With the soft prior p(G) defined as Equation 17
and bounded λ1 , λ2 , ρ, α, we have
                                         1
                                     lim   KL[qϕ (G)∥p(G)] = 0.                                          (26)
                                    N →∞ N


Proof. This directly follows from Lemma 1 of (Geffner et al., 2022).

Now we can proceed to prove Proposition 2:

Proof. For N-ADMG, in the infinite data limit LELBO becomes
        N                                             N
     1 X                                           1 X                      1
 lim       Eqϕ (G)q(un |G) [log pθ (xn , un |G)] −       H[q(un |xn , G)] − KL [q(G)||p(G)]
N →∞ N                                             N                       N
       n=1                                           n=1                   |     {z       }
                                                                                                →0
              N                                                          N
            1 X X                                                      1 X
= lim                    wϕ (G)Eq(u|x,G) [log pθ (xn |un , G)] −               Eq(G) [KL [q(un |xn G)||p(un |xn , G)]] .
    N →∞ N                                                             N n=1
              n=1 G∈Gϕ
                                                                                                       (27)
where the zeroing of the KL divergence follows from Lemma 5. Given fixed θ, the optimal posterior
q ∗ (un |xn , G) satisfies q ∗ (un |xn , G) = pθ (un |xn , G) due to the flexibility assumption. Thus,
                                  lim LELBO (θ, ϕ, q ∗ (un |xn , G))
                                 N →∞
                                            N
                                    1 X X
                              = lim            wϕ (G)log pθ (xn |G)
                               N →∞ N                                                                    (28)
                                      n=1 G∈Gϕ
                               Z          X
                              = p(x; G0 )    wϕ (G) log pθ (x|G)dx
                                                G∈Gϕ

where p(x; G0 ) denotes
                    R the data  generation distribution with the ground truth           0
                                                                               P ADMG, G . Let
  ∗   ∗                     0
(θ , G ) = arg max p(x; G ) log pθ (x|G)dx be the MLE solution. Since G∈Gϕ wϕ (G) = 1,
wϕ (G) > 0, we have
                 X
                      wϕ (G)Ep(x;G0 ) [log pθ (x|G)] ≤ Ep(x;G0 ) [log pθ∗ (x; G∗ )]
                   G∈Gϕ



                                                       14
                         P
with the optimal value of G∈Gϕ wϕ (G)Ep(x;G0 ) [log pθ (x|G)] is achieved when every graph G ∈
Gϕ and associated parameter θG satisfies

                        Ep(x;G0 ) [log pθG (x|G)] = Ep(x;G0 ) [log pθ∗ (x|G∗ )] .                 (29)

Since the model is correctly specified, the MLE solution (θ∗ , G∗ ) satisfies

                        Ep(x;G0 ) [log pθ∗ (x|G∗ )] = Ep(x;G0 ) log p(x; G0 )



Therefore, condition Equation 29 implies for every graph G′ ∈ Gϕ , G′ = G0 under the regularity
condition; or equivalently, Gϕ = {G′ = G0 }. This proves our statement that qϕ′ (G) = δ(G = G′ ),
where G′ = G0 .



C    E STIMATING T REATMENT E FFECTS

For all experiments we consider, the causal quantity of interest we wish to estimate is the expected
average treatment effect (ATE), Eqϕ (G) [ATE(a, b|G)], where the expectation is taken with respect
to our learned posterior over causal graphs qϕ (G):

     Eqϕ (G) [ATE(a, b|G)] = Eqϕ (G) Ep(xY |do(xT =b),G) [xY ] − Ep(xY |do(xT =b),G) [xY ] .    (30)

This requires samples from p(xY |do(xT = b), G) = p(xY |xT = b, Gdo(xT ) ), where Gdo(xT ) is the
‘mutilated’ graph obtained by removing incoming edges into xT . We can achieve this by simulating
the learnt SCM on Gdo(xT ) whilst keeping xT = b fixed. Note that qϕ (u|x) is not used to estimate
the ATE; it suffices to sample u from the prior distribution, p(u). In our setting, the inference MLP
qϕ (u|x) is only used as a means through which the likelihood of the data can be evaluated efficiently,
and thus model parameters learned. This is in a similar spirit to VAEs (Kingma & Welling, 2013).


D    R ELATED W ORK O N C AUSAL I NFERENCE U NDER L ATENT
     C ONFOUNDING

Attempting to perform causal inference in the presence of latent confounding can lead to biased esti-
mates (Pearl, 2012). Whilst the observed data distribution may still be identifiable, estimating causal
effects are not (Spirtes et al., 2000). A recent string of work has made progress in the case where
the effects of multiple interventions are being estimated (Tran & Blei, 2017; Ranganath & Perotte,
2018; Wang & Blei, 2019; D’Amour, 2019). An alternative approach is to assume identifiability of
the joint distribution over both latent and observed variables given just the observations. Louizos
et al. (2017) point out that there are many cases in which this is possible (Khemakhem et al., 2020;
Kingma & Welling, 2013). Nevertheless, all these methods assume the underlying causal graph is
known. More recently, Mohammad-Taheri et al. (2021) argue that a DAG latent variable model
trained on data can be used for down-stream causal inference tasks even if its parameters are non-
identifiable, as long as the query can be identified from the observed variables according to the
do-calculus.


E    A DDITIONAL D ISCUSSIONS ON S TRUCTURAL I DENTIFIABILITY OF
     L ATENT VARIABLES

In Section 3.2, we argued that the identifiability of ADMG does not imply the structural identifiabil-
ity of the magnified SCM. In this section, we will present more discussions on certain identifiability
of latent structures (of magnified SCMs). In general, these examples demonstrate that for linear
non-Gaussian ANMs the structure of latent variables can be refined beyond the assumption of latent
confounders acting between pairs of non-adjacent observed variables, whilst the same techniques
cannot achieve the same for non-linear ANMs.


                                                   15
E.1   D ETERMINING C AUSAL S TRUCTURE A MONGST L ATENT VARIABLES

Recently, Cai et al. (2019) demonstrated that it is possible to discover the structure amongst latent
variables using their so-called Triad constraints. Their method is limited to the linear non-Gaussian
ANM case. In this section, we demonstrate that an analogous constraint isn’t available for non-linear
ANMs.

                f12                                                                    f21
          u1              u2                                                     u1            u2
       f1i            f2j           f2k                                        f1i           f2j    f2k
          xi              xj              xk                                      xi           xj         xk

                       (a)                                                                    (b)

       Figure 4: The two possible latent variable structures considered by Cai et al. (2019).


Consider the causal graphs shown in Figure 4a and Figure 4b.
Lemma 6 (Linear non-Gaussian identifiability). In the linear non-Gaussian ANM case, Equation 31
is satisfied only for the causal graph shown in Figure 4b. In the non-linear ANM case, Equation 31
is not satisfied for either Figure 4a or Figure 4b.
                                               ∃g,   xi − g(xj ) xk|=                                          (31)

Sketch of Proof. For the causal graph in Figure 4a, Equation 31 is equivalent to
                ∃g     f1i (u1 ) + ϵi − g(f2j (f12 (u1 ), u2 ), ϵj ) f2k (f12 (u1 ), u2 ) + ϵk .
                                                                         |=


                                                                                                               (32)
On the right, we have some function of the latent variables u1 and u2 , f2k (f12 (u1 ), u2 ). On the left,
we have some function of the same noise terms, f1i (u1 ) − g(f2j (f12 (u1 ), ϵj ). To remove u1 from
both sides, we require g to be non-zero and so a term including u2 is still present. To remove u2 , we
again require g to be non-zero and so a term including u1 is still present. Thus, Equation 31 is not
satisfied in either the linear non-Gaussian or non-linear ANM case.
For the causal graph in Figure 4b, Equation 31 is equivalent to
                     ∃g      f1i (f21 (u2 ), u1 ) + ϵi − g(f2j (u2 ) + ϵj ) f2k (u2 ) + ϵk .
                                                                                 |=


                                                                                                               (33)
In the linear case, we can construct a linear g to remove u2 fom the left side so that Equation 31
holds (i.e. g = f1if2j
                    f21
                        ). In the non-linear case, u1 and u2 are coupled in the leftmost term and cannot
be removed by a term involving u2 and ϵj . Hence, Equation 31 is violated.

E.2   D ETERMINING THE N UMBER OF L ATENT C ONFOUNDERS

Here, we consider whether the number of latent confounders can be determined in the non-linear
ANM case. Lemma 7 shows that in the linear non-Gaussian case, the number of latent confounders
acting between a triplet of confounded observed variables can be determined (by verifying certain
constraints on marginal distributions on observed variables), whilst the same approach cannot be
used in the non-linear ANM case.
Consider the two causal graphs shown in Figure 5a and Figure 5b.
Lemma 7 (Linear non-Gaussian identifiability). In the linear non-Gaussian ANM case, Equation 34
is satisfied only for the causal graph shown in Figure 4b. In the non-linear ANM case, Equation 34
is not satisfied for either Figure 4a or Figure 4b.
                                               ∃g,   xi − g(xj )
                                                                   |=


                                                                        xk .                                   (34)

Sketch of Proof. For Figure 5b, Equation 34 is equivalent to
                               ∃g    fi (u) + ϵi − g(fj (u) + ϵj ) fk (u) + ϵk .
                                                                         |=


                                                                                                               (35)


                                                         16
In the linear non-Gaussian case, it is straightforward to set g = ffji to remove the common noise term
u from the left term and make the two sides independent. In the non-linear case, when fi ̸= fj the
common noise term u cannot be removed from the left as g must be non-linear, and thus produces a
term that involves both u and ϵj . For Figure 5a, Equation 34 is equivalent to
                    ∃g fi (u1 , u2 ) + ϵi − g(fj (u1 , u3 ) + ϵj ) fk (u2 , u3 ) + ϵk .


                                                                |=
                                                                                                   (36)
u2 cannot be removed from the left, and so Equation 34 does not hold in either the linear non-
Gaussian or non-linear case.

          u1           u2           u3                                            u
       f1i f2i f1j    f3j f2k f3k                                       fi   fj         fk
          xi       xj        xk                                    xi             xj         xk

                       (a)                                                        (b)

      Figure 5: Two possible latent structures that confound each pair of variables xi , xj and xk .


F     O PTIMISATION D ETAILS
F.1     O PTIMISATION D ETAILS FOR N-ADMG

As discussed in Section 5, we gradually increase the prior hyperparameters ρ and α throughout
training. This is done using the augmented Lagrangian procedure for optimisation (). The optimisa-
tion process interleaves two steps: 1) optimise the objective for fixed values of ρ and α for a certain
number of steps; and ii) update the values of ρ and α. Steps i) and ii) and ran until convergence, or
the maximum number of optimisation steps is reached. We describe these two steps in more detail
below.

Step i). The objective is optimised for some fixed vales of ρ and α using Adam (). We use a
learning rate of 10−3 for the model parameters and 5 × 10−3 for the variational parameters. We
optimise the objective for a maxmimum of 5000 steps or until convergence (we stop early if the loss
does not improve for 1500 optimisation steps, moving to step ii)). During training, we reduce the
learning rate by a factor of 10 if the training loss does not improve for 1000 steps a maximum of
two times. If we reach the condition a third time, we assume optimisation has converged and move
to step ii). We apply annealing to the KL-divergence between the approximate posterior and prior
over the latent variables. The annealing contant is fixed for each step i), and increased linearly over
the first optimisation loops.

Step ii). We initialise ρ = 1 and α = 0. At the beginning of step i) we measure the DAG /
bow-free penalty P1 = Eqϕ (G) [h(G)]. At the beginning of step ii), we measure this penalty again,
P2 = Eqϕ (G) [h(G)]. If P2 < P1 , we leave ρ unchanged and update α ← α + ρP2 . Otherwise, if
P2 ≥ 0.65P1 , we leave α unchanged and update ρ ← 10ρ. We repeat the steps i) to ii) a maximum
of 30 times or until convergence (measured as α or ρ reaching some max value which we set to 103
for both).

F.2     A DDITIONAL H YPERPARAMETERS

Prior Hyperparameters. We use the sparsity inducing prior hyperparameters λs,1 = λs,2 = 5.

ELBO approximation. We construct an approximation to the ELBO in Equation 15 using a single
sample from the approximate posteriors. For evaluating the gradients of the ELBO we use the
Gumbel softmax method with a hard forward pass and soft backward pass with temperature of 0.25.

Neural network architectures. The functions ξ1 , ξ2 and ℓ used in the likelihood and the inference
network used to parameterise qϕ (u|x) are all two hidden layer MLPs with 80 hidden units per hidden
layer.

                                                   17
Non-Gaussian noise model. For the non-Gaussian noise model

ATE estimation. For ATE estimation we compute expectations by drawing 1000 graphs from the
learnt posterior, and for each graph we draw two samples of xY for a total of 2000 samples which
we used to form a Monte Carlo estimate.

G     DATASET D ETAILS
G.1   S YNTHETIC F ORK -C OLLIDER DATASET

We constructed a 2000 sample synthetic dataset with the causal structure shown in Figure 1 by
sampling from the following SEM:
              [u1 , u2 , ϵ1 , ϵ2 , ϵ3 , ϵ4 , ϵ5 ]T ∼ N (0, I)
                                               x 1 = ϵ1
                                                     √
                                               x2 = 6 exp(−u21 ) + 0.1ϵ2
                                                     √             √                              (37)
                                               x3 = 6 exp(−u21 ) + 6 exp(−u22 ) + 0.2ϵ3
                                                     √             √
                                               x4 = 6 exp(−u22 ) + 6 exp(−x21 ) + 0.1ϵ4
                                                     √
                                               x5 = 6 exp(−x21 ) + 0.1ϵ5 .
Variables u1 and u2 are latent confounders acting on variable pairs x2 and x3 , and x3 and x4 ,
respectively.

G.2   L ATENT CONFOUNDED ER DATASET

We generate synthetic datasets from ADMG extension of Erdős-Rényi (ER) graph model
(Lachapelle et al., 2019; Zheng et al., 2020). An ER(d, e, m) dataset is generated according the
following procedures:

1. Generate a d×d directed adjacency matrix GD of a ADMG from Erdős-Rényi (ER) graph model,
   whose expected directed edges equal to e;
2. Simulate d × d bidirected adjacency matrix GB via random Bernoulli sampling, whose expected
   number equals to m;
3. Simulate exogenous noises ϵi from a zero mean Gaussian distribution with standard deviation of
   0.1;
4. Simulate latent variables u from a zero mean Gaussian distribution with standard deviation of
   0.1;
5. Simulate each observed variable as xi = fi (xpa(i;GD ) ) + gi (upa(i;GB ) ) + ϵi , where fi , gi are
                                                                   2
   randomly sampled nonlinear functions of the form: y = wT e−x .
6. Remove u from the sampled dataset.

G.3   IHDP DATASET D ETAILS

This dataset contains measurements of both infants (birth weight, head circumference, etc.) and
their mother (smoked cigarettes, drank alcohol, took drugs, etc) during real-life data collected in a
randomised experiment. The main task is to estimate the effect of home visits by specialists on fu-
ture cognitive test scores of infants. The outcomes of treatments are simulated artificially as in Hill
(2011); hence the outcomes of both treatments (home visits or not) on each subject are known. Note
that for each subject, our models are only exposed to only one of the treatments; the outcomes of the
other potential/counterfactual outcomes are hidden from the mode, and are only used for the purpose
of ATE evaluation. To make the task more challenging, additional confoundings are manually intro-
duced by removing a subset (non-white mothers) of the treated children population. In this way we
can construct the IHDP dataset of 747 individuals with 6 continuous covariates and 19 binary covari-
ates. We use 10 replicates of different simulations based on setting B (log-linear response surfaces)


                                                  18
Figure 6: Run time results for N-BF-ADMG and CAM-UV on a 12 variable synthetic ER dataset.
The figure shows mean results ± standard deviation across five randomly generated datasets.


of Hill (2011), which can downloaded from https://github.com/AMLab-Amsterdam/CEVAE.
We use a 70%/30% train-test split ratio. Before training our models, all continuous covariates are
normalised.

H    RUN T IME C OMPARISON
Here, we compare the run time of N-BF-ADMG and CAM-UV on a synthetically generated ER(12,
50, 10) dataset. The results are shown in Figure 6. N-BF-ADMG is trained using 30k epochs to
ensure convergence, whose run time can be further reduced via early stopping etc. The results in
Figure 6 highlight that methods based on continuous optimisation (N-BF-ADMG) offer a significant
improvement in run time relative to methods based on conditional independency tests (CAM-UV)
for large datasets. In combination with the results in the main paper, this shows the empirical validity
of deep learning approach for identifying ADMGs that scales to larger dataset, without sacrificing
accuracy.


                                                  19
