Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I DENTIFYING W EIGHT-VARIANT L ATENT C AUSAL
M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         The task of causal representation learning aims to uncover latent higher-level causal
         representations that affect lower-level observations. Identifying true latent causal
         representations from observed data, while allowing instantaneous causal relations
         among latent variables, remains a challenge, however. To this end, we start from
         the analysis of three intrinsic indeterminacies in identifying latent space from
         observations: transitivity, permutation indeterminacy, and scaling indeterminacy.
         We find that transitivity acts as a key role in impeding the identifiability of latent
         causal representations. To address the unidentifiable issue due to transitivity,
         we introduce a novel identifiability condition where the underlying latent causal
         model satisfies a linear-Gaussian model, in which the causal coefficients and the
         distribution of Gaussian noise are modulated by an additional observed variable.
         Under some mild assumptions, we can show that the latent causal representations
         can be identified up to trivial permutation and scaling. Furthermore, based on this
         theoretical result, we propose a novel method, termed Structural caUsAl Variational
         autoEncoder (SuaVE), which directly learns latent causal representations and
         causal relationships among them, together with the mapping from the latent causal
         variables to the observed ones. We show that SuaVE learns the true parameters
         asymptotically. Experimental results on synthetic and real data demonstrate the
         identifiability and consistency results and the efficacy of SuaVE in learning latent
         causal representations.


1   I NTRODUCTION

While there is no universal formal definition, one widely accepted feature of disentangled repre-
sentations (Bengio et al., 2013) is that a change in one dimension corresponds to a change in one
factor of variation in the underlying model of the data, while having little effect on others. The
underlying model is rarely available for interrogation, however, which makes learning disentangled
representations challenging. Several excellent works for disentangled representation learning have
been proposed that focus on enforcing independence over the latent variables that control the factors
of variation (Higgins et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Locatello et al., 2019; Kim & Mnih, 2018;
Locatello et al., 2020). In many applications, however, the latent variables are not statistically
independent, which is at odds with the notion of disentanglement above, i.e., foot length and body
height exhibit strong positive correlation in the observed data (Träuble et al., 2021).
Causal representation learning avoids the aforementioned limitation, as it aims to learn a representa-
tion that exposes the unknown high-level causal structural variables, and the relationships between
them, from a set of low-level observations (Schölkopf et al., 2021). Unlike disentangled representa-
tion learning, it identifies the possible causal relations among latent variables. In fact, disentangled
representation learning can be viewed as a special case of causal representation learning where
the latent variables have no causal influences (Schölkopf et al., 2021). One of the most prominent
additional capabilities of causal representations is the ability to represent interventions and to make
predictions regarding such interventions (Pearl, 2000), which enables the generation of new samples
that do not lie within the distribution of the observed data. This can be particularly useful to improve
the generalization of the resulting model. Causal representations also enable answering counterfactual
questions, e.g., would a given patient have suffered heart failure if they had started exercising a year
earlier (Schölkopf et al., 2021)?


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Despite its advantages, causal representation learning is a notoriously hard problem—without certain
assumptions, identifying the true latent causal model from observed data is generally not possible.
There are three primary approaches to achieve identifiability: 1) adapting (weakly) supervised
methods with given latent causal graphs or/and labels (Kocaoglu et al., 2018; Yang et al., 2021;
Von Kügelgen et al., 2021; Brehmer et al., 2022), 2) imposing sparse graphical conditions, e.g., with
bottleneck graphical conditions (Adams et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2020; Lachapelle et al., 2021), 3)
using temporal information (Yao et al., 2021; Lippe et al., 2022). A brief review is provided in Section
2. For the supervised approach, when labels are known, the challenging identifiability problem in
latent space has been transferred to an identifiability problem in the observed space, for which some
commonly-used functional classes have been proven to be identifiable (Zhang & Hyvarinen, 2012;
Peters et al., 2014). Given latent causal graphs overly depends on domain knowledge. For the second
approach, many true latent causal graphs do not satisfy the assumed sparse graph structure. The
temporal approach is only applicable when temporal information or temporal intervened information
among latent factors is available.
In this work, we explore a new direction in the identifiability of latent causal representations, by
allowing causal influences among latent causal variables to change, motivated by recent advances
in nonlinear ICA (Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020). (Hyvarinen et al., 2019;
Khemakhem et al., 2020) have shown that with an additional observed variable u to modulate
latent independent variables, the latent independent variables are identifiable. Then a question
naturally arises: with causal relationships among latent variables, what additional assumptions are
required for the identifiability? To answer this question, we start from the analysis of three intrinsic
indeterminacies in latent space (see Section 3): transitivity, permutation indeterminacy, and scaling
indeterminacy, which further give rise to the following insights. 1) Transitivity is the scourge of
identifiablity of the latent causal model. 2) Permutation indeterminacy means the recovered latent
variables can have arbitrary permutation of the underlying orders, due to the flexibility in latent
space. This nature enables us to enforce the learned causal representations in correct causal orders
regularized by a predefined a directed acyclic supergraph, avoiding troublesome directed acyclic
graph (DAG) constraint. 3) Scaling and permutation indeterminacy only allow recovering latent
causal variables up to permutation and scaling, not the exact values. To overcome the transitivity
challenge we model the underlying causal representation with weight-variate linear Gaussian models,
where both the weights (i.e., causal coefficients) and the mean and variance of the Gaussian noise
are modulated by an additional observed variable u (see Section 4). With these assumptions, we can
show that the latent causal representations can be recovered up to a trivial permutation and scaling.
The key to the identifiability is that the causal influences (weights) among the latent causal variables
are allowed to change. Intuitively, the changing causal influences enable us to obtain interventional
observed data, which enables the identifiability of the latent causal variables. Based on this result, in
Section 5, we further propose a novel method, Structural caUsAl Variational autoEncoder (SuaVE),
for learning latent causal representations with consistency guarantee. Section 6 verifies the efficacy
of the proposed approach on both synthetic and real fMRI data.


2    R ELATED WORK

Due to the challenges of identifiability in causal representation learning, most existing works handle
this problem by imposing assumptions. We thus give a brief review of the related work on this basis.
(Weakly) Supervised Causal Representation Learning Approaches falling within this class assume
known latent causal graphs or labels. CausalGAN (Kocaoglu et al., 2018) requires a-priori knowledge
of the structure of the causal graph of latent variables, which is a significant practical limitation.
CausalVAE (Yang et al., 2021) needs additional labels to supervise the learning of latent variables.
Such labels are not commonly available, however, and manual labeling can be costly and error-prone.
Von Kügelgen et al. (2021) use a known but non-trivial causal graph between content and style
factors to study self-supervised causal representation learning. Brehmer et al. (2022) learn causal
representation in a weakly supervised setting whereby they assume access to data pairs representing
the system before and after a randomly chosen unknown intervention.
Sparse Graphical Structure Most recent progress in identifiability focuses on sparse graphical
structure constraints (Silva et al., 2006; Shimizu et al., 2009; Anandkumar et al., 2013; Frot et al.,
2019; Cai et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2020; 2022). Adams et al. (2021) provided a unifying viewpoint of


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


this approach whereby a sparser model that fits the observation is preferred. However, they primarily
consider linear relations between latent causal variables, and between latent causal variables and
observed variables, which are often violated in real-world applications. Lachapelle et al. (2021)
handles nonlinear causal relation between latent variables by assuming special sparse graphical
structures. However, many latent causal graphs in reality may be more or less arbitrary, beyond a
purely sparse graph structure. In contrast, our work assumes a function class of latent variables, and
does not restrict the graph structure over them.
Temporal Information The temporal constraint that the effect cannot precede the cause has been
used repeatedly in latent causal representation learning (Yao et al., 2021; Lippe et al., 2022; Yao et al.,
2022). For example, Yao et al. (2021) recover latent causal variables and the relations between them
using Variational AutoEncoders and enforcing constraints in causal process prior. Lippe et al. (2022)
learn causal representations from temporal sequences, which requires the underlying causal factors
to be intervened. All of these works can be regarded as special cases of exploring the change of
causal influences among latent variables in time series data. The approach proposed is more general
since the observed auxiliary variable u could represent time indices, domain indices, or almost any
additional or side information.
Besides, Kivva et al. (2021) considers a nonlinear setting for latent causal discovery. It assumes
discrete latent causal variables that are rendered identifiable by a mixture oracle, while in this work
we consider continues latent causal variables.


3     T HREE I NDETERMINACIES IN L ATENT C AUSAL M ODELS

In this section, we first build a connection between nonlinear ICA and causal representation learning,
by exploiting the correspondence between the independence of latent variables in nonlinear ICA
and the independence of latent noise variables in causal representations. We then consider three
indeterminacies in latent space: transitivity, permutation indeterminacy, and scaling indeterminacy,
and analyse their impact on identifiability.


3.1   R ELATING C AUSAL R EPRESENTATION L EARNING WITH I DENTIFIABLE N ONLINEAR ICA

Causal representation learning aims to uncover latent
higher-level causal representations that can explain
lower-level raw observations with a nonlinear mapping.
Specifically, we assume that the observed variables x
are influenced by latent causal variables zi , and the
causal structure among zi can be any directed acyclic
graph (which is unknown). For each latent causal vari-
able zi , there is a corresponding latent noise variable
ni , as shown in Figure 1, which represents some un-
measured factors that influence zi . The latent noise
variables ni are assumed to be independent 1 with each        Figure 1: Causal representation with u.
other, conditional on the observed variable u, in a
causal system (Peters et al., 2017), so it is natural to leverage recent progress in nonlinear ICA
(Hyvarinen et al., 2019; Khemakhem et al., 2020), which has shown that the independent latent
noise variables ni are identifiable under relatively mild assumptions, if they are modulated by an
additionally observed variable u. For example, if {ni } are Gaussian distributed with their mean and
variance modulated by an observed variable u, and the mapping from n to z is invertible. Taking one
step further, our goal is to recover the latent causal variables zi . However, with the assumptions for
the identifiability of latent noise variables ni from nonlinear ICA, it is still insufficient to identify
the latent causal variables zi . The reason of such non-identifiability will be given in Section 3.2.
Given this fact, a further question is what additional conditions are needed to recover the latent causal
variables zi . The corresponding identifiability conditions will be given in Section 4.

  1
    For convenience in the later parts, with a slight abuse of definition, independent ni means that ni are
mutually independent conditional on the observed variable u.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   T RANSITIVITY: THE C HALLENGE OF I DENTIFYING L ATENT C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS

Even with the identifiable ni , it is impossible to identify the latent causal variables zi without
additional assumptions. To interpret this point, for simplicity, let us only consider the influences
of z1 and z2 on x in Figure 1. According to the graph structure in Figure 1, assume that z1 := n1 ,
z2 := z1 + n2 and x := f (z1 , z2 ) + ε (case 1). We then consider the graph structure shown in the left
column of Figure 2, where the edge z1 → z2 has been removed, and assume that z1 := n1 , z2 := n2
and x := f ◦ g(z1 , z2 ) + ε where g(z1 , z2 ) = [z1 , z1 + z2 ] (case 2). Interestingly, we find that the
causal models in case 1 and case 2 generate the same observed data x, which implies that there are
two different causal models to interpret the same observed data. Clearly, z2 in both the two equivalent
causal structures are different, and thus z2 is unidentifiable.
Similarly, we can also cut the edge z1 →
z3 in Figure 1, obtaining another equiv-
alent causal graph as shown in the right
of Figure 2. That is, we can have two dif-
ferent z3 to interpret the same observed
data, and thus z3 is unidentifiable. Since
there exists many different equivalent
causal structures, the latent causal vari-
ables in Figure 1 is unidentifiable. Such
result is because that the effect of z1 on
z2 (or z3 ) in latent space can be ‘ab-             Figure 2: Two equivalent graph structures.
sorbed’ by the nonlinear function from z
to x. We term this indeterminacy transitivity in this work. We will show how to handle this challenge
in Section 4. Before that, we introduce the other two indeterminacies in latent space, which assists in
understanding the proposed identifiablity result.

3.3   S CALING I NDETERMINACY IN R ECOVERING L ATENT C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS

The scaling indeterminacy of latent causal variables is also an intrinsic indeterminacy in latent space.
Again, for simplicity, we only consider the influence of z1 and z2 on x in Figure 1, and assume that
z1 := n1 , z2 := z1 + n2 and x := f (z1 , z2 ) + ε. Under this setting, if the value of z1 is scaled by
s, e.g. s × z1 , we can easily obtain the same observed data x by: 1) letting z2 := 1s × z1 + n2 and
2) x := f ◦ g(z1 , z2 ) + ε where g(z1 , z2 ) = [s × z1 , z1 ]. This indeterminacy is because the scaling
of the latent variables zi can be ‘absorbed’ by the nonlinear function from z to x and the causal
functions among the latent causal variables. Therefore, without additional information to determine
the values of the latent causal variables zi , it is only possible to identify the latent causal variable up
to scaling, not exactly recovering the values. In general, this scaling does not affect identifying the
causal structure among the latent causal variables. We will further discuss this point in Section 4.

3.4   P ERMUTATION I NDETERMINACY IN R ECOVERING L ATENT C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS

Due to the nature of ill-posedness, latent causal repre-
sentation learning suffers from permutation indetermi-
nacy, where the recovered latent causal representations
have an arbitrary permutation. For example, assume
that the underlying (synthetic) latent causal represen-             Figure 3: A Causal Supergraph.
tations are corresponding to the size, color, shape, and
location of an object, and we obtain the recovered latent
causal representations z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 . Permutation indeterminacy means that we can not ensure that the
recovered z1 represents which specified semantic information, e.g., the size or the color. Therefore,
without additional information to determine the order of the recovered latent causal representations
zi , it is only possible to identify the latent causal representations up to permutation.
Although the flexibility and ambiguity in latent space causes permutation indeterminacy bringing
some troubles, they also bring a benefit for learning latent causal representations with a straightforward
way to handle the causal order on latent causal representations. That is, we can always pre-define a
causal order z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , without specified semantic information for the nodes. Based on this, we


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


can further pre-define a causal supergraph as depicted by Figure 3 2 . As a result, the four predefined
nodes z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 are enforced to learn four corresponding latent variables in the correct causal order.
For example, assume that a correct underlying causal order is: size ≻ color ≻ shape ≻ location. Since
z1 is the first node in the predefined causal supergraph, z1 is enforced to the semantic information of
the first node in the correct underlying causal order, e.g., the size. Similarly, z2 is enforced to the
semantic information of the second node in the correct underlying causal order, e.g., the color. The
proposed causal supergraph can naturally ensure a directed acyclic graph estimation in learning causal
representation, avoiding DAG constraints (such as the one proposed in Zheng et al. (2018)). We will
further show how to implement it in the proposed method for learning latent causal representations in
Section 5.


4    I DENTIFIABLE L ATENT C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS WITH
     W EIGHT- VARIANT L INEAR G AUSSIAN M ODELS

As discussed in Section 3.2, the key factor that
impedes identifiable causal representations is
the transitivity in latent space. Note that the tran-
sitivity is because the causal influences among
the latent causal variables may be ‘absorbed’ by
the nonlinear mapping from latent variables z
to the observed variable x. To address this is-
sue, we allow causal influences among latent
causal variables to be modulated by an addition-
ally observed variable u, represented by the red
edge in Figure 4. Intuitively, variant causal in-
fluences among latent causal variables cannot
be ‘absorbed’ by an invariant nonlinear map-          Figure 4: The proposed Latent Causal Model.
ping from z to x, resulting in identifiable causal
representations. We assume x and z satisfy the following causal models:


                                        ni :∼ N (βi,1 (u), βi,2 (u)),                                       (1)
                                        zi := λTi (u)(z) + ni ,                                             (2)
                                        x := f (z) + ε                                                      (3)

where

        • each noise term ni is Gaussian distributed with mean βi,1 (u) and variance βi,2 (u); both
          βi,1 and βi,2 can be nonlinear mappings. Moreover, the distribution of ni is modulated by
          the observed variable u.
        • In Eq. (2), λi (u) denote the vector corresponding to the causal weights from z to zi , e.g.
          λi (u) = [λ1,i (u), λ2,i (u), ..., λn,i (u)], and each λj,i could be a nonlinear mapping.
        • In Eq. (3), f denote a nonlinear mapping, and ε is independent noise with probability density
          function pε (ε).

In Eq. (2), we assume the latent causal model of each zi satisfies a linear causal model with the causal
weights being modulated by u, and we call it weight-variant linear Gaussian model. Therefore,
p(z|u) satisfies the following multivariate Gaussian distribution:

                                          p(λ,β) (z|u) = N (µ, Σ),                                          (4)

    2
      Here a causal supergraph is defined a directed acyclic graph in which there is a directed edge for any two
variables.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with the mean µ and the covariance matrix Σ computed by the following recursion relations (Bishop
& Nasrabadi, 2006; Koller & Friedman, 2009):
                   X                                   X
              µi =       λi,j (u)µj + βi,1 (u), Σi,i =      λ2i,j (u)Σj,j + βi,2 (u),
                      j∈pai                                       j∈pai
                         X                                                                                 (5)
               Σi,j =           λj,k (u)Σi,k ,   f or   i ̸= j,
                        k∈paj

where pai denotes the parent nodes of zi .
Furthermore, this multi-variate Gaussian can be re-formulated with the following exponential family:
                                                1
                         p(T,λ,β) (z|u) =              exp TT (z)η(u) ,                         (6)
                                           Z(λ, β, u)
where the natural parameter η(u) = [Σ−1 µ; − 21 vec(Σ−1 )],Z(λ, β, u) denotes the normalizing
constant, and the sufficient statistic T(z) = [z; vec(zzT )] (‘vec’ denotes the vectorization of a
matrix). We further denote by Tmin the minimal sufficient statistic and by k its dimension, with
2n ≤ k ≤ n + (n ∗ (n + 1))/2. In particular, k = 2n corresponds to the case when Tmin (z) =
[z1 , z2 , ..., zn , z12 , z22 , ..., zn2 ], or in other words, there is no edges among the latent variables z,
while k = n + (n ∗ (n + 1))/2 corresponds to a full-connected causal graph over z. So with
different causal structures over z, the dimension k may vary. For the graph structure in Figure 1,
Tmin (z) = [z1 , z2 , z3 , z4 , z12 , z22 , z32 , z42 , z1 z2 , z1 z3 , z3 z4 ] and k = 11.
The following theorem shows that under certain assumptions on the nonlinear mapping f and the
variability of u, the latent variable z can be identifiability up to trivial permutation and scaling.

Theorem 4.1 Suppose latent causal variables z and the observed variable x follow the generative
models defined in Eq. 1- Eq. 3, with parameters (f , λ, β). Assume the following holds:
      (i) The set {x ∈ X |φε (x) = 0} has measure zero (i.e., has at most countable number of
          elements), where φε is the characteristic function of the density pε .
     (ii) The function f in Eq. 3 is bijective.
    (iii) There exist k + 1 distinct points u0 , u1 , ..., uk such that the matrix
                                     L = (η(u1 ) − η(u0 ), ..., η(uk ) − η(u0 ))                           (7)
          of size k × k is invertible.
    (iv) For each i, j, λi,j (0) = 0,
then the true latent causal variables z are related to the estimated latent causal variables ẑ by the
following relationship:
                                            z = Pẑ + c,
where P denotes the permutation matrix with scaling, c denotes a constant vector.

Intuitively, the identifiability result benefits from the weight-variant linear Gaussian model in Eq.
2. The auxiliary observed variable u modulates the variant weights among latent causal variables,
which can be regarded as an intervention and contributes to the identifiability, so a wrong causal
structure over the latent variables will violate the assumed model class. As a challenging problem,
causal representation learning is known to be generally impossible without further assumptions.
The proposed weight-variant linear Gaussian model explores the possibility of identifiable causal
representation learning, without any special causal graphical structure constraints. The proof is given
in Appendix.
The above theorem has shown that the latent causal variables can be identified up to trivial permutation
and linear scaling. With this result, identifiability of causal structure in latent space reduces to the
identifiability of the causal structure in observed space. With the help of recent progress in causal
discovery from heterogeneous data (Huang* et al., 2020), the following corollary shows that the
causal structure among latent variables z is also identifiable up to the Markov equivalence class.
Moreover, although there exists scaling indeterminacy for the recovered latent variables as stated in
Theorem 4.1, it does not affect the identifiability of the causal structure.


                                                        6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corollary 4.2 Suppose latent causal variables z and the observed variable x follow the generative
models defined in Eq. 1- Eq. 3, and that the conditions in Theorem 4.1 hold. Then, under the
assumption that the joint distribution over z and u is Markov and faithful to Gz∪u , the acyclic causal
structure among latent variables z can be identified up to the Markov equivalence class of Gz , where
Gz∪u denotes the causal graph over z ∪ u and Gz denotes the causal graph over z.

5     L EARNING C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS WITH W EIGHT-VARIANT L INEAR
      G AUSSIAN M ODELS
Based on the identifiable results above, in this section, we propose a structural causal variational
autoencoder (SuaVE) to learn latent causal representations. We first propose a structural causal
model prior relating to the proposed weight-variant linear Gaussian model. We then show how to
incorporate the proposed prior into the traditional VAE framework (Kingma & Welling, 2013a). We
finally give consistency result for the proposed SuaVE.

5.1     P RIOR ON L EARNING L ATENT C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS

Since we can always have a super causal graph for the causal structure among z as shown in Figure 3
as discussed in 3.4, the corresponding weight matrix λ = [λ1 (u), ..., λn (u)] can be constrained as a
upper triangular matrix with zero-value diagonal elements. As a result, the causal model for the latent
causal variables, e.g., Eq. 1 and Eq. 2, can be reformulated with the following probabilistic model.
                                           Yn                  n
                                                               Y
                         p(z|u) = p(z1 |u)    p(zi |z<i , u) =   N (µzi , δz2i ),                   (8)
                                                 i=2                   i=1
where                            X
                        µzi =            λi,i′ (u)(zi′ ) + βi,1 (u),    δz2i = βi,2 (u).                (9)
                                 i′ <i

The proposed prior naturally ensures a directed acyclic graph estimation, avoiding additional DAG
constraint. In contrast, traditional methods, i.e. CausalVAE (Yang et al., 2021), employ a relaxed
DAG constraint proposed by Zheng et al. (2018) to estimate the causal graph, which may result in a
cyclic graph estimation due to the inappropriate setting of the regularization hyper parameter.

5.2     S UAVE FOR L EARNING L ATENT C AUSAL R EPRESENTATIONS

The nature of the proposed prior in Eq. 8 and Eq. 9 gives rise to the following variational posterior:
                                            n                      n
                                           Y                      Y              ′
                   q(z|x, u) = q(z1 |x, u)    q(zi |z<i , x, u) =     N (µ′zi , δz2i ),          (10)
                                                   i=2                       i=1
where:                         X         ′               ′               ′         ′
                      µ′zi =           λi,i′ (u)zi′ + βi,1 (x, u),     δz2i = βi,2 (x, u).             (11)
                               i′ <i

Therefore, we can arrive at a simple objective:
                        max Eq(z|x,u) (p(x|z, u)) − DKL (q(z|x, u)||p(z|u)),                           (12)
where DKL denotes Kullback–Leibler divergence. Note that the proposed SuaVE is different from
hierarchical VAE models (Kingma et al., 2016; Sønderby et al., 2016; Maaløe et al., 2019; Vahdat &
Kautz, 2020) in that the former has rigorous theoretical justification for identifiability, while the latter
has no such supports without further assumptions. Besides, the theoretical justification implies the
consistency of estimation for the proposed SuaVE as follows:

Theorem 5.1 Assume the following holds:
      (i) The variational distributions Eq. 10 contains the ture posterior distribution pf ,λ,β (z|x, u).
      (ii) We maximize the objective function: max Eq(z|x,u) (p(x|z, u)) − DKL (q(z|x, u)||p(z|u)).

then in the limit of infinite data, the proposed SuaVE learns the true parameters θ = (f , λ, β) up to
z = Pẑ + c, where P denotes the permutation matrix with scaling, c denotes a constant vector.


                                                             7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6    E XPERIMENTS

Synthetic Data We first conduct experiments on synthetic data, generated by the following process:
we divide the latent noise variables into M segments, where each segment corresponds to one
conditional variable u as the segment label. Within each segment, we first sample the mean βi,1
and variance βi,2 from uniform distributions [−2, 2] and [0.01, 3], respectively. We then sample the
weights λi,j from uniform distributions [0.1, 2]. Then for each segment, we generate the latent causal
samples according to the generative model in Eq.3. Finally, we obtain the observed data samples x
by an invertible nonlinear mapping. More details can be found in Appendix.

Comparison We compare the proposed method with identifiable VAE (iVAE) Khemakhem et al.
(2020), β-VAE Higgins et al. (2017), CausalVAEYang et al. (2021), and vanilla VAE Kingma &
Welling (2013b). Among them, iVAE has been proven to be identifiable so that it is able to learn the
true independent noise variables with certain assumptions. While β-VAE has no theoretical support,
it has been widely used in various disentanglement tasks. Note that both methods assume that the
latent variables are independent, and thus they cannot model the relationships among latent variables.
To make a fair comparison in the unsupervised setting, we implement an unsupervised version of
CausalVAE, which is not identifiable.

Performance metric Since the proposed method can recover the latent causal variables up to trivial
permutation and linear scaling, we compute the mean of the Pearson correlation coefficient (MPC) to
evaluate the performance of our proposed method. The Pearson correlation coefficient is a measure
of linear correlation between the true latent causal variables and the recovered latent causal variables.
Note that the Pearson coefficient is suitable for iVAE, since it has been shown that iVAE can also
recover the latent noise variables up to linear scaling under the setting where mean and variance
of the latent noise variables are changed by u (Sorrenson et al., 2020). To remove the permutation
effect, following Khemakhem et al. (2020), we first calculate all pairs of correlation and then solve a
linear sum assignment problem to obtain the final results. A high correlation coefficient means that
we successfully identified the true parameters and recovered the true variables, up to component-wise
linear transformations.


                             (a)                   (b)                   (c)
Figure 5: Performances of the proposed SuaVE in comparison to iVAE, β-VAE, VAE and CausalVAE
in recovering the latent causal variables on synthetic data with different numbers of segments (a), and
with different numbers of the latent causal variables (b). The proposed SuaVE obtain the best MPC,
compared with the others. (c) The SHD obtained by the proposed SuaVE and CausalVAE.

Results We compared the performance of the proposed SuaVE to some variants of VAE mentioned
above. We used the same network architecture for encoder and decoder parts in all these models.
In particular, we add a sub-network to model the conditional prior in both iVAE and the proposed
SuaVE. We further assign an linear SCM sub-network to model the relations among latent causal
variables in the proposed SuaVE. We trained these 5 models on the dataset described above, with
different numbers of segments and different numbers of latent causal variables. For each method, we
use 5 different random seeds for data sampling. Figure 5 (a) shows the performance on two latent
causal variables with different numbers of segment. The proposed SuaVE obtains the score 0.96
approximately for all the different numbers of segment. In contrast, β-VAE, VAE and CausalVAE
fail to achieve a good estimation of the true latent variables, since they are not identifiable. iVAE
obtains unsatisfactory results, since its theory only holds for i.i.d. latent variables. Figure 5 (b) shows
the performance in recovering latent causal variables on synthetic data with different numbers of the
latent causal variables. Figure 5 (c) depicts the structural Hamming distance (SHD) of the recovered
skeletons, causal graphs and completed partial directed acyclic graphs (CPDAG) by the proposed
SuaVE and CausalVAE. Since CausalVAE obtains fully connected graphs, the SHD of the recovered
CPDAG is the same as one of the recovered skeletons.
                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               (a)                     (b)             (c)
Figure 6: Performance on fMRI Data. (a) the performance of the proposed SuaVE in comparison
to iVAE, β-VAE, VAE and CausalVAE in recovering the latent six signals. (b) The skeleton of the
anatomical connections given in Bird & Burgess (2008). (c) The recovered skeleton by the proposed
SuaVE, where the dashed lines indicate errors.



fMRI Data Following Ghassami et al. (2018), we applied the proposed method to fMRI hippocam-
pus dataset (Laumann & Poldrack, 2015), which contains signals from six separate brain regions:
perirhinal cortex (PRC), parahippocampal cortex (PHC), entorhinal cortex (ERC), subiculum (Sub),
CA1, and CA3/Dentate Gyrus (CA3/DA) in the resting states on the same person in 84 successive
days. Each day is considered as different u, thus u is a 84-dimensional vector. Since we are interested
in recovering latent causal variables, we treat the six signals as latent causal variables by applying
a random nonlinear mapping on them to obtain observed data. We then apply various methods on
the observed data to recover the six signals. Figure 6 (a) shows the performance of the proposed
SuaVE in comparison to iVAE, β-VAE, VAE and CausalVAE in recovering the latent six signals.
β-VAE aims to recover independent latent variables, and it obtains an interesting result: enforcing
independence (e.g. β = 25, 50) leads to worse MPC, and relaxing it (though contracting to its own
independence assumption) improves the result (e.g. β = 4). This is because the latent variables given
the time index are not independent in this dataset.
We further verify the ability of the proposed method to recover causal skeleton. We use the anatomical
connections (Bird & Burgess, 2008) as a reference as shown in Figure 6 (b), since causal connections
among the six regions should not exist if there is no anatomical connection. After recovering the
latent causal variables, we estimate the causal skeleton by a threshold (0.1) on the learned λi,j to
remove some edges, and obtain the final causal skeleton. Figure 6 (c) shows an example of the
estimated causal skeleton by the proposed SuaVE. Averaging over 5 different random seeds for the
used nonlinear mapping from latent space to observed space, structural Hamming distance (SHD)
obtained by the proposed SuaVE is 5.0 ± 0.28. In contrast, iVAE, β-VAE and VAE assume latent
variables to be independent, and thus can not obtain the causal skeleton. We further analyse the
result of β-VAE with β = 4 by using the PC algorithm (Spirtes et al., 2001) to discovery skeleton
on the recovered latent variables, and obtain SHD = 5.8 ± 0.91. This means that: 1) β-VAE with
β = 4 does not ensure the strong independence among the recover latent variables as it is expected,
2) the proposed SuaVE is an effective one-step method to discovery the skeleton. The unsupervised
version of CausalVAE is not identifiable, and can also not ensure the relations among the recover
variables to be causal skeleton in principle. In experiments we found that CausalVAE always obtains
fully-connected graphs for the 5 different random seeds, for which SHD is 9.0 ± 0.


7   C ONCLUSION

Identifying latent causal representations is known to be generally impossible without certain assump-
tions. Motivated by recent progress in the identifiability result of nonlinear ICA, we analyse three
intrinsic indeterminacies in latent space, e.g., transitivity, permutation indeterminacy and scaling
indeterminacy, which provide deep insights for identifying latent causal representations. To address
the unidentifiable issue due to transitivity, we explore a new line of research in the identifiability of
latent causal representations, that of allowing the causal influences among the latent causal variables
to change by an additionally observed variable. We show that latent causal representations, modelled
by weight-variant linear Gaussian models, can be identified up to permutation and scaling, with mild
assumptions. We then propose a novel method to consistently learn latent causal representations.
Experiments on synthetic and fMRI data demonstrate the identifiability and consistency results and
the efficacy of the proposed method. Future work may include developing effective methods for
learning latent causal structures and exploring nonlinear causal representations.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Jeffrey Adams, Niels Hansen, and Kun Zhang. Identification of partially observed linear causal
  models: Graphical conditions for the non-gaussian and heterogeneous cases. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Animashree Anandkumar, Daniel Hsu, Adel Javanmard, and Sham Kakade. Learning linear bayesian
  networks with latent variables. In ICML, pp. 249–257, 2013.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE TPAMI, 35(8):1798–1828, 2013.
Chris M Bird and Neil Burgess. The hippocampus and memory: insights from spatial processing.
  Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(3):182–194, 2008.
Christopher M Bishop and Nasser M Nasrabadi. Pattern recognition and machine learning, volume 4.
  Springer, 2006.
Johann Brehmer, Pim De Haan, Phillip Lippe, and Taco Cohen. Weakly supervised causal representa-
  tion learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.16437, 2022.
Ruichu Cai, Feng Xie, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Triad constraints for learning
  causal structure of latent variables. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Ricky TQ Chen, Xuechen Li, Roger Grosse, and David Duvenaud. Isolating sources of disentangle-
  ment in vaes. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Benjamin Frot, Preetam Nandy, and Marloes H Maathuis. Robust causal structure learning with some
  hidden variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 81
  (3):459–487, 2019.
AmirEmad Ghassami, Negar Kiyavash, Biwei Huang, and Kun Zhang. Multi-domain causal structure
 learning in linear systems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
I. Higgins, Loı̈c Matthey, A. Pal, Christopher P. Burgess, Xavier Glorot, M. Botvinick, S. Mohamed,
   and Alexander Lerchner. beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational
   framework. In ICLR, 2017.
B. Huang*, K. Zhang*, J. Zhang, J. Ramsey, R. Sanchez-Romero, C. Glymour, and B. Schölkopf.
  Causal discovery from heterogeneous/nonstationary data. JMLR, 21(89), 2020.
Aapo Hyvarinen, Hiroaki Sasaki, and Richard Turner. Nonlinear ica using auxiliary variables and
  generalized contrastive learning. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 859–868. PMLR, 2019.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoencoders
   and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In AISTAS, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.
Hyunjik Kim and Andriy Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. In ICML, 2018.
D. P. Kingma and M Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. NeurIPS, 2013a.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.           Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013b.
Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Rafal Jozefowicz, Xi Chen, Ilya Sutskever, and Max Welling.
  Improved variational inference with inverse autoregressive flow. In NeurIPS, volume 29, pp.
 4743–4751, 2016.
Bohdan Kivva, Goutham Rajendran, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Bryon Aragam. Learning latent causal
  graphs via mixture oracles. NeurIPS, 2021.
Murat Kocaoglu, Christopher Snyder, Alexandros G Dimakis, and Sriram Vishwanath. Causalgan:
 Learning causal implicit generative models with adversarial training. In ICLR, 2018.
Daphne Koller and Nir Friedman. Probabilistic graphical models: principles and techniques. MIT
  press, 2009.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sébastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodrı́guez López, Yash Sharma, Katie Everett, Rémi Le Priol, Alexandre
   Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization: A
   new principle for nonlinear ica. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.10098, 2021.
Timothy O. Laumann and Russell A. Poldrack, 2015.              URL https://openfmri.org/
  dataset/ds000031/.
Phillip Lippe, Sara Magliacane, Sindy Löwe, Yuki M Asano, Taco Cohen, and Stratis Gavves. Citris:
  Causal identifiability from temporal intervened sequences. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 13557–13603. PMLR, 2022.
Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentan-
  gled representations. In ICML, 2019.
Francesco Locatello, Ben Poole, Gunnar Rätsch, Bernhard Schölkopf, Olivier Bachem, and Michael
  Tschannen. Weakly-supervised disentanglement without compromises. In ICML, 2020.
Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, Valentin Liévin, and Ole Winther. Biva: A very deep hierarchy of
  latent variables for generative modeling. In NeurIPS, 2019.
J. Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
   2000.
Jonas Peters, Joris M. Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal discovery with
  continuous additive noise models. JMLR, 15(58):2009–2053, 2014.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schlkopf. Elements of Causal Inference: Foundations
  and Learning Algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of the
  IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O Hoyer, and Aapo Hyvärinen. Estimation of linear non-gaussian acyclic
  models for latent factors. Neurocomputing, 72(7-9):2024–2027, 2009.
Ricardo Silva, Richard Scheines, Clark Glymour, Peter Spirtes, and David Maxwell Chickering.
  Learning the structure of linear latent variable models. JMLR, 7(2), 2006.
Casper Kaae Sønderby, Tapani Raiko, Lars Maaløe, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Ladder
  variational autoencoders. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Peter Sorrenson, Carsten Rother, and Ullrich Köthe. Disentanglement by nonlinear ica with general
  incompressible-flow networks (gin). arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04872, 2020.
P. Spirtes, C. Glymour, and R. Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT Press, Cambridge,
   MA, 2nd edition, 2001.
Frederik Träuble, Elliot Creager, Niki Kilbertus, Francesco Locatello, Andrea Dittadi, Anirudh Goyal,
  Bernhard Schölkopf, and Stefan Bauer. On disentangled representations learned from correlated
  data. In ICML, pp. 10401–10412. PMLR, 2021.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Julius Von Kügelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Schölkopf, Michel
  Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably
  isolates content from style. In Advances in neural information processing systems, 2021.
Feng Xie, Ruichu Cai, Biwei Huang, Clark Glymour, Zhifeng Hao, and Kun Zhang. Generalized
  independent noise condition for estimating latent variable causal graphs. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Feng Xie, Biwei Huang, Zhengming Chen, Yangbo He, Zhi Geng, and Kun Zhang. Identification of
  linear non-gaussian latent hierarchical structure. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 24370–24387. PMLR, 2022.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mengyue Yang, Furui Liu, Zhitang Chen, Xinwei Shen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang. Causalvae:
 Structured causal disentanglement in variational autoencoder. In CVPR, 2021.
Weiran Yao, Yuewen Sun, Alex Ho, Changyin Sun, and Kun Zhang. Learning temporally causal
 latent processes from general temporal data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.05428, 2021.
Weiran Yao, Guangyi Chen, and Kun Zhang. Learning latent causal dynamics. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2202.04828, 2022.
Kun Zhang and Aapo Hyvarinen. On the identifiability of the post-nonlinear causal model. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1205.2599, 2012.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. Dags with no tears: Continuous
  optimization for structure learning. In NeurIPS, 2018.


                                             12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A       A PPENDIX
A.1     T HE PROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1

The proof of Theorem 4.1 is done in three steps. The steps I is the same as nonlinear ICA Khemakhem
et al. (2020), which builds a connection between any two different solutions by using a simple
convolutional trick made possible by assumption (i). The step II consists of building a linear
connection between any two different solutions by assumptions (iv). This step is different with
nonlinear ICA Khemakhem et al. (2020) in that we employ the assumptions of multivariate Gaussian
as Eq. 6, which can model the linear causal relations among the latent causal variables, while
nonlinear ICA Khemakhem et al. (2020) assumes independent noise variables. The step III shows
that we can recover latent causal variables up to a linear transformation by the identity theorem for
polynomials and assumption (iii). The step IV shows that the linear transformation can be reduced to
permutation transformation by assumption (iv).
Step I: Suppose we have two sets of parameters θ = (f , T, λ, β) and θ̂ = (f̂ , T̂, λ̂, β̂) such that
p(f ,T,λ,β) (x|u) = p(f̂ ,T̂,λ̂,β̂) (x|u) for all pairs (x, u). Then:

              Z                                      Z
                  p(T,λ,β) (z|u)p(f ) (x|z) dz =         p(T̂,λ̂,β̂) (z|u)p(f̂ ) (x|z) dz                   (13)
        Z                                            Z
⇒            p(T,λ,β) (z|u)pε (x − f (z)) dz =     p(T̂,λ̂,β̂) (z|u)pε (x − f̂ (z)) dz                       (14)
    Z                                                           Z
⇒        p(T,λ,β) (f −1 (x̄)|u)volJf −1 (x̄)pε (x − x̄) dx̄ = p(T̂,λ̂,β̂) (f̂ −1 (x̄|u))volJˆf̂ −1 (x̄)pε (x − x̄) dx̄
                                                                                                            (15)
         Z                                           Z
⇒             p̂(T,λ,β,f ,u) (x̄)pε (x − x̄) dx̄ =       p̂(T̂,λ̂,β̂,f̂ ,u) (x̄)pε (x − x̄) dx̄             (16)

⇒                     (p̂(T,λ,β,f ,u) ∗ pε )(x) = (p̂(T̂,λ̂,β̂,f̂ ,u) ∗ pε )(x)                             (17)
⇒                  F [p̂(T,λ,β,f ,u) ](ω)φε (ω) = F [p̂(T̂,λ̂,β̂,f̂ ,u) ](ω)φε (ω)                          (18)
⇒                         F [p̂(T,λ,β,f ,u) ](ω) = F [p̂(T̂,λ̂,β̂,f̂ ,u) ](ω)                               (19)
⇒                             p̂(T,λ,β,f ,u) (x) = p̂(T̂,λ̂,β̂,f̂ ,u) (x)                                   (20)
where:

         • in Eq. 15, J denotes the Jacobian, and we introduce here the volume of a matrix denoted
                                                                                             √     volJ
           as the product of the singular values of J. When J is full column rank, volJ = det J T J,
           and when J is invertible, volJ = |det J|. We made the change of variable x̄ = f (z) on the
           left hand side, and x̄ = f̂ (z) on the right hand side.
         • in Eq. 16, we introduced:
                                p̂(T,λ,β,f ,u) (x) = p(T,λ,β) (f −1 (x)|u)volJf −1 (x)1X (x),               (21)
           on the left hand side, and similarly on the right hand side.
         • in Eq. 17, we used ∗ for the convolution operator.
         • in Eq. 18, we used F [.] to designate the Fourier transform.
         • in Eq. 19, we dropped φε from both sides as it is non-zero almost everywhere (by assumption
           (i)).

Step II By taking the logarithm on both sides of Eq. 20 and replacing p(T,λ,β) by its expression from
Eq. 6, we have:


                           log volJf −1 (x) + TT (f −1 (x))η(u) − log Z(λ, β, u) =                          (22)
                                                    T    −1
                           log volJf̂ −1 (x) + T̂ (f̂         (x))η̂(u) − log Ẑ(λ̂, β̂, u).                (23)


                                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let u0 , u1 , ..., uk+1 be the points provided by assumption (iii) of the Theorem. Similar to nonlinear
ICA Khemakhem et al. (2020), we define η̄(u) = η(u) − η(u0 ). We plug each of those ul , l =
1, ..., k in Eq. 23 to obtain k + 1 equations. We subtract the first equation for u0 from the remaining
k equations. For example, for u0 and uk we have two equations:
                      log volJf −1 (x) + TT (f −1 (x))η(u0 ) − log Z(λ, β, u0 ) =
                                                                                                          (24)
                      log volJf̂ −1 (x) + T̂T (f̂ −1 (x))η̂(u0 ) − log Ẑ(λ̂, β̂, u0 ),
and
                      log volJf −1 (x) + TT (f −1 (x))η(uk ) − log Z(λ, β, uk ) =
                                                                                                          (25)
                   log volJf̂ −1 (x) + T̂T (f̂ −1 (x))η̂(uk ) − log Ẑ(λ̂, β̂, uk ),
Using Eq. 25 subtracts Eq. 24, removing the terms that do not include u, we have:
            TT (f −1 (x))η(uk ) − log Z(λ, β, uk ) − TT (f −1 (x))η(u0 ) + log Z(λ, β, u0 )
                                                                                                          (26)
         =T̂T (f̂ −1 (x))η̂(uk ) − log Ẑ(λ̂, β̂, uk ) − T̂T (f̂ −1 (x))η̂(u0 ) + log Ẑ(λ̂, β̂, u0 ).

As a result, we arrive at:
                                         Z(λ, β, u0 )                   ¯ l )⟩ + log Ẑ(λ̂, β̂, u0 ) .
        ⟨T(f −1 (x)), η̄(ul )⟩ + log                  = ⟨T̂(f̂ −1 (x)), η̂(u                              (27)
                                         Z(λ, β, ul )                                Ẑ(λ̂, β̂, ul )

Let L be the matrix defined in Eq. 7 in assumption (iii), and L̂ similarly (L̂ is not necessarily
invertible). Define bl = log Ẑ(λ̂,β̂,u0 )Z(λ,β,ul )
                             Z(λ,β,u0 )Ẑ(λ̂,β̂,ul )
                                                     and b the vector for bl . Expressing Eq. 27 for all
points ul in matrix form, we get:
                              LT T(f −1 (x)) = L̂T T̂(f̂ −1 (x)) + b.                                     (28)
We multiply both sides of Eq. 28 by the inverse of LT to find:
                                       T(f −1 (x)) = AT̂(f̂ −1 (x)) + c,                                  (29)
where A = (LT )−1 L̂T and c = (LT )−1 b.
Step III As mentioned in Eq. 6, the sufficient statistic T(z) = [z; vec(zzT )]. In this case, the
relationship Eq. 29 becomes:
                                                        
                                           z           ẑ
                                         z2  = A  ẑ2  + c,                                           (30)
                                          zi,j       ẑi,j
where z denotes [z1 , ..., zi ], z2 denotes [z12 , ..., zi2 ], zi,j denotes the vector whose elements are zi zj
for all i ̸= j, A in block matrix can be rewritten as:
                                            (1)                           
                                                A            A(2) A(3)
                                      A =  A(4) A(5) A(6)                                               (31)
                                                A(7) A(8) A(9)
and c as:                                              (1) 
                                                            c
                                               c =  c(2)  .                                             (32)
                                                            c(3)
Then, we have:
                                   z = A(1) ẑ + A(2) ẑ2 + A(3) ẑi,j + c(1) ,                           (33)
                                   z2 = A(4) ẑ + A(5) ẑ2 + A(6) ẑi,j + c(2) .                          (34)

So we can write for each zi :
                          X (1)             X (2)           X (3)               (1)
                     zi =     (Ai,j ẑj ) +  (Ai,j ẑj2 ) +  (Ai,j ẑi ẑj ) + ci ,                       (35)
                               j                  j              j̸=i
                              X (4)          X (5)           X (6)               (2)
                      zi2 =    (Ai,j ẑj ) +  (Ai,j ẑj2 ) +  (Ai,j ẑi ẑj ) + ci .                      (36)
                               j                  j              j̸=i



                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Squaring Eq. 35, we have:
                 X (2)              X (1)             X (3)                 (1)
          zi2 = ( (Ai,j ẑj2 ))2 + ( (Ai,j ẑj ))2 + ( (Ai,j ẑi ẑj ))2 +(ci )2 + .....
                    j                      j                             j̸=i                             (37)
                |       {z        }    |             {z       }      |              {z            }
                        (a)                          (b)                            (c)


It is notable that Eq. 36 and Eq. 37 are derived from Eq. 29 which holds for arbitrary x, then by the
assumption (ii) in Theorem 4.1 that f is a bijective mapping from z to x, and thus Eq. 36 and Eq. 37
must holds for z everywhere. Then by the fact that the right sides of the Eq. 36 and Eq. 37 are both
polynomials with finite degree, we have each coefficients of the two polynomials must be equal. In
more detail, for the term (a) in Eq. 37:
                       X (2)             X (2)               X    (2) (2)
                      ( (Ai,j ẑj2 ))2 =     (Ai,j )2 ẑj4 +   (2Ai,j Ai,j ′ ẑj2 ẑj2′ ).       (38)
                        j                        j                         j̸=j ′

Compared with Eq. 36, since there is no term ẑj4 in Eq. 36, we must have that:

                                                           A(2) = 0.                                      (39)
For the term (c) in Eq. 37:
                                X (3)                X (3)
                               ( (Ai,j ẑi ẑj ))2 =  (Ai,j )2 (ẑi ẑj )2 + ...                          (40)
                                j̸=i                          j̸=i

Compared with Eq. 36, since there is no term (ẑi ẑj )2 in Eq. 36, we must have that:
                                                           A(3) = 0                                       (41)
As a result, Eq. 33 becomes:
                                                 z = A(1) ẑ + c(1) .                                     (42)
The above equation indicates the latent causal variables can be recovered up to linear transformation.
Step IV We then show that the linear transformation matrix A(1) in Eq. 42 must be a permutation
matrix. Since our assumptions in Theorem 4.1 includes the assumptions for identifying the Gaus-
sian noise variables ni , the Gaussian noise variables ni can be recovered up to linear scaling and
permutation according to Sorrenson et al. (2020):
                                                      n = Pn̂ + cn ,                                      (43)
where P denote the permutation matrix. With Eq. 43, the Eq. 42 can be rewritten as follows:
                               B(Pn̂ + cn ) = A(1) (B̂n̂) + c(1) .                                        (44)
                                               (1)                 (1)                    (1)
                              ⇒(BP − A               B̂)n̂ = A           B̂cn + c               − Bcn ,   (45)
where B and B̂ denote lower triangular matrix, for which the main diagonal are 1, the others depend
on λi,j (u) and λ̂i,j (u), respectively. By differentiating Eq. 45 with respect to n̂, we have:
                                               (BP − A(1) B̂)I = 0,                                       (46)
where I denote the identity matrix, which implies that:
                                                      BP = A(1) B̂.                                       (47)
Then A(1) must be an identity matrix. To understand this point, we give a 2-dimensional case as
follows, which can be easily extended to n-dimensional case. Without loss of generality, we assume
P to be diagonal with elements s1,1 , s2,2 .
                                             !                                                     !
                                 (1)     (1)                              (1)   (1)            (1)
        s1,1       0           A1,1 A1,2               1      0         A1,1 + A1,2 λ̂1,2 (u) A1,2
                         =       (1)     (1)                      =       (1)   (1)            (1)   .
   s1,1 λ1,2 (u) s2,2          A2,1 A2,2           λ̂1,2 (u) 1          A2,1 + A2,2 λ̂1,2 (u) A2,2
                                                                                                (48)
                   (1)         (1)             (1)                 (1)
Then we have: A1,2 = 0, A1,1 = s1,1 , A2,2 = s2,2 , and A2,1 = 0 (by our assumption (iv)
λi,j (0) = 0). The proof of other case for P is similar to the above procedure.


                                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2    U NDERSTANDING A SSUMPTIONS IN T HEOREM 4.1



Gaussian assumption on the latent noise variables Our first assumption is implicitly enforcing
Gaussian distribution on the latent noise variables. Note that the assumptions of nonlinear ICA
(Khemakhem et al., 2020) on the noise could be broad exponential family distribution, e.g., Gaussian
distributions, Laplace, Gamma distribution and so on. This work consider Gaussian distribution,
mainly because it can be straightforwardly implemented for the re-parameterization trick in VAE. 2)
it is convenient for simplifying proof process (As shown in Step III in the proof.). It is worthwhile
and promising to extend the Gaussian assumption to exponential family for future work.

Linear model assumption for the latent causal variables As the first work to discuss the relation
between the change of causal influences and identifiability pf latent causal model, this work simply
consider linear models for the latent causal variables, because it can be directly parameterized, which
helps us to analyse the challenge of identifiability and how to handle it. In addition, together with
Gaussian noise, we arrive the same probabilistic model as linear Gaussian Bayesian networks, which
is a well-studied model as mentioned in Eq. 5. We expect that the proposed weights-variant linear
models can motivate more general functional class in the future work, e.g., nonlinear additive noise
models.

Changes of weight and Assumption (iv) We allow changes of weight (e.g., causal influences)
among latent causal variables across u to handle the transitivity problem. We argue that this is
not necessary condition for identifiability (Existing methods, including sparse graph structure and
temporal information, could be regarded as feasible ways to handle the transitivity.), but it is a
sufficient condition to handle the transitivity, and provide a new research line for causal representation
learning. Assumption (iv) is to handle a special case as follows: λi,j (u) = λ′i,j u + b where b is a
non-zero constant. For example, if z2 = (λ′1,2 (u) + b)z1 + n2 , then the term bz1 is still unchanged
across all u, and thus can still be ‘absorbed’ by the nonlinear mapping from latent variables z to the
observed variable x due to the transitivity, which results in non-identifiability. Note that assumption
(iv) is sufficient to handle the special case, but it may not be necessary. There may exist possible
assumption to relax the assumption (iv).

Assumptions (i)-(iii) All three assumptions are motivated by the nonlinear ICA literature (Khe-
makhem et al., 2020), which is to provide guarantee that we can recover latent causal variables zi
up to a linear transformation. Note that three assumptions also provide a support for recovering the
latent noise variables up to linear scaling and permutation.

A.3    T HE P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4.2

Theorem 4.1 has shown that the latent causal variables z can be identified up to trivial permutation
and linear scaling. Hence, the identifiability of the causal structure in latent space can be reduced to
the identifiability of the causal structure in observed space. Moreover, we need to show that the linear
scaling does not affect theoretical identifiability of the causal structure.
For the identifiability of the causal structure in observed space from heterogeneous data, fortunately,
we can leverage the results from Huang* et al. (2020). Corollary 4.2 relies on the Markov condition
and faithfulness assumption and the assumption that the latent change factor (i.e., causal strength in
the linear case) can be represented as a function of the domain index u. Hence, it relies on the same
assumptions as that in Huang* et al. (2020).
It has been shown in Huang* et al. (2020) that if the joint distribution over z and u (z and u are
observed variables here) are Markov and faithful to the augmented graph, then the causal structure
over z ∪ u can be identified up to the Markov equivalence class, by making use of the conditional
independence relationships.
Next, we show that the Markov equivalence class over z is also identifiable. Denote by M the Markov
equivalence class over z ∪ u, and by Mz the Markov equivalence class over z. Then after removing
variable u in M and its edges, the resulting graph (denoted by Mz′ ) is the same as Mz . This is because
of the following reasons. First, it is obvious that Mz′ and Mz have the same skeleton. Second, in


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


this paper, u has an edge to every zi when considering n as latent noise variables, because all causal
strength and noise distributions change with u. Hence, there is no v-structure over u, zi , and zj , so it
is not possible to have more oriented edges in Mz′ . Therefore, Mz′ and Mz have the same skeleton
and the same directions.
Moreover, the conditional independence relationships will not be affected by linear scaling of the
variables, so the conditional independence relationships still hold in the identified latent variables.
Furthermore, for linear-Gaussian models, independence equivalence is the same as distributional
equivalence. This is because of the following reasons. First, since we are concerned with linear
Gaussian models over the latent variables, the identifiability up to equivalence class also holds
for score-based methods that use the likelihood of data as objective functions. This is because
independence equivalence, i.e., two DAGs have the same conditional independence relations, is
the same as distributional equivalence for linear-Gaussian models, i.e., two Bayesian networks
corresponding to the two DAGs can define the same probability distribution. That is to say, score-
based methods also find the structure based on independence relations implicitly. Because the scaling
does not change the independence relations, it will also not affect the identifiability of the graph
structure.
Therefore, the causal structure among latent variables z can be identified up to the Markov equivalence
class.

A.4     T HE PROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

The proof of Theorem 5.1 is similar to the proof of Theorem 4 in non-linear ICA Khemakhem et al.
(2020). If the variational posterior q(z|x, u) is large enough to include the true posterior p(z|x, u),
then by optimizing the loss, the KL term will be zero, and the loss will be equal to the log-likelihood.
Since our identifiability is guaranteed up to permutation and scaling, the consistency of maximum
log-likelihood means that we converge to the true latent causal variables up to permutation and scaling
classes, in the limit of infinite data.



A.5     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

A.5.1    E XPERIMENTS FOR F IGURE 5 ( A )
Data For experimental results of Figure 5 (a) the number of segments (e.g.,u) M is 10,20,30,40
and 50 respectively. For each segment, the number of latent causal variables is 2 and the sample size
is 1000. We consider the following structural causal model
                   n1 := N (β(u)1,1 , β(u)1,2 ),        n2 := N (β(u)2,1 , β(u)2,2 ),                (49)
                   z1 := n1 ,                           z2 := λ1,2 (u)z1 + n2 ,                      (50)
where we sample the mean β(u)i,1 and variance β(u)i,2 from uniform distributions [−2, 2] and
[0.01, 3], respectively. We sample the weights λ1,2 (u) from uniform distributions [0.1, 2]. We sample
latent variable z according to Eqs. 49 and 50, and then mix them using a 2-layer multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) to generate observed x.

Network and Optimization For all methods, we used a encoder, e.g. 3-layer fully connected
network with 30 hidden nodes and Leaky-ReLU activation functions, and decoder, e.g. 3-layer
fully connected network with 30 hidden nodes and Leaky-ReLU activation functions. We also use
3-layer fully connected network with 30 hidden nodes and Leaky-ReLU activation functions. For
optimization, we use Adam optimizer with learning rate 1r = 1e − 3. For hyper-parameters, we set
β = 4 for the β-VAE. For CausalVAE, we set the hyper-parameters as suggested in the paper Yang
et al. (2021).

A.5.2    E XPERIMENTS FOR F IGURE 5 ( B ) AND ( C )
Data For experimental results of Figure 5 (b) and (c), the number of segments is 30 and sample
size is 1000, while the number (e.g., dimension) of latent causal variables is 2,3,4,5 respectively. For


                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2-dimensional latent causal variables, the setting is the same as experiments for Figure 5 (a). For
3-dimensional case, we consider the following structural causal model:
  n1 := N (β(u)1,1 , β(u)1,2 ),   n2 := N (β(u)2,1 , β(u)2,2 ),     n3 := N (β(u)3,1 , β(u)3,2 ), (51)
  z1 := n1 ,                      z2 := λ1,2 (u)z1 + n2 ,           z3 := λ2,3 (u)z2 + n3 .       (52)
For 4-dimensional case, we consider the following structural causal model:
                   n1 := N (β(u)1,1 , β(u)1,2 ),        n2 := N (β(u)2,1 , β(u)2,2 ),            (53)
                   n3 := N (β(u)3,1 , β(u)3,2 ),        n4 := N (β(u)4,1 , β(u)4,2 ),            (54)
                   z1 := n1 ,                           z2 := λ1,2 (u)z1 + n2 ,                  (55)
                   z3 := λ2,3 (u)z2 + n3 ,              z4 := λ2,4 (u)z2 + n4 .                  (56)
For 5-dimensional case, we consider the following structural causal model:
  n1 := N (β(u)1,1 , β(u)1,2 ),   n2 := N (β(u)2,1 , β(u)2,2 ),                                   (57)
  n3 := N (β(u)3,1 , β(u)3,2 ),   n4 := N (β(u)4,1 , β(u)4,2 ),     n5 := N (β(u)5,1 , β(u)5,2 ), (58)
  z1 := n1 ,                      z2 := λ1,2 (u)z1 + n2 ,                                         (59)
  z3 := λ2,3 (u)z2 + n3 ,         z4 := λ2,4 (u)z2 + n4 ,           z5 := λ4,5 (u)z4 + n5 .       (60)
Again, for all these Eqs 51-60, we sample the mean β(u)i,1 and variance β(u)i,2 from uniform distri-
butions [−2, 2] and [0.01, 3], respectively. We sample the weights λi,j (u) from uniform distributions
[0.1, 2]. We sample latent variable z according to these equations, and then mix them using a 2-layer
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to generate observed x.

Network and Optimization The network architecture, optimization and hyper-parameters are the
same as used for experiments of Figure 5 (a), except for the 5-dimensional case where we use 40
hidden nodes for each linear layer.

A.6   E XPERIMENTS ON C HANGES OF PART OF W EIGHTS

In this part, we conduct experiments on changes of part of weighs. To this end, we consider two cases
on the following graph: z1 → z2 → z3 (data details as mentioned in section A.5.2 for 3-dimensional
case): Change 1: the weight on the edge of z1 → z2 changes across u, while the weight on the
edge of z2 → z3 remains unchanged across u, Change 2: the weight on the edge of z1 → z2
changes only for the first 15 segments (e.g., u), the weight on the edge of z2 → z3 changes only
for the last 15 segments (totally 30 segments). Again, the network architecture, optimization and
hyper-parameters are the same as used for experiments of Figure 5 (a). The Figure 7 shows the MPC


                            (a)                                         (b)

Figure 7: Performances of the proposed SuaVE in recovering the latent causal variables on Change
1 (a), and Change 2 (b).

between the recovered latent variables and the true ones by the proposed SuaVE. For Change 1, we
can see that only the recovered z2 obtains satisfactory MPC. For Change 2, all the recovered latent
causal variables obtain high MPC, which seems to be promising to obtain identifiability. To further
understand this interesting result, we investigate the recovered graph in the case of Change 2. Again,
we also use a threshold to remove some edges to obtain the final graph. Since no identifiability is
provided, we measure the SHD of CPDAG. We found that for Change 2, the proposed method obtains


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


SHD = 1.0 ± 0.39. Compared to that, we reported SHD = 0.6 ± 0.35 in Figure 5 where the weights
always change across u. In summary, it seems to be promising to obtain identifiability up to Markov
equivalence class for the setting of Change 2. It would be interesting to provide theoretical insights
for this case in the future work.

A.7   E XPERIMENTS ON I . I . D . zi

As we mentioned in the main paper, our work is closely related to nonlinear ICA, and our assumptions
includes the assumptions for identifying the Gaussian noise variables. To verify this point, we conduct
experiments on the case where any two latent causal variables zi are independent given u. Data
details is the same as mentioned in section A.5.2, but we here enforce λi,j (u) = 0 for each i, j.
Again, the network architecture, optimization and hyper-parameters are the same as section A.5.2,
except for learning rate (here we set 1r = 1e − 2). Figure 8 shows the performances of the proposed
SuaVE and iVAE. We can see that iVAE is slightly better than the proposed SuaVE, both obtain
satisfying results in terms of MPC.


                                                 (a)

Figure 8: Performances of the proposed SuaVE and iVAE in recovering the independent latent causal
variables conditional u.


A.8   D ETAILED R ESULTS ON F MRI

Figure 9 shows the recovered latent six signals (Blue) and the true ones (Red) within one day by the
proposed SuaVE.
The recovered latent fMRI variables within one day by iVAE are depicted by Figure 10.
The recovered latent fMRI variables within one day by VAE are depicted by Figure 11.
The recovered latent fMRI variables within one day by β-VAE are depicted by Figure 12.
The recovered latent fMRI variables within one day by CausalVAE are depicted by Figure 13.
Implementation Details: For fMRI data, again, we used the same network architecture for encoder (e.g.
3-layer fully connected network with 30 hidden nodes for each layer) and decoder (e.g. 3-layer fully
connected network with 30 hidden nodes for each layer) parts in all these models. For prior model in
the proposed SuaVE and iVAE, we use 3-layer fully connected network with 30 hidden nodes for
each layer. We assign an 3-layer fully connected network with 30 nodes to generate the weights to
model the relations among latent causal variables in the proposed SuaVE. For hyper-parameters, we
set β = 4, 25, 50 for β-VAE. For CausalVAE, we use the hyper-parameters setting as recommended
by the authors (Yang et al., 2021), for generating observed x, we use an invertible 2-layer multi-layer
perceptron on the fMRI with different 5 random seeds.


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Recovered latent six signals (Blue) and the true ones (Red) within one day by the proposed
SuaVE.


  Figure 10: Recovered latent six signals (Blue) and the true ones (Red) within one day by iVAE.


                                                20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Figure 11: Recovered latent six signals (Blue) and the true ones (Red) within one day by VAE.


 Figure 12: Recovered latent six signals (Blue) and the true ones (Red) within one day by β-VAE.



                                               21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: Recovered latent six signals (Blue) and the true ones (Red) within one day by CausalVAE.


                                                22
