Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING T O I NVERT: S IMPLE A DAPTIVE ATTACKS
FOR G RADIENT I NVERSION IN F EDERATED L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Gradient inversion attack enables recovery of training samples from model updates
         in federated learning (FL) and constitutes a serious threat to data privacy. To
         mitigate this vulnerability, prior work proposed both principled defenses based on
         differential privacy, as well as heuristic defenses based on gradient compression as
         countermeasures. These defenses have so far been very effective, in particular those
         based on gradient compression that allow the model to maintain high accuracy
         while greatly reducing the attack’s effectiveness. In this work, we argue that such
         findings do not accurately reflect the privacy risk in FL, and show that existing
         defenses can be broken by a simple adaptive attack that trains a model using
         auxiliary data to learn how to invert gradients on both vision and language tasks.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (FL; (McMahan et al., 2017)) is a popular framework for distributed model
training on sensitive user data. Instead of centrally storing the training data, FL operates in a server-
client setting where the server hosts the model and has no direct access to the data. The clients can
apply the model on their private data and send gradient updates back to the server. This learning
regime promises data privacy as users only share gradients but never any raw data. However, recent
work (Zhu et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2020; Geiping et al., 2020) showed that despite these efforts, the
server can still recover the training data from gradient updates, violating the promise of data privacy
in FL. These so-called gradient inversion attacks operate by optimizing over the input space to find
training samples whose gradient matches that of the observed gradient, and such attacks remain
effective even when clients utilize secure aggregation (Bonawitz et al., 2016) to avoid revealing
individual updates (Yin et al., 2021; Jeon et al., 2021).
As countermeasures against these gradient inversion attacks, prior work proposed both principled
defenses based on differential privacy (Abadi et al., 2016), as well as heuristics that compress the
gradient update through gradient pruning (Aji & Heafield, 2017) or sign compression (Bernstein
et al., 2018). In particular, gradient compression defenses have so far enjoyed great success, severely
hindering the effectiveness of existing optimization-based attacks (Zhu et al., 2019; Jeon et al., 2021)
while maintaining close to the same level of accuracy for the trained model. As a result, these
limitations seemingly diminish the threat of gradient inversion in practical FL applications.
In this paper we argue that evaluating defenses on existing optimization-based attacks may provide
a false sense of security. To this end, we propose a simple learning-based attack—which we call
Learning To Invert (LTI)—that trains a model to learn how to invert the gradient update to recover
client samples; see Figure 1 for an illustration. We assume that the adversary (i.e., the server) has
access to an auxiliary dataset whose distribution is similar to that of the private data, and use it to
generate training samples for the gradient inversion model by querying the global model for gradients.
Our attack is highly adaptable to different defenses since applying a defense simply amounts to
training data augmentation for the gradient inversion model.
We empirically demonstrate that LTI can successfully circumvent defenses based on gradient pertur-
bation (i.e., using differential privacy; (Abadi et al., 2016)), gradient pruning (Aji & Heafield, 2017)
and sign compression (Bernstein et al., 2018) on both vision and language tasks.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Learning To
        Invert (LTI)


                                    In-Distribution                          Out-of-Distribution
                                                         Auxiliary Dataset

                           Federated                        Gradient                       Inversion
                           Model 𝑓"                       ∇" 𝑙(𝑓" 𝒙 , 𝑦)                   Model 𝑔!
       Data <𝒙, y>                                                                        train                        𝒙, y* >
                                                                                                       Reconstruction <)
                                                                                            𝒍𝒂𝒕𝒕𝒂𝒄𝒌
        Federated                       Gradient                                                                   Gradient
        Learning                     ∇! 𝑙(𝑓! 𝒙" , 𝑦" )                                                             Inversion
                                                                                                                      Attack
                                                                                                                    with LTI
                       Client 1 Model 𝑓!                 Federated       Inversion
                                                                                                          )"
                                                                                                          𝒙

                                  Model 𝑓!               Model 𝑓"        Model 𝑔!
                                                             Server & Attacker 😈
                                         Gradient
                                     ∇! 𝑙(𝑓! 𝒙# , 𝑦# )

                       Client 2                                                                           )#
                                                                                                          𝒙



Figure 1: Illustration of federated learning (FL) and gradient inversion methods. The goal of gradient
inversion is to recover training data (x, y) from the observed gradient ∇w ℓ(fw (x), y). Optimization-
based methods (e.g., (Zhu et al., 2019; Geiping et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021; Jeon et al., 2021))
directly optimize (x̃, ỹ) in search for a sample that produces gradient similar to that of (x, y). Our
proposed learning-based approach, which we call Learning to Invert, instead trains an inversion
model gθ to reconstruct training samples from their gradient.


• Vision: We evaluate on the CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) classification dataset. LTI attains
  recovery accuracy close to that of the best optimization-based method when no defense is applied,
  and significantly outperforms all prior attacks under defense.
• NLP: We experiment with causal language model training on the WikiText (Merity et al., 2016)
  dataset, where LTI attains state-of-the-art performance in all settings, with or without defense.
Given the strong empirical performance of LTI and its adaptability to different learning tasks and
defense mechanisms, we advocate for its use as a simple baseline for future studies on gradient
inversion attacks in FL.


2    BACKGROUND

Federated learning. The objective of federated learning (McMahan et al., 2017) is to train
a machine learning model in a distributed fashion without centralized collection of training
data. In detail, let fw be the global model parameterized by w, and consider a supervised
learning
P         setting that optimizes w by minimizing a loss function ℓ over the training set Dtrain :
   (x,y)∈Dtrain ℓ(fw (x), y). In centralized learning this is typically done by computing a stochastic
            PB
gradient B1 i=1 ∇w ℓ(fw (xi ), yi ) over a randomly drawn batch of data (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xB , yB ) and
minimizing ℓ using gradient descent.
In FL, instead of centrally collecting Dtrain to draw a random batch during training, the training set
Dtrain is distributed across multiple clients and the model fw is stored on a central server. At each
iteration, the model parameter w is transmitted to each client to compute the per-sample gradients
{∇w ℓ(fw (xi ), yi )}Bi=1 locally over a set of clients. The server and clients then execute a federated
aggregation protocol to compute the average gradient for the gradient descent update. A major
advantage of FL is data privacy since clients do not need to disclose their data explicitly, but rather only
send their gradient ∇w ℓ(fw (xi ), yi ) to the server. Techniques such as secure aggregation (Bonawitz
et al., 2016) and differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006; 2014) can further reduce the privacy leakage
from sending this gradient update.


                                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gradient inversion attack. Despite the promise of data privacy in FL, recent work showed that
the heuristic of sending gradient updates instead of training samples themselves in fact provides a
false sense of security. Zhu et al. (2019) showed in their seminal paper that it is possible for the
server to recover the full batch of training samples given aggregated gradients. These optimization-
based gradient inversion attacks operate by optimizing a set of dummy data x̃1 , . . . , x̃B and labels
ỹ1 , . . . , ỹB to match their gradient to the observed gradient:
                              B                               B                           2
                              X                               X
                        min         ∇w ℓ(fw (x̃i ), ỹi ) −         ∇w ℓ(fw (xi ), yi )       .          (1)
                         x̃
                              i=1                             i=1                         2

For image tasks, since Equation 1 is differentiable in x̃i and ỹi and the model parameter w is known
to the server, the server can optimize Equation 1 using gradient-based search. Doing so yields
recovered samples (x̃i , ỹi ) that closely resemble actual samples (xi , yi ) in the batch. In practice this
approach is highly effective, and follow-up works proposed several optimizations to further improve
its recovery accuracy (Geiping et al., 2020; Yin et al., 2021; Jeon et al., 2021).
For language tasks this optimization problem is considerably more complex since the samples
x1 , . . . , xB are sequences of discrete tokens, and optimizing Equation 1 amounts to solving a discrete
optimization problem. To circumvent this difficulty, Zhu et al. (2019) and Deng et al. (2021)
instead optimize the token embeddings to match the observed gradient and then maps the recovered
embeddings to their closest tokens in the embedding layer to recover the private text. In contrast,
Gupta et al. (2022) leveraged the insight that gradient of the token embedding layer can be used to
recover exactly the set of tokens present in the training sample, and then uses beam search to optimize
the ordering of tokens for fluency to recover the private text.

Gradient inversion under the malicious server setting. The aforementioned gradient inversion
attacks operate under the honest-but-curious setting where the server faithfully executes the federated
learning protocol, but attempts to extract private information from the observed gradients. Fowl et al.
(2021), Boenisch et al. (2021) and Fowl et al. (2022) consider a stronger malicious server threat
model that allows the server to transmit arbitrary model parameters w to the clients. Under this
threat model, it is possible to carefully craft the model parameters so that the training sample can be
recovered exactly from its gradient even when the batch size B is large. While this setting is certainly
realistic and relevant, our paper operates under the weaker honest-but-curious threat model.

3    L EARNING T O I NVERT: L EARNING - BASED G RADIENT I NVERSION ATTACKS
Motivation. The threat of gradient inversion attack has prompted prior work to employ defense
mechanisms to mitigate this privacy risk in FL (Zhu et al., 2019; Jeon et al., 2021). Intuitively, such
defenses reduce the amount of information contained in the gradient about the training sample by
either perturbing the gradient with noise (Abadi et al., 2016) or compressing them (Aji & Heafield,
2017; Bernstein et al., 2018), making recovery much more difficult. However, doing so also reduces
the amount of information a sample can provide for training the global model, and hence has a
negative impact on the model’s performance. This is certainly true for principled defenses based on
differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2006) such as gradient perturbation (Abadi et al., 2016), however,
defenses based on gradient compression seemingly provide a much better privacy-utility trade-off,
effectively preventing the attack with minor reduction in model performance (Zhu et al., 2019).
The empirical success of existing defenses seemingly diminish the threat of gradient inversion in
FL, especially since gradient compression (Aji & Heafield, 2017; Bernstein et al., 2018) is already
commonplace in practical FL applications to reduce communication cost. However, we argue that
optimization-based attacks underestimate the power of the adversary: If the adversary has access to an
auxiliary dataset Daux , they can train a gradient inversion model to recover Daux from its gradients
computed on the global model. As we will establish later, this greatly empowers the adversary,
exposing existing risks to federate learning.
Threat model. We consider the setting where the adversary is an honest-but-curious server, who
executes the learning protocol faithfully but aims to extract private training data from the observed
gradients. We also assume that the FL protocol does not leverage secure aggregation, so per-client
gradients are revealed to the server. Under these assumptions, in each FL iteration the adversary


                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


has the knowledge of model weights w and the gradients ∇w ℓ(fw (x), y) for each sample (x, y)
in the batch. Moreover, we assume the adversary has an auxiliary dataset Daux , which could
be in-distribution or a mixture of in-distribution and out-of-distribution data. This assumption is
similar to the setting in Jeon et al. (2021), which assumes a generative model that is trained from
the in-distribution data, and is common in the study of other privacy attacks such as membership
inference (Shokri et al., 2017).
Learning to invert (LTI). Since the adversary has knowledge of the model weights, he/she is able
to generate the gradient ∇w ℓ(fw (xaux ), yaux ) for each sample (xaux , yaux ) in the auxiliary dataset.
This allows the adversary to learn a gradient inversion model gθ , parameterized by θ, to predict the
data point (xaux , yaux ) from the gradient of the global model ∇w ℓ(fw (xaux ), yaux ) by solving the
following learning problem:
                           X
              min                   ℓattack (gθ (∇w ℓ(fw (xaux ), yaux )) , (xaux , yaux )) .        (2)
                θ
                    (xaux ,yaux )∈Daux


In practice, ℓattack can be the cross-entropy (for discrete input) or squared-loss (for continuous-valued
input) function and we find that using a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) (Bishop et al., 1995) for gθ
is effective empirically. Importantly, when a defense mechanism such as gradient perturbation or
gradient compression is applied, we can apply the same transformation to ∇w ℓ(fw (xaux ), yaux ) to
augment the training data for gθ to carry out an adaptive attack. We will show in section 4 that this
simple approach is surprisingly effective at circumventing existing defenses.
Dimensionality reduction for large models. One potential problem for LTI is that the gradients
∇w ℓ(fw (xaux ), yaux ) can be extremely high-dimensional. For example, both ResNet18 (He et al.,
2016) for vision tasks and a three-layer transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) for language tasks have
approximately 1.1 million trainable parameters. Such high-dimensional input to the model gθ can
lead to memory issues, as the first layer of the MLP would have 11M × h parameters, where h
denotes the size of the first hidden layer.
To address this issue, we use feature hashing (Weinberger et al., 2009) to reduce the dimensionality
of the input gradient. To this end we create k bins, where k is much smaller than the size of gradient
m, and assign each gradient dimension i ∈ [m] to a random bin r(i) ∈ [k]. For each bin, we
sum up the gradient values that are assigned to this bin. As a result, we obtain a feature vector of
size k for the inversion model gθ . In other words, we project the gradient ∇w ℓ(fw (xaux ), yaux ) to
P ∇w ℓ(fw (xaux ), yaux ) using the random projection matrix P given by:

                      P ∈ {0, 1}k×m s.t. ∀i, Pj,i = 0 (∀j ̸= r(i)), Pr(i),i = 1.

If r(i) is implemented with a pseudo-uniform hashing function, P does not need to be stored in
memory, reducing the memory footprint of gθ to a constant independent of the gradient dimension.


4    E XPERIMENT

We evaluate LTI on vision and language tasks against several existing defenses to show that it
vastly outperforms prior gradient inversion attacks. We consider the following defense mechanisms
evaluated in prior work (Zhu et al., 2019; Jeon et al., 2021):
• None. The gradient shared between the server and clients is the full gradient without any defense.
  This is the most common setting that previous papers focus on.
• Sign compression (Bernstein et al., 2018) applies the sign function to each dimension of the gradient
  independently to compress the gradient to one bit per dimension.
• Gradient pruning with pruning rate α (Aji & Heafield, 2017) zeroes out the bottom 1 − α fraction
  of coordinates of ∇w ℓ(fw (x), y) in terms of absolute value, which effectively compresses the
  gradient to (1 − α)m dimensions.
• Gradient perturbation with Gaussian standard deviation σ (Abadi et al., 2016) is a differentially
  private mechanism used commonly for training private models with SGD. An i.i.d. Gaussian
  random vector N (0, σ 2 ) is added to the gradient, which one can show achieves ϵ-local differential
  privacy (Kasiviswanathan et al., 2011) with ϵ = O(1/σ).


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Defense                    None                             Sign Compression
         Method      MSE (↓)     PSNR (↑)     LPIPS (↓)     MSE (↓)     PSNR (↑)     LPIPS (↓)
            IG        0.022       22.290        0.263        0.116        9.981        0.677
         GI-GIP       0.001       33.374        0.033        0.091       13.574        0.471
        LTI (Ours)    0.004       24.837        0.221        0.014       18.986        0.396
         Defense       Gradient Pruning (α = 0.99)          Gaussian Perturbation (σ = 0.1)
         Method      MSE (↓)     PSNR (↑)     LPIPS (↓)     MSE (↓)     PSNR (↑)     LPIPS (↓)
            IG        0.138        8.807        0.675        0.150        8.349        0.653
         GI-GIP       0.043       14.356        0.474        0.124        9.383        0.568
        LTI (Ours)    0.029       15.897        0.472        0.012       20.249        0.370

Table 1: Result for gradient inversion attack on vision data. LTI achieves the best performance on all
three metrics against the sign compression, gradient pruning and Gaussian perturbation defenses.

4.1     E VALUATION ON V ISION TASK

For evaluating LTI on a vision task, we experiment with image classification on CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009). The target model fw is LeNet (LeCun et al., 1998) with 1.5 × 104 parameters trained
using the cross-entropy loss.
Baselines. We compare our method with two baseline gradient inversion attacks: Inverting Gradients
(IG; Geiping et al. (2020)), a representative optimization-based method, and Gradient Inversion with
Generative Image Prior (GI-GIP; Jeon et al. (2021)), the state-of-the-art optimization-based method
that uses a generative model to encode the data prior. We make minor modifications to these attacks
to adapt them to various defenses; see appendix for details. The threat model for our attack is most
similar to GI-GIP since both use an auxiliary dataset to encode the data prior.
Inversion model training. We follow the setup below for training the gradient inversion model gθ .
• Auxiliary dataset. We use the train split of CIFAR10 as the auxiliary dataset for training the
  inversion model gθ and the test split for inverting gradients computed on the global model fw .
• Inversion model architecture. We use a three-layer MLP with hidden size 3000 for our inversion
  model gθ . The MLP takes the flattened gradient vector as input and outputs a 3072-dimensional
  vector representing the flattened image. The training objective ℓattack in Equation 2 is the mean
  squared error (MSE) between the output vector from MLP and the flattened ground truth image.
• Training details. We use the Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) optimizer for training gθ . The model is
  trained for 200 epochs using training batch size 256. The initial learning rate is 10−4 with learning
  rate drop to 10−5 after 150 epochs.
• Computation cost. Our experiments are conducted using NVIDIA GeForce RTX 2080 GPUs and
  each training run takes about 1.5 hours.
Evaluation methodology. We evaluate LTI and the aforementioned baselines on 1, 000 random
images from the CIFAR10 test split. To measure reconstruction quality, we use three metrics:
• Mean squared error (MSE) measures the average pixel-wise (squared) distance between the
  reconstructed image and the ground truth image. Lower is better.
• Peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) measures the ratio between the maximum image pixel value and
  MSE. Higher is better.
• Learned perceptual image patch similarity (LPIPS) measures distance in the features space of a
  VGG (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014) model trained on ImageNet. Lower is better.

4.1.1    M AIN R ESULTS

Quantitative evaluation. Table 1 gives quantitative comparisons for IG, GI-GIP, and LTI against
various defense mechanisms on CIFAR10. When no defense is applied, GI-GIP achieves the best
performance according to all three metrics, whereas LTI performs almost equally well in terms of
MSE and close to that of IG in terms of PSNR and LPIPS. However, when the gradient is augmented
with a defense mechanism, both IG and GI-GIP have considerably worse performance with MSE


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     None              Sign Compression        Gradient Pruning      Gradient Perturbation


 Ground Truth
   Images
                IG   GI-GIP   LTI     IG   GI-GIP    LTI      IG   GI-GIP     LTI     IG    GI-GIP     LTI


Figure 2: Comparison of LTI with IG and GI-GIP for reconstructing 4 random images in CIFAR10
test set. Under sign compression, only LTI can partially reconstruct the images to recover the object
of interest whereas both IG and GI-GIP fail to do so on most samples.



close to 0.1. By comparison, LTI outperforms both baselines significantly and consistently across all
three defense mechanisms. For example, under gradient perturbation with σ = 0.1, which prior work
believed is sufficient for preventing gradient inversion attacks (Zhu et al., 2019; Jeon et al., 2021),
MSE can be as low as 0.012 for LTI. Our result therefore provides considerable additional insight
for the level of empirical privacy achieved by DP-SGD (Abadi et al., 2016), and suggests that the
theoretical privacy leakage as predicted by DP ϵ may be tighter than previously thought.
Qualitative evaluation. Figure 2 shows 4 random CIFAR10 test samples and their reconstructions
under different defense mechanisms. Without any defense in place, all three methods recover a
considerable amount of semantic information about the object of interest, with both GI-GIP and LTI
faithfully reconstructing the training sample. Under the sign compression defense, IG completely
fails to reconstruct all 4 samples, while GI-GIP only successfully reconstructs the second image. In
contrast, LTI is able to recover the semantic information in all 4 samples. Results for gradient pruning
and gradient perturbation yield similar conclusions. Additional samples are given in the appendix.


4.1.2     A BLATION S TUDIES

Since LTI learns to invert gradients using the auxiliary dataset, its performance depends on the quantity
and quality of data available to the adversary. We perform ablation studies to better understand this
dependence by changing the auxiliary dataset size and its distribution.
Varying the auxiliary dataset size. We randomly subsample the CIFAR10 training set to construct
auxiliary datasets of size {500, 5000, 15000, 25000, 35000, 45000, 50000} and evaluate the perfor-
mance of LTI under various defenses. Figure 3(a) plots reconstruction MSE as a function of the
auxiliary dataset size, which is monotonically decreasing as expected. Moreover, with just 5, 000
samples for training the inversion model (second point in each curve), the performance is nearly as
good as when training using the full CIFAR10 training set. Notably, even if auxiliary dataset size as
small as 500, reconstruction MSE is still lower than that of IG and GI-GIP in Table 1. Corresponding
figures for PSNR and LPIPS in the appendix show similar findings.
Varying the auxiliary data distribution. Although access to a large set of in-distribution data may
be not available in practice, it is plausible that the adversary can collect out-of-distribution samples
for the auxiliary dataset. This is beneficial for the adversary since a model that learns how to invert
out-of-distribution samples given their gradients may transfer to in-distribution data as well. To
simulate this scenario, we divide CIFAR10 into two halves with disjoint classes, and construct the
auxiliary dataset by combining a β fraction of samples from the first half and a 1 − β fraction of
samples from the second half for β ∈ {0, 0.01, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, 1}. The target model fw is
trained only on samples from the first half, and hence the auxiliary set has the exact same distribution
as the target model’s data when β = 1 and only has out-of-distribution data when β = 0.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                1RQH            6LJQ &RPS          *UDG  3UXQLQJ  ͅ                            *UDG  3HUW   ͗


       06(


                                                              06(


                         6L]H RI $X[LOLDU\ 'DWDVHW                                     6KLIW )DFWRU ͆
                     (a) Vary the size of auxiliary set             (b) Vary the distribution of auxiliary set

Figure 3: Ablation studies on size and distribution of the auxiliary dataset Daux . Under both severe
data size limitation (left) and data distribution shift (β = 0.01; right), LTI is able to outperform both
baselines in Table 1 when a defense mechanism is applied. See text for details.

Figure 3(b) shows reconstruction MSE as a function of β; corresponding figures for PSNR and LPIPS
are given in the appendix. We make the following observations:
1. Even if the auxiliary dataset only contains 250 in-distribution samples (β = 0.01; second point in
   each curve), MSE of the inversion model is still lower than that of the best baseline in Table 1.
   For example, with the sign compression defense, LTI attains an MSE of ≤ 0.02, which is much
   lower than the MSE of 0.116 for IG and 0.091 for GI-GIP.
2. When the auxiliary dataset contains only out-of-distribution data (β = 0), the inversion model
   has very high reconstruction MSE, which suggests that methods for improving out-of-distribution
   generalization may be necessary for further improvement.

4.2     E VALUATION ON L ANGUAGE TASK

For evaluating LTI on a language task, we experiment with causal language model training1 for
next-token prediction. The language model fw is a three-layer transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)
with frozen token embedding layer. This is a common technique for language model fine-tuning (Sun
et al., 2019), which also has privacy benefits since direct privacy leakage from the gradient magnitude
of the token embedding layer can be prevented (Fowl et al., 2022; Gupta et al., 2022). As a
result, the trainable model contains about 1.1 × 106 parameters. We train the language model
on WikiText (Merity et al., 2016), where each training sample is limited to L = 16 tokens and
the language model is trained to predict the next token xl given x:l−1 for l = 1, . . . , L using the
cross-entropy loss.
Baseline. We compare LTI with TAG (Deng et al., 2021)—the state-of-the-art language model
gradient inversion attack without utilizing the token embedding layer gradient2 . The objective
function for TAG is a slight modification of Equation 1 that uses both the ℓ2 and ℓ1 distance between
the observed gradient and the gradient of dummy data. We also modify TAG slightly to adaptive it
different defenses; see appendix for details.
Inversion model training. We follow the setup below for training the gradient inversion model gθ .
• Auxiliary dataset. We use ∼ 1.8 × 105 samples from the train split of Wikitext as the auxiliary
  dataset, and 1, 000 samples from the test split for evaluating the attack. In addition, we introduce a
  weaker variant of our attack that only assumes knowledge of the marginal token distribution for the
  language model training data. Instead of using the WikiText train split as auxiliary data, we sample
  random tokens according to the marginal token distribution to generate pseudo-data for training
  the inversion model. We show that this variant, which we denote LTI-P, can even outperform LTI
  with in-distribution auxiliary data due to access to infinite training data.

   1
     We follow the task setup and code in https://github.com/JonasGeiping/breaching
   2
     We do not compare against a more recent attack by Gupta et al. (2022) since it crucially depends on access
to the token embedding layer gradient.


                                                          7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Defense                        None                               Sign Compression
      Method       Acc.    Rouge-1    Rouge-2    Rouge-L      Acc.    Rouge-1     Rouge-2    Rouge-L
        TAG        74.13    71.92      50.64       68.46      0.00      0.06        0.00       0.06
     LTI (Ours)    89.61    86.13      79.53       86.11     71.15     63.17       43.51       63.11
    LTI-P (Ours)   91.14    89.43      85.11       89.41     88.06     84.66       76.46       84.64
      Defense          Gradient Pruning (α = 0.99)              Gaussian Perturbation (σ = 0.01)
      Method       Acc.    Rouge-1    Rouge-2    Rouge-L      Acc.    Rouge-1     Rouge-2    Rouge-L
        TAG        34.34    48.50      10.21       35.60     64.34     66.19       37.86       59.55
     LTI (Ours)    66.79    58.31      37.58       58.21     82.08     76.55       63.38       76.52
    LTI-P (Ours)   86.19    82.56      73.04       82.50     90.25     87.39       81.94       87.34

Table 2: Results for gradient inversion attack on text data. Both LTI and LTI-P significantly outperform
TAG cross different settings in all 4 metrics, where LTI-P achieves the best result with only access to
the marginal token distribution for generating the auxiliary dataset.

• Inversion model architecture. We train a two-layer MLP with ReLU activation and first hidden-layer
  size 600 and second hidden-layer size 1, 000. The inversion model outputs L probability vectors
  each with size equal to the vocabulary size (∼ 50, 000), and we train it using the cross-entropy
  loss to predict the L tokens given the target model gradient. We use feature hashing (Weinberger
  et al., 2009) to reduce the target model gradient to 10% of its original dimensions as input to the
  inversion model.
• Training details. We use Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) to train the inversion model over
  20 epochs with batch size 64. Learning rates are selected separately for each defense from
  {10−3 , 10−4 , 10−5 }.
• Computation cost. Our experiments are conducted using NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPUs and
  each training run takes about 3 hours.
Evaluation methodology. We evaluate LTI and the TAG baseline on 1, 000 samples from the
WikiText test set. To measure the quality of reconstructed text, we use four metrics:
• Accuracy(%) measures the average token-wise zero-one accuracy. Higher is better.
• Rouge-1(%), Rouge-2(%) and Rouge-L(%) measure the overlap of unigram, bigram, and length of
  longest common subsequence between the ground truth and the reconstructed text. Higher is better.
Results. Table 2 shows quantitative comparison between LTI (and its variant LTI-P) and TAG against
various defenses. The overall trend is remarkably consistent: LTI and LTI-P outperform TAG in all
four metrics for all defense settings, with LTI-P achieving state-of-the-art recovery accuracy by far.
This result suggests that knowledge of the marginal token distribution encodes enough data prior
for LTI-P to train the inversion model, and having access to infinite training data allows it to better
generalize to the test set compared to LTI. In practice, it is very plausible that the marginal token
distribution is known to the adversary, and hence LTI-P serves as a surprisingly simple and effective
baseline for gradient inversion in NLP.
Figure 4 shows 3 random test samples from WikiText and their reconstructions using LTI-P and TAG,
with tokens that are correctly reconstructed highlighted in blue. Without any defense, both TAG
and LTI-P yield reasonably accurate reconstructions, with LTI-P faithfully reconstructing all but 1-2
tokens. With the sign compression defense applied, TAG fails to recover any token correctly, whereas
LTI-P can faithfully recover almost half of the tokens in each sample. Results for gradient pruning
and gradient perturbation yield similar conclusions, with TAG recovering a larger but still relatively
insignificant set of tokens. Additional samples are given in the appendix.


5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

We demonstrated the effectiveness of LTI—a simple learning-based gradient inversion attack—under
realistic federated learning settings. For both vision and language tasks, LTI can match or exceed
the performance of state-of-the-art optimization-based methods when no defense is applied, and
significantly outperform all prior works under defenses based on gradient perturbation and gradient


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Example 1                       Example 2                    Example 3
                     crumbled into dust, when    exploration of the vault     the team's 95th straight
                     exposed to the air ".       then revealed " a large      season as a member of
     True Texts      She added that further      mass of human bones,         the Big Ten Conference
                                                 several feet
                     Barrierumbled into dust,    exploration of Trail vault   the team jQuerys 95th
                     deprive exposed to the      then revealed " a large      straight season as 2010
              TAG                                Grip of human Sharia,        member of the Big Ten
                     etched ". She added that
     None            Enforcement                 several uggets               Sard

                     ofumbled into dust, when    of of the vault then         the team's 95th straight
                     ifying to the air ". She    revealed " a large mass of   season as a member of the
             LTI-P
                     added that further          human bones, several feet    Big Ten Conference
                     droppingize adrenaline      stressed…] div              Phot Sultan 417 staminausp
                     proxiesisal unlaweca        wrapperoesYRfont interacted plent behclinical
             TAG     Veilookie indispensable     AI surfingHB 84 Divfrog     Volkswagenble twitch
     Sign            DSrav Christopher cricket   Thunder172                  calories dumpsasy everyable
    Comp.            currents Dominion
                     wasumbled into dust, when   to of the vault then       the team's 95th straight
             LTI-P   exposed to the air ". She   revealed " a large mass of season as a member of the
                     added that further          human bones, several feet Big Ten Conference

                     Indoumbledhol dust to        Iw of hotels coal           the team's Big Ple
                                                  linked
              TAG    when, exposed Wearorb ".
                                                  explorationumbers a
                                                                              belongings BCC courtyard
                     into added that Franklin                                 Add member of 95 pid Ten
   Grad.                                          then revealed of human      yeast
  Pruninig                                        bones vault severalCAN
                     theumbled into dust, when   , of the vault then          the team's 95th straight
                     mayor to the air ". She     revealed " a large           season as a member of the
             LTI-P added that further
                                                 devotion of human Road,      Big Ten Conference
                                                 several feet
                     respumbled into dust        exploration bones the      resp team's 95th straight
                     Sync when permitting        vault large revealed Punch wise as a member Ten the Big
             TAG     exposed the air ". She      a of mass nost human of,   of philosophies
   Grad.             to Liz thresholds           several cycle
   Pert.             ,umbled into dust, when     , of the vault then        the team's 95th straight
             LTI-P   exposed to the air ".       revealed " a large mass of season as a member of the
                     She added that further      human bones, several feet  Big Ten Conference



Figure 4: Ground truth text and their reconstructions for 3 random samples from the WikiText test
set. LTI-P significantly outperforms TAG both with and without defenses, especially under sign
compression where TAG fails to recover any token while LTI-P is capable of recovering almost half
of the tokens in each sample.

compression. Given its simplicity and versatility, we advocate the use of LTI both as a strong baseline
for future research as well as a diagnostic tool for evaluating privacy leakage in FL.
Negative societal impact. The concept of a gradient inversion attack can lead to negative conse-
quences if used inappropriately. Our work showed that if FL is deployed without consideration
for gradient inversion attacks, an adversary can leverage its vulnerabilities to compromise the data
privacy of clients even under strong empirical defenses. However, we strongly emphasize that our
work should not be interpreted as a tool for adversaries, but rather serve to inform the community
about the risks of data privacy breach in FL and promote future research into safe practices.
Limitations. This paper serves as preliminary work towards understanding the effectiveness of
learning-based gradient inversion attacks, and our method can be further improved along several
different directions. 1. For large models, our current approach is to hash the gradients into a lower-
dimensional space to reduce memory cost. It may be possible to leverage the model’s architecture
to design more effective dimensionality reduction techniques to further scale up the method. 2.
Currently we only focus on the setting with batch size 1, which precludes the use of secure aggre-
gation (Bonawitz et al., 2016)—a common technique in FL for amplifying privacy by aggregating
the gradients from multiple clients before revealing it to the server. For LTI, the complexity of MLP
would increase when the batch size increases, which makes the learning harder. More advanced
model architecture and loss design might help with the large batch case. 3. LTI in its current form
does not leverage additional data priors such as the smoothness prior for images and text fluency prior
for text. We can readily incorporate these priors by modifying the inversion model’s loss function
with total variation (for image data) or perplexity on a trained language model (for text data), which
may further improve the performance of LTI.


                                                        9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, H Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC
 conference on computer and communications security, pp. 308–318, 2016.
Alham Fikri Aji and Kenneth Heafield. Sparse communication for distributed gradient descent. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1704.05021, 2017.
Jeremy Bernstein, Yu-Xiang Wang, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Animashree Anandkumar. signsgd:
   Compressed optimisation for non-convex problems. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 560–569. PMLR, 2018.
Christopher M Bishop et al. Neural networks for pattern recognition. Oxford university press, 1995.
Franziska Boenisch, Adam Dziedzic, Roei Schuster, Ali Shahin Shamsabadi, Ilia Shumailov, and
  Nicolas Papernot. When the curious abandon honesty: Federated learning is not private. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2112.02918, 2021.
Keith Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
  Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for federated
  learning on user-held data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.04482, 2016.
Jieren Deng, Yijue Wang, Ji Li, Chao Shang, Hang Liu, Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, and Caiwen Ding.
   Tag: Gradient attack on transformer-based language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.06819,
   2021.
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity in
  private data analysis. In Theory of cryptography conference, pp. 265–284. Springer, 2006.
Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found. Trends
  Theor. Comput. Sci., 9(3-4):211–407, 2014.
Liam Fowl, Jonas Geiping, Wojtek Czaja, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. Robbing the
  fed: Directly obtaining private data in federated learning with modified models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.13057, 2021.
Liam Fowl, Jonas Geiping, Steven Reich, Yuxin Wen, Wojtek Czaja, Micah Goldblum, and Tom
  Goldstein. Decepticons: Corrupted transformers breach privacy in federated learning for language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12675, 2022.
Jonas Geiping, Hartmut Bauermeister, Hannah Dröge, and Michael Moeller. Inverting gradients-how
  easy is it to break privacy in federated learning? Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:16937–16947, 2020.
Samyak Gupta, Yangsibo Huang, Zexuan Zhong, Tianyu Gao, Kai Li, and Danqi Chen. Recovering
  private text in federated learning of language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.08514, 2022.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Jinwoo Jeon, Kangwook Lee, Sewoong Oh, Jungseul Ok, et al. Gradient inversion with generative
   image prior. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:29898–29908, 2021.
Shiva Prasad Kasiviswanathan, Homin K Lee, Kobbi Nissim, Sofya Raskhodnikova, and Adam Smith.
  What can we learn privately? SIAM Journal on Computing, 40(3):793–826, 2011.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and Richard Socher. Pointer sentinel mixture
  models, 2016.
Reza Shokri, Marco Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly Shmatikov. Membership inference attacks
  against machine learning models. In 2017 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP), pp. 3–18.
  IEEE, 2017.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
  recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
Chi Sun, Xipeng Qiu, Yige Xu, and Xuanjing Huang. How to fine-tune bert for text classification? In
  China national conference on Chinese computational linguistics, pp. 194–206. Springer, 2019.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 30, 2017.
Kilian Weinberger, Anirban Dasgupta, John Langford, Alex Smola, and Josh Attenberg. Feature
  hashing for large scale multitask learning. In Proceedings of the 26th annual international
  conference on machine learning, pp. 1113–1120, 2009.
Hongxu Yin, Arun Mallya, Arash Vahdat, Jose M Alvarez, Jan Kautz, and Pavlo Molchanov. See
  through gradients: Image batch recovery via gradinversion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
 Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16337–16346, 2021.
Bo Zhao, Konda Reddy Mopuri, and Hakan Bilen. idlg: Improved deep leakage from gradients.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.02610, 2020.
Ligeng Zhu, Zhijian Liu, and Song Han. Deep leakage from gradients. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A       S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL FOR SECTION 4

A.1         M ODIFICATIONS FOR BASELINE M ETHODS

Vision baselines. Both IG and GI-GIP use cosine distance instead of ℓ2 distance in Equation 1 for
optimizing the dummy data. For the sign compression defense, this loss function does not optimize
the correct objective since the dummy data’s gradient is not a vector with ±1 entries but rather a
                                                                             Pm          2
real-valued vector with the same sign. We replace cosine distance by the loss i=1 ℓisign where

                          ℓisign = max {−∇wi ℓ(fw (x̃), ỹ) · Sign (∇wi ℓ(fw (x), y)) , 0} .                          (3)

One sanity check for this loss is that when ∇wi ℓ(fw (x̃), ỹ) has the same sign as that of
∇wi ℓ(fw (x), y), the minimum loss value of 0 is achieved. For the gradient pruning defense,
optimizing the cosine distance between the dummy data gradient and the pruned ground truth gradient
will force too many gradient values to 0, which is the incorrect value for the full ground truth gradient.
Therefore we only compute cosine distance over the non-zero dimensions of pruned gradient.

Language baselines. For TAG, we find that the loss function also needs to be modified slightly to
accommodate the sign compression and gradient pruning defenses:
• Sign compression. Similar to the vision baselines, the ℓ2 and ℓ1 distance between the dummy data
  gradient and the ground truth gradient sign do not optimize the correct objective. We replace ∥ · ∥22
                Pm           2                                Pm
  and ∥ · ∥1 by i=1 ℓisign and ℓisign , respectively, where i=1 ℓisign is defined in Equation 3.
• Gradient pruning. We make the same modification to TAG as in the vision baselines.


            1RQH              6LJQ &RPS             *UDG  3UXQLQJ  ͅ                           *UDG  3HUW   ͗


                                                          /3,36
3615


                  6L]H RI $X[LOLDU\ 'DWDVHW                                    6L]H RI $X[LOLDU\ 'DWDVHW

            Figure 5: Plot of reconstruction PSNR / LPIPS vs. auxiliary dataset size on CIFAR10.


            1RQH             6LJQ &RPS              *UDG  3UXQLQJ  ͅ                           *UDG  3HUW   ͗


                                                          /3,36
3615


                          6KLIW )DFWRU ͆                                               6KLIW )DFWRU ͆

    Figure 6: Plot of reconstruction PSNR / LPIPS vs. auxiliary dataset distribution on CIFAR10.



                                                          12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2   AUXILIARY DATASET A BLATION S TUDIES

In section 4.1.2 we showed reconstruction MSE for LTI as a function of the auxiliary dataset size
and the shift factor β. For completeness, we show the corresponding PSNR and LPIPS curves in
Figure 6. Similar to Figure 3, when reducing the auxiliary dataset size (e.g., from 50, 000 to 5, 000)
or reducing the proportion of in-distribution data (e.g., from β = 1 to β = 0.1), the performance of
LTI does not worsen significantly.

A.3   A DDITIONAL S AMPLES

Figure 7 and Figure 8 show additional samples and their reconstructions under various defense
mechanisms. The result is consistent with Figure 2 and Figure 4, where LTI shows consistently better
reconstruction quality compared to baselines.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  Groud Truth

   None



Sign Comp.


Grad. Prun.


Grad. Pert.


                                                       IG


   None



Sign Comp.


Grad. Prun.


Grad. Pert.


                                                     GI-GIP


   None



Sign Comp.


Grad. Prun.


Grad. Pert.


                                                    LTI (Ours)

              Figure 7: Additional samples from CIFAR10 and their reconstructions.


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Example 1                         Example 2                      Example 3
               . and Zack Novak. Burke     12 NCAA Division I men's         turned full circle and
               was named Big Ten           basketball season. The team      Capel <unk> today is just
  True Texts   Freshman of the Year        played its home games            another ruined relic of

                                           12 NCAA Division I 276's
               Travel and Zack Novak.                                       turned full circle and
                                           basketball season rails
         TAG   Burke was named Big Ten
                                           Theakia played its home
                                                                            Capel <unk> today is
               heroman of the icago                                         just9999 sadly relic
  Full                                     Dalton
                                                                            Chronicles
 Grad.
                of and Zack Novak. Burke   the NCAA Division I men's        , full circle and Capel
         LTI-P was named Big Ten           basketball season. The team      <unk> today is just another
               Freshman of the Year        played its home games            ruined relic of


               ElectricityangingsićBrad    intuition electrom PLA coast     screws441 governed
               closet Authent Orion        flurry Initialgrowth             legionLegendary Brighamessen
         TAG
               muscle flawlessgra Garr     Lukeaccount fructose BJP rival   Eas tulugucomedUAowment
 Sign          wideningprintln Tanner      complicationbite era Relax       LearMorbacked
Comp.
               of and tub Novak. Burke     of NCAA Division I men's         the full circle and Capel
         LTI-P was named Big Ten           basketball season. The team      <unk> today is just another
               Freshman of the Year        played its home games            native Construction of


               of and aesthetic co                                          turned today circle and Cap
                                           12ELD Division I menanooga
               counters Tenak Boolean                                       Genetic just Hutch> another
         TAG   Zack static Marlins
                                           played itsika. The NCAA
                                                                            isel ruined full
                                           season‫ ة‬home bartender
 Grad.         satisfGar. SE Quentin                                        installment Turnbull
 Prun.
               of and Zack Novak. Burke    the NCAA Division I men's        , full circle and Capel
         LTI-P was named Big Ten           basketball season. The team      <unk> today is just another
               Freshman of the Year        played its home contras          < bolster of



               . and Zack Novak. was Ten   12 NCAA Division Cipher men's    turned full circle Drinking
         TAG Bro Big Argentine             albums season. The team played   Capel < another> relicunk
               Freshman of the safer       its beginner Franken             today is ruined justchance
 Grad.
 Purt.
               the and Zack Novak. Burke   the NCAA Division I men's home   the full circle and Capel
         LTI-P was named Big Ten           season. The team played its      <unk> today is just another
               Freshman of the Year        home games                       ruined relic of



               Figure 8: Additional samples from WikiText and their reconstructions.


                                                   15
