Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O N THE E FFICACY OF S ERVER -A IDED F EDERATED
L EARNING AGAINST PARTIAL C LIENT PARTICIPATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Although federated learning (FL) has become a prevailing distributed learning
         framework in recent years due to its benefits in scalability/privacy, there remain
         many significant challenges in FL system design. Notably, most existing works in
         the current FL literature assume either full client or uniformly distributed client
         participation. Unfortunately, this idealistic assumption rarely holds in practice. It
         has been frequently observed that some clients may never participate in FL training
         (aka partial/incomplete participation) due to a meld of system heterogeneity factors.
         To mitigate impacts of partial client participation, an increasingly popular approach
         in practical FL systems is the sever-aided federated learning (SA-FL) framework,
         where one equips the server with an auxiliary dataset. However, despite the fact
         that SA-FL has been empirically shown to be effective in addressing the partial
         client participation problem, there remains a lack of theoretical understanding for
         SA-FL. Worse yet, even the ramifications of partial worker participation are not
         clearly understood in conventional FL so far. These theoretical gaps motivate us to
         rigorously investigate SA-FL. To this end, we first reveal that conventional FL is not
         PAC-learnable under partial client participation in the worst case, which advances
         our understanding of conventional FL. Then, we show that the PAC-learnability
         of FL with partial client participation can indeed be revived by SA-FL, which
         theoretically justifies the use of SA-FL for the first time. Lastly, to further make
         SA-FL communication-efficient, we propose the SAFARI (server-aided federated
         averaging) algorithm that enjoys convergence guarantees and the same level of
         communication efficiency and privacy as the state-of-the-art FL.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Since the seminal work by McMahan et al. (2017), federated learning (FL) has emerged as a
powerful distributed learning paradigm that enables a large number of clients (e.g., edge devices)
to collaboratively train a model under a central server’s coordination. However, with FL gaining
popularity, it has also become apparent that FL faces a key challenge that is unseen in traditional
distributed learning in datacenter settings – system heterogeneity. Generally speaking, system
heterogeneity in FL is caused by the massively different computation and communication capabilities
at each client (computational power, communication capacity, drop-out rate, etc.). Studies have
shown that system heterogeneity can significantly impact client participation in a highly non-trivial
fashion and severely degrade the learning performance of FL algorithms (Bonawitz et al., 2019; Yang
et al., 2021a). For example, it is shown in (Yang et al., 2021a) that more than 30% clients never
participate in FL, while only 30% of the clients contribute to 81% of the total computation even if the
server uniformly samples the clients. Exacerbating the problem is the fact that the client’s status could
be unstable and time-varying due to the aforementioned computation and communication constraints.
To mitigate the impact of partial client participation, one approach called server-aided federated learn-
ing (SA-FL) has been increasingly adopted in practical FL systems in recent years (see, e.g., (Zhao
et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2021b)). The basic idea of SA-FL is to equip the server in FL with a
small auxiliary dataset that approximately mimics the population distribution, so that the distribution
deviation induced by partial client participation can be corrected. To date, even though SA-FL has
been empirically shown to be quite effective in addressing the partial client participation problem in
practice, there remains a lack of theoretical understanding for SA-FL. This motivates us to rigorously
investigate the efficacy of SA-FL against partial client participation in FL in this paper.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Somewhat counterintuitively, to fully understand SA-FL, one must be able to first see what happens
if SA-FL is not used and partial client participation is left untreated in conventional FL. In other
words, we need to first answer the following fundamental question: “1) What are the impacts of
partial client participation on FL learning performance?” Upon answering this question, the next
important follow-up question regarding SA-FL is: “2) What benefits could SA-FL bring and how
could we theoretically characterize them? Also, since SA-FL still largely follows the server-client
architecture that demands intensive communication between server and clients, the third fundamental
question regarding SA-FL is: “3) Could we make SA-FL as communication-efficient as conventional
FL?” Indeed, answering these three questions constitutes the rest of this paper, where we address
the first two questions through the lens of PAC (probably approximately correct) learnability, while
resolving the third question by proposing a communication-efficient SA-FL algorithm. Our major
contributions in this work are summarized as follows:
• By establishing a worst-case generalization error lower bound, we show that conventional FL is
   not PAC-learnable under partial client participation. In other words, no learning algorithm can
   approach zero generalization error under partial participation for conventional FL even in the
   limit of infinitely many data samples and training iterations. This insight, though being negative,
   warrants the necessity of developing new algorithmic techniques and system architectures (e.g.,
   SA-FL) to modify the conventional FL framework to mitigate partial client participation.
• Inspired by techniques from domain adaptation, we prove a new generalization error bound to
   show that SA-FL can indeed revive the PAC learnability of FL under partial client participation.
   We note that this bound could reach zero asymptotically as the number data samples increase. This
   is much stronger than previous results in domain adaptation with non-vanishing small error (see
   Section 2 for details).
• To make SA-FL communication-efficient, we propose a new training algorithm for SA-FL called
   SAFARI (server-aided federated averaging). By carefully designing the update coordination
                                                                                   √
   between the server and the clients, we show that SAFARI achieves an O(1/ KR) convergence
   rate, matching the convergence rate of state-of-the-art conventional FL algorithms. We also conduct
   extensive experiments to demonstrate the efficacy and efficiency of our SAFARI algorithm.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we review the literature to put our work
in comparative perspectives. Section 3 presents the PAC learning analysis of standard FL under
partial participation and our proposed SA-FL framework. We then propose SAFARI algorithm with
convergence guarantees in Section 4.

2    R ELATED WORK
1) Client Participation in Federated Learning: The seminal FedAvg algorithm was first proposed
in (McMahan et al., 2017) as a heuristic to improve communication efficiency and data privacy for FL.
Since then, there have been many follow-ups (e.g., (Li et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al.,
2020; Acar et al., 2021; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2021; Mitra et al., 2021; Karimireddy
et al., 2021; Khanduri et al., 2021; Murata & Suzuki, 2021; Avdiukhin & Kasiviswanathan, 2021) and
so on) on addressing the data heterogeneity challenge in FL. However, most of these works (e.g., (Li
et al., 2020a; Wang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020; Acar et al., 2021; Karimireddy et al., 2020; Yang
et al., 2021b)) are based on the full or uniform (i.e., sampling clients uniformly at random) client
participation assumption. The full or uniform participation assumptions are essential since they are
required to ensure that the stochastic gradient estimator is unbiased in each round of update. Thus,
even if “model drift” or “objective inconsistency” emerges due to local updates (Karimireddy et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2020), the full/uniform client participation in each communication round averages
them out in the long run, therefore, guaranteeing convergence.
A related interesting line of works in FL different from full/uniform client participation focuses
on proactively creating flexible client participation (see, e.g., (Xie et al., 2019; Ruan et al., 2021;
Gu et al., 2021; Avdiukhin & Kasiviswanathan, 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Wang & Ji, 2022)). The
main idea here is to allow asynchronous communication or fixed participation pattern (e.g., given
probability) for clients to flexibly participate in training. Existing works in this area often require extra
assumptions, such as bounded delay (Ruan et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2022; Avdiukhin
& Kasiviswanathan, 2021) and identical computation rate (Avdiukhin & Kasiviswanathan, 2021).
Under these assumptions, although the stochastic gradients are no longer unbiased estimators of the


                                                     2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


full gradients, the deviation in each communication round remains bounded. For sufficiently many
communication rounds, the impact of such deviation from full gradients vanishes asymptotically,
since each client can still participate in FL in the long run. In contrast, this paper considers a more
practical (or worst-case) scenario in FL – partial client participation even in the long run, which can
be caused by many real-world system heterogeneity factors as mentioned in Section 1 .
2) Domain Adaptation: Since partial client participation induces a gap between the dataset distribu-
tion used for FL training and the true data population distribution across all clients, our work is also
related to the field of domain adaptation in learning. Domain adaptation focuses on the learnability of
a model trained in one source domain but applied to a different and related target domain. The basic
approach is to quantify the error in terms of the source domain plus the distance between source and
target domains. Specifically, let P and Q be the target and source distributions, respectively. Then,
the generalization error is expressed as O(A(nQ )) + dist(P, Q), where A(nQ ) is an upper bound of
the error dependent on the total number of samples in Q, Widely-used distance measures include
dA -divergence (Ben-David et al., 2010; David et al., 2010) and Y-discrepancy (Mansour et al., 2009;
Mohri & Medina, 2012). We note, however, that results in domain adaptation cannot be directly
applied in FL with partial client participation, since doing so yields an overly pessimistic bound.
Specifically, the error based on domain adaptation remains non-zero for asymptotically small distance
dist(P, Q) between P and Q even with infinite many samples in nQ (i.e., A(nQ ) → 0). In this paper,
rather than directly using results from domain adaptation, we establish a much sharper upper bound
(see Section 3). Another line of work in domain adaptation is using importance weights defined by
the density ratios between P and Q to correct the bias and reduce the discrepancy (Sugiyama et al.,
2007a;b; Cortes et al., 2008). However, due to FL privacy constraints, such density ratios are difficult
to estimate, which renders importance-weights-based methods infeasible in FL. A closely related
work is (Hanneke & Kpotufe, 2019), which proposed a new notion of discrepancy between source
and target distributions called transfer exponents. However, this work considers non-overlapping
support between P and Q, while we focus on overlapping support (see Fig. 1 in Section 3.3).

3     PAC-L EARNABILITY OF C ONVENTIONAL F EDERATED L EARNING WITH
      PARTIAL C LIENT PARTICIPATION
In this section, we first focus on understanding the impacts of partial client participation on con-
ventional FL in terms of PAC-learnability in Section 3.2. This will also pave the way for studying
SA-FL later in Section 3.3. In what follows, we start with the conventional FL formulation and some
definitions in statistical learning that are necessary to formulate and prove our main results.

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

The goal of FL is to minimize the following loss function F (x) = Ei∼P [Fi (x)], where Fi (x) ,
Eξ ∼Pi [fi (x, ξ)]. Here, P represents the distribution of the entire client population, x ∈ Rd is
the model parameter, Fi (x) represents the local loss function at client i, and Pi is the underlying
distribution of the local dataset at client i. In general, Pi 6= Pj , if i 6= j due to data heterogeneity.
However, the loss function F (x) or full gradient ∇F (x) can not be directly computed as the exact
distribution of data is unknown in general. Instead, one often considers the following empirical risk
minimization (ERM) problem in the form of finite-sum:
                                                     X
                                      min F̂ (x) =         αi F̂i (x),
                                     x∈Rd
                                                    i∈[M ]
                         P
where F̂i (x) , (1/|Si |) ξ∈Si fi (x, ξ). Here, M is the total number of clients, Si is the local dataset
                                                                                          P
with cardinality |Si |, which is i.i.d. and sampled from distribution Pi , αi = |Si |/( j∈[M ] |Sj |)
       P
(hence i∈[M ] αi = 1). For ease of presentation, we consider the balanced dataset case: αi =
1/M, ∀i ∈ [M ]. Next, we state several definitions from statistical learning theory (Mohri et al., 2018).

Definition 1 (Generalization Error and Empirical Error). Given a hypothesis h ∈ H, a target concept
f , an underlying distribution D and a dataset S i.i.d. sampled from D (S ∼ D), the generalization
error and empirical error of h are defined as follows: RD (h, f ) = E(x,y)∼D l(h(x), f (x)) and
               1
                  P
R̂D (h, f ) = |S|   i∈S l(h(xi ), f (xi )), where l(·) is some valid loss function.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


With a slight abuse of notation, we omit f by using RD (h) and R̂D (h) for simplicity.
Definition 2 (Optimal Hypothesis). For a distribution D and a dataset S ∼ D, we define h∗D =
argminRD (h) and ĥ∗D = argminR̂D (h).
  h∈H                         h∈H
Definition 3 (Excess Error). For hypothesis h and distribution D, the excess error and excess empiri-
cal error are defined as εD (h) = RD (h)−RD (h∗D ), and ε̂D (h) = R̂D (h)− R̂D (ĥ∗D ), respectively.

3.2     C ONVENTIONAL F EDERATED L EARNING UNDER PARTIAL C LIENT PARTICIPATION

With the above notations, we consider conventional FL under partial client participation. Consider
an FL system with M clients in total. We let P denote the underlying joint distribution of the entire
system,
      P which can be decomposed intoPthe summation of the local distributions at each client, i.e.,
P = i∈[M ] λi Pi , where λi > 0 and i∈[M ] λi = 1. We assume that each client i has n training
samples i.i.d. drawn from Pi , i.e., |Si | = n, ∀i ∈ [M ]. Then, S = {(xi , yi ), i ∈ [M × n]} can
be viewed as the dataset i.i.d. sampled from the joint distribution P . We consider a partial client
participation setting, where m ∈ [0, M ) clients participate in the FL training as a result of some client
sampling process F. We let F(S) represent the data ensemble actually used in training and D denote
                                                                                                        m
the underlying distribution corresponding to F(S). For convenience, we define the notion α = M
as the FL system capacity (i.e., only m clients participate in the training). For FL with partial client
participation, we establish the following fundamental performance limit of any learner in general. For
simplicity, we use binary classification with zero-one loss here. We state the following impossibility
result in Theorem 1 in terms of PAC learnability:
Theorem 1 (Impossibility Theorem). Let H be a non-trivial hypothesis space and L :
(X , Y)(m×n) → H be the learner for an FL system. There exists a client participation pro-
cess F,  a distribution P , and a  target   function f ∈ H with minh∈H RP (h, f ) = 0, such that
PS∼P RP (L(F(S), f )) > 1−α     8    >  1
                                       20 .

Proof Sketch. The proof is based on the method of induced distributions in (Bshouty et al., 2002;
Mohri et al., 2018; Konstantinov et al., 2020). We first show that the learnability of an FL system
is equivalent to that of a system that arbitrarily selects mn out of M n samples in the centralized
learning. Then, for any learning algorithm, there exists a distribution P such that dataset F(S)
resulting from partial participation and seen by the algorithm is always distributed identically for any
target functions. Thus, no algorithm can learn a better predictor than random guessing. Due to space
limitation, we relegate the full proof to supplementary material.
Given the system capacity α ∈ (0, 1), the above theorem characterizes the worst-case scenario for
FL with partial client participation. It says that for any learner (i.e., algorithm) L, there exists a bad
client participation process F and distributions Pi , i ∈ [M ] over target function f , for which the
error of the hypotheses returned by L is constant with non-zero probability. In other words, FL with
partial client participation is not PAC-learnable. One interesting observation here is that the lower
bound is independent of the number of samples per client n. This indicates that even if each client
has infinitely many samples (n → ∞), it is impossible to have a zero-generation-error learner under
the partial client participation (α ∈ (0, 1)). Note that this fundamental result relies on two conditions:
heterogeneous dataset and arbitrary client participation. Under these two conditions, there exists
a worst-case scenario where the underlying distribution D of the participating data SD = F(S)
deviates from the ground-truth P , thus yielding a non-vanishing error. This result also sheds light on
how to motivate client participation in FL effectively and efficiently: the participating client’s data
should be comprehensive enough to model the complexity of the joint distribution P to close the gap
between D and P . Note that this result is not contradictory to previous works where the convergence
of FedAvg is guaranteed, since this theorem is not applicable for homogeneous (i.i.d.) datasets or
uniformly random client participation. As mentioned earlier, most of the existing works rely on at
least one of these two assumptions. However, none of these two assumptions hold for conventional
FL with partial client participation in practice.

3.3     T HE PAC-L EARNABILITY OF S ERVER - AIDED FEDERATED LEARNING (SA-FL)

The intuition of SA-FL is to utilize a dataset T i.i.d. sampled from distribution P with cardinality nT
as a vehicle to correct potential distribution derivations due to partial client participation. By doing


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


so, the server steers the learning by a small number of representative data, while the clients aid the
learning by federation to leverage the huge amount of privately decentralized data (nS   nT ). Note
that the assumption of access to this dataset is not restrictive since such datasets are already available
in many FL systems: although not always necessary for training, an auxiliary dataset is often needed
for defining FL tasks (e.g., simulation prototyping) before training and model checking after training
(e.g., quality evaluation and sanity checking) (McMahan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a). Also,
obtaining an auxiliary dataset is affordable since the number of data points required is relatively small
(of the order of hundreds, see our experimental results), and hence the cost is low. Then, SA-FL can
be easily achieved or even with manually labelled data thanks to its small size. It is also worth noting
that many works use such auxiliary datasets in FL for security (Cao et al., 2021), incentive design
(Wang et al., 2019), and knowledge distillation (Cho et al., 2021).
For SA-FL, we consider the same partial client participation setting that induces a dataset SD ∼ D
with cardinality nS and D 6= P . As a result, the learning process is to minimize RP (h) by
utilizing (X , Y)nT +nS to learn a hypothesis h ∈ H. For notional clarity, we assume the joint dataset
SQ = (SD ∪ T ) ∼ Q with cardinality nT + nS for some distribution Q. Before deriving the
generalization error bound for SA-FL, we state the following assumption and definition.
Assumption 1 (Noise Condition). Suppose that h∗P and h∗Q exist. There exist βP , βQ ∈ [0, 1] and
αP , αQ > 0 such that the following hold: Px∼P (h(x) 6= h∗P (x)) ≤ αP [εP (h)]βP , Px∼Q (h(x) 6=
h∗Q (x)) ≤ αq [εQ (h)]βQ .

This assumption is a traditional noise model known as the Bernstein class condition, which has been
widely used in the literature (Massart & Nédélec, 2006; Koltchinskii, 2006; Hanneke, 2016).
Definition 4 ((α, β)-Positively-Related). Distributions P and Q are said to be (α, β)-positively-
related if there exist constants α ≥ 0 and β ≥ 0 such that |εP (h) − εQ (h)| ≤ α[εQ (h)]β , ∀h ∈ H.

Definition 4 specifies a stronger constraint between distributions P and Q. It indicates that the
difference of excess error for one hypothesis h ∈ H between P and Q is bounded by the excess error
of Q in some exponential form. With the above assumption and definition, we have the following
generation error bound for SA-FL, which shows that SA-FL is PAC-learnable:
Theorem 2 (Generalization Error Bound for SA-FL). For an SA-FL system with arbitrary system and
data heterogeneity, if distributions P and Q satisfy Assumption 1 and are (α, β)-positively-related,
then with probability at least 1 − δ for any δ ∈ (0, 1), it holds that
                                                   1
                                                 2−β                     β
                                                                       2−β   !
                           ∗              dH         Q         dH          Q
                     εP (ĥQ ) = O
                                 e                     +                       ,                 (1)
                                       nT +nS               nT +nS

where dH denotes the finite VC dimension for hypotheses class H, and parameters {P, Q, nT , nS , β,
βQ } are defined the same as before.

It is known that (see, e.g., (Hanneke, 2016)) the generalization error bound of centralized learning is
          1
 e 1 ) 2−βQ ) (hiding logarithmic factors) with n samples in total and noise parameter βQ . Note that
O((   n
when β ≥ 1, the first term in Eq. (1) dominates. Hence, Theorem 2 implies that the generalization
error bound for SA-FL matches that of centralized learning (with dataset size nT + nS ). Mean-
while, compared with solely training on server’s dataset T , SA-FL exhibits an improvement from
            1                      β
 e 1 ) 2−βQ ) to O((
O((                e       1
                               ) 2−βQ ).
    nT                 nT +nS

Note that SA-FL shares some similarity with the domain adaptation problem, where the learning is
on Q but the results will be adapted to P . In what follows, we offer some deeper insights between the
two by answering two key questions: 1) What is the difference between SA-FL and domain adaptation
(a.k.a. transfer learning)? and 2) Why is SA-FL from Q to P PAC-learnable, but FL from D to P
with partial client participation not PAC-learnable (as indicated in Theorem 1)?
To answer these questions, we illustrate the distribution relationships for domain adaptation and fed-
erated learning, in Fig. 1, respectively. In domain adaptation, the target P and source Q distributions
often have overlapping support but there also exists distinguishable difference. In contrast, the two
distributions P and Q in SA-FL happen to share exactly the same support with different density, since
Q is a mixture of D and P . As a result, the known bounds in domain adaptation (or transfer learning)


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


are pessimistic in SA-FL. For example, the dist(P, Q) in dA -divergence and Y-divergence both have
non-negligible gaps when applied to SA-FL. Here in Theorem 2, we provide a generalization error
bound in terms of the total sample size nT + nS , thus showing the benefit of SA-FL.
                                                        i.i.d.
Moreover, for SA-FL, only the auxiliary dataset T ∼
P is directly available for the server. The clients’                           Q
datasets could be used in SA-FL training, but they are                                         D
not directly accessible due to privacy constraints. Thus,
previous methods in domain adaptation (e.g., impor-
tance weights-based methods in covariate shift adapta-
tion (Sugiyama et al., 2007a;b)) are not applicable since           P                      P
they require the knowledge of density ratio between
training and test datasets.                                      Domain Adaptation Federated Learning
The key difference between FL and SA-FL lies in rela-
tions among D, P and Q. For FL, the distance between Figure 1: Diagram of distributions for do-
D and P under partial participation could be large due main adaptation and federated learning.
to system and data heterogeneity in the worst-case. More specifically, the support of D could be
narrow enough to miss some part of P , resulting in non-vanishing error as indicated in Theorem 1.
For SA-FL, distribution Q is a mixture of P and D (Q = λ1 D + λ2 P , with λ1 , λ2 ≥ 0, λ1 + λ2 = 1),
thus having the same support with P . Hence, under Assumption 4, the PAC-learnability is guaranteed.
Although we provide a promising bound to show the PAC-learnability of SA-FL in Theorem 2, the
                                                                                        1
                                                                           e 1 ) 2−βP )) is not always
superiority of SA-FL over training solely with dataset T in server (i.e., O((    nT
guaranteed as β → 0 (i.e., Q becomes increasingly different from P ). In what follows, we reveal
under what conditions between P and Q could SA-FL perform no worse than centralized learning in
terms of generalization error.
Theorem 3 (SA-FL Being No Worse Than Centralized Learning). Consider an SA-FL system with
arbitrary system and data heterogeneity. If Assumption 1 holds and additionally R̂P (ĥ∗Q ) ≤ R̂P (h∗Q )
and εP (h∗Q ) = O(A(nT , δ)), where A(nT , δ) = dnH   T
                                                        log( dnH
                                                               T
                                                                 + n1T log( 1δ )), then with probability at
                                                                           1

least 1 − δ for any δ ∈ (0, 1), it holds that εP (ĥ∗ ) = O
                                                    Q
                                                           e (dH /nT ) 2−βP . Other parameters are
the same as defined in Theorem 2.

Here, we remark that εP (h∗Q ) = O(A(nT , δ)) is a weaker condition than the εP (h∗Q ) = 0 condition
and the covariate shift assumption (PY |X = QY |X ) used in the transfer learning literatures (Hanneke
& Kpotufe, 2019; 2020). Together with the condition R̂P (ĥ∗Q ) ≤ R̂P (h∗Q ), the following intermedi-
ate result holds: R̂P (ĥ∗Q ) − R̂P (h∗P ) = O(A(nT , δ)) (see Lemma 2 in the supplementary material).
Intuitively, this states that “if P and Q share enough similarity, then the difference of excess empirical
error between ĥ∗Q and h∗P on P can be bounded.” Thus, the excess error of ĥ∗Q shares the same upper
bound as that of ĥ∗P in centralized learning. Therefore, Theorem 3 implies that, under mild conditions,
SA-FL guarantees the same generalization error upper bound as that of centralized learning with
dataset T , hence being “no worse than” centralized learning with dataset T .

4    T HE SAFARI ALGORITHM
Although we have shown that SA-FL is PAC-learnable under partial client participation, we note that
SA-FL still follows the server-client architecture, which demands intensive communication between
the server and clients. Hence, it is important to design communication-efficient algorithms for SA-FL
with a comparable level of communication complexity as that of conventional FL. In this section, we
propose a new algorithm called SAFARI (server-aided federated averaging) algorithm for SA-FL and
characterize its convergence guarantees.
As shown in Algorithm 1, SAFARI iteratively performs the following three steps: 1) Server samples
a subset of clients as in conventional FL and synchronize the latest global model xr with each
participating clients (Line 3); 2) The server and all participating clients train the model based on
local dataset (Lines 4-8). Specifically, client initializes its local model with xr and then performs K
local steps by the stochastic gradient descent method. Then, each client sends its locally accumulated


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 The SAFARI Algorithm for SA-FL.
 1: Initialize x0 .
 2: for r = 0, · · · , R − 1 do
 3:    The server samples a subset Sr of clients with |Sr | = n and send current model xt .
 4:    for Each client i ∈ Sr do
 5:       Synchronization: xir,0 = xr .
 6:       Local updates: for k = 0, ..., K − 1: xir,k+1 = xir,k − η∇Fi (xir,k , ξr,k
                                                                                 i
                                                                                     ).
                   i
                          P  K−1          i   i
 7:       Send ∆r = − k=0 ∇Fi (xr,k , ξr,k ) to server.
 8:    end for
 9:    for Server do
10:       Local updates: for k = 0, ..., K − 1: x0r,k+1 = x0r,k − η∇F (x0r,k , ξr,k
                                                                                 0
                                                                                    ),
                 0
                         P  K−1         0   0
               ∆r = − k=0 ∇F (xr,k , ξr,k ).
                                                               i   0
11:                                                ˆ ir = cr ∆ri −∆r0 .
          Receive ∆ir , i ∈ Sr , and normalize it: ∆         k∆r −∆r k
12:      Server Update:
                                             ˆ ir .
             xr+1 = xr + η ∆0r + |S1r | i∈Sr ∆
                                       P

13:   end for
14: end for


update ∆ir back to the server. Note the server simultaneously takes K local steps based on its auxiliary
dataset (in Line 10). 3) Server aggregates and updates the global model (Lines 11-12). Upon receiving
the local update ∆ir , the server normalizes and rescales it by a hyper-parameter cr . Then, the server
updates the global model by aggregating the normalized update ∆    ˆ i and the server’s update ∆0 based
                                                                     r                          r
on its own auxiliary dataset. Compared to FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) in FL, SAFARI shares the
same communication and computation process from the client’s perspective. Hence, it enjoys the
same level of communication efficiency and privacy benefits. Before conducting the convergence
performance analysis, we first state two commonly used assumptions in the FL literature.
Assumption 2. (L-Lipschitz Continuous Gradient) There exists a constant L > 0, such that
k∇F (x) − ∇F (y)k ≤ Lkx − yk, ∀x, y ∈ Rd .
Assumption 3. (Unbiased Stochastic Gradient with Bounded Variance) The stochastic gradient is
unbiased, i.e., E[∇F (x, ξ)] = ∇F (x) and E[k∇F (x, ξ) − ∇F (x)k2 ] ≤ σ 2 .partial

With the assumptions above, we are now in the position to analyze the convergence of SAFARI.
Theorem 4 (Convergence Rate for SAFARI ). Under Assumptions 2 and 3, let constant learning
rate η satisfy ( 12 − 4LKη − 20K(L + 4KL3 η)η 2 ) > 0. Then, the sequence {xr } generated by the
SAFARI algorithm satisfies:
         R−1
                              1 F (x0 ) − F (x∗ )

      1 X                                             1
              Ek∇F (xr )k2 ≤                              5KLη 2 + 20K 2 L3 η 3 + 2Lη σ 2

                                                    +
      R t=0                   c      ηKR              c
                                  "              R−1       #
                                1    1      Lη 1 X 2
                              +          +               c ,
                                c    K2     K R t=0 r
where c is a constant and x∗ denotes an optimal solution.

Theorem 4 implies an O(1/R) convergence rate to a neighborhood of a stationary point. Furthermore,
by choosing parameters {cr } and the learning rate η appropriately, we have the following convergence
rate to a stationary point:
                 PR−1                                          1
Corollary 1. If t=0 c2r is bounded and learning rate η = √KR       , the convergence rate of SAFARI is:

                                                                         K 1/2

                                1        1       1           1
                       O               + + 2 + 3/2 3/2 + 3/2 .
                            K 1/2 R1/2   R K R K R                       R

In Theorem 4 and Corollary 1, we show the convergence guarantee of SAFARI under no extra assump-
tions on the data and system heterogeneity (client participation), which corroborates the learnability


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     1                                                                        0.7
                                                                                              0.6
                    0.9


                                                                              Test Accuracy
                                                                                              0.5
    Test Accuracy


                    0.8
                                                                                              0.4
                    0.7                                                                       0.3             SAFARI+Server Datasize 500
                               Incomplete Client Participation Index: 0                       0.2             SAFARI+Server Datasize 1000
                    0.6
                               Incomplete Client Participation Index: 2
                                                                                                              SAFARI+Server Datasize 5000
                               Incomplete Client Participation Index: 4                       0.1             FedAvg
                    0.5
                          10                          5              2    1                       0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
                                       Non-IID Index (p)                                                  Communication Round
                                 (a) FedAvg on MNIST                                   (b) SAFARI on CIFAR-10 with s = 4 and p = 1.
Figure 2: Test accuracy of FedAvg on MNIST and SAFARI on CIFAR-10 with partial client partici-
pation. Larger partial client participation index s means less clients participate in the training, and
smaller non-i.i.d. index p means the data across clients are more heterogeneous.

analysis in Section 3. Hence, in the worst-case scenarios, convergence rate O(1/(K 1/2 R1/2 )) is
achieved for sufficiently large R and K ≤ R. In comparison, a non-vanishing error term emerges
consistently for the same setting in FL (Yang et al., 2022). This verifies the superiority of SA-FL
over conventional FL with partial client participation. Note that Corollary 1 requires a convergent
                                      PR−1
series {c2r }. This can be relaxed to r=0 c2r = O(min{KR, K 3/2 R1/2 }) to maintain the same
O(1/(K 1/2 R1/2 )) rate. It can be readily verified that p-series (cr = r−p ) satisfies the condition.
Also, we will see later in numerical results that, compared to FedAvg, our SAFARI has a faster
convergence as the size of auxiliary server dataset increases. It is also worth noting that SA-FL can
be used to mitigate Byzantine attacks to FL systems. For example, empirical success of utilizing an
auxiliary dataset and normalization at the server has been shown in (Cao et al., 2021) in defending
against Byzantine attacks in FL systems. Lastly, note that the convergence rate bound in Corollary 1
does not explicitly depend on the number of participating clients m. It is thus an interesting future
work to study whether there exist algorithms for SA-FL that theoretically guarantee a “linear speedup
effect” as the number of participating clients increases under partial client participation.

5                    N UMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, we conduct numerical experiments to verify our theoretical results using 1) logistic
regression (LR) on MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 1998) and 2) convolutional neural network (CNN)
on CIFAR-10 dataset (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). To simulate data heterogeneity, we distribute the
data into each client evenly in a label-based partition, following the same process as in previous
works (e.g., (McMahan et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2021b; Li et al., 2020b)). As a result, we can use a
parameter p to represent the classes of labels in each client’s dataset, which serves as an index of
data heterogeneity level (non-i.i.d. index). The smaller p-value, the more heterogeneous the data
among clients. To mimic partial client participation, we force s clients to be excluded. We can use s
as an index to represent the degree of such partial client participation. In our experiments, there are
M = 10 clients in total, and m = 5 clients participate in the training in each communication round,
who are uniformly sampled from the M − s clients. We use two algorithms as baselines to compare
with our algorithm: i) the FedAvg algorithm without any auxiliary dataset at the server; and ii) the
SGD algorithm for centralized learning with dataset only at the server (without any clients). Due to
space limitation, we highlight four key observations in this section, and relegate the details of the
experiments and additional experiments to the supplementary material.
1) Performance Degradation of Partial Client Participation: We first show the test accuracy of
FedAvg on MNIST for different values of non-i.i.d. index p and partial client index s in Fig. 2(a).
For nearly homogeneous data (e.g., from p = 10 to p = 5), partial client participation has negligible
impacts on test accuracy. However, for highly non-i.i.d. cases, partial client participation results in
dramatic performance degradation. Specifically, for p = 1, the test accuracy for s = 4 is only 57%,


                                                                              8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  Table 2: Test accuracy improvement (%) for
Table 1: Test accuracy improvement (%) for
                                                  SAFARI under partial client participation s = 4 com-
SAFARI compared with FedAvg on MNIST
                                                  pared with SGD in centralized learning on MNIST.
with partial client participation s = 4. ‘-’
                                                  Smaller non-i.i.d. index means the data across clients
means “no statistical difference within 2%
                                                  is more heterogeneous. ‘-’ means “no statistical dif-
error bar”.
     S ERVER    N ON -IID I NDEX (p)              ference within 2% error bar”.
    DATASIZE    10 5          2      1                   S ERVER    N ON -IID I NDEX (p)
                                                        DATASIZE      10        5       2       1
         50      -    -       -    12.32
        100      -    -     5.24   16.48                    50      28.94 19.65 9.32          3.69
        500      -    -     9.40   27.55                    100     20.46 14.84 8.58          -3.42
       1000      -    - 10.08 28.78                         500      6.13     3.92    2.09      -
                                                           1000      3.79     3.16      -       -



yielding a large degradation (35%) compared to that of s = 0. This is consistent with the worst-case
analysis in Theorem 1 and also the main motivation of SA-FL.
2) Improvement of the SAFARI Algorithm under Partial Client Participation: In Table 1, we
show the test accuracy improvement of our SAFARI algorithm compared with that of FedAvg in
standard FL. The key observation is that, with a small amount of auxiliary data at the server, there
is a significant increase of test accuracy for our SAFARI algorithm. For example, with only 50 data
samples at the server (0.1% of the total training data), there is a 12.32% test accuracy increase. With
500 data samples, the improvement reaches 27.55%. This verifies the effectiveness of our SA-FL
framework and our SAFARI algorithm. Another observation is that for nearly homogeneous case
(e.g., from p = 10 to p = 5), there is no statistical difference with or without auxiliary data at the
server (denoted by ‘-’ in Table 1. This is consistent with the previous observations of negligible
degradation in cases with homogeneous data across clients.
3) Benefits of Collaboration Even with Partial Client Participation: In Table 2, we show the
comparison between our SAFARI algorithm under partial client participation (s = 4) and SGD for
centralized learning (i.e., only with data at the server). This comparison is to illustrate the benefit of
collaborations from the clients. We can see these collaborations from the clients significantly improve
the performance for the nearly homogeneous case, especially when the size of the server dataset is
small (cf. the columns of p = 10 and p = 5). However, for highly heterogeneous cases, it shows no
obvious improvement from the collaboration of clients if participation is partial. This confirms our
theoretical analysis in Theorem 2. Specifically, highly partial client participation and heterogeneous
data render a small β-value, and so there is no clear benefit of collaboration in FL over centralized
learning only on small auxiliary dataset due to the significant distribution deviation.
4) Convergence Speedup of SAFARI with Larger Server Dataset: In this experiment, we illustrate
the speedup effect of SAFARI numerically as the size of server dataset increases. In Fig. 2(b), we
show the convergence processes of SAFARI on CIFAR-10 for partial client participation (s = 4) and
non-i.i.d. data (p = 1). We can see clearly that the convergence of SAFARI is accelerating and the
test accuracy increases as more data are employed at the server. In this experiment setting, we also
plot the convergence of FedAvg in Fig. 2(b). It can be seen that all three cases of SAFARI converge
faster than FedAvg in this experiment.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we rigorously investigated the server-aided federated learning (SA-FL) framework,
which has been increasingly adopted in practice to mitigate the impacts of partial client participation
in conventional FL. In SA-FL, the key idea is to deploy an auxiliary dataset at the server to reduce
the distribution deviation induced by partial client participation. To characterize the benefits of
SA-FL, we first showed that conventional FL is not PAC-learnable under partial client participation
by establishing a fundamental generalization error lower bound. Then, we showed that SA-FL is able
to revive the PAC-learnability of conventional FL under partial client participation. Upon resolving
the PAC-learnability challenge, we proposed a new SAFARI (server-aided federated averaging)
algorithm that enjoys convergence guarantee and the same level of communication efficiency as that
of conventional FL. Extensive numerical results also validated our theoretical findings.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Durmus Alp Emre Acar, Yue Zhao, Ramon Matas Navarro, Matthew Mattina, Paul N Whatmough,
  and Venkatesh Saligrama. Federated learning based on dynamic regularization. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Dmitrii Avdiukhin and Shiva Kasiviswanathan. Federated learning under arbitrary communication
 patterns. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference
 on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 425–435.
 PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021.
Shai Ben-David, John Blitzer, Koby Crammer, Alex Kulesza, Fernando Pereira, and Jennifer Wortman
  Vaughan. A theory of learning from different domains. Machine learning, 79(1):151–175, 2010.
Keith Bonawitz, Hubert Eichner, Wolfgang Grieskamp, Dzmitry Huba, Alex Ingerman, Vladimir
  Ivanov, Chloe Kiddon, Jakub Konecnỳ, Stefano Mazzocchi, H Brendan McMahan, et al. Towards
  federated learning at scale: System design. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.01046, 2019.
Nader H Bshouty, Nadav Eiron, and Eyal Kushilevitz. Pac learning with nasty noise. Theoretical
  Computer Science, 288(2):255–275, 2002.
Xiaoyu Cao, Minghong Fang, Jia Liu, and Neil Zhenqiang Gong. Fltrust: Byzantine-robust feder-
  ated learning via trust bootstrapping. ISOC Network and Distributed Systems Security (NDSS)
  Symposium, abs/2012.13995, 2021.
Yae Jee Cho, Jianyu Wang, Tarun Chiruvolu, and Gauri Joshi. Personalized federated learning for
  heterogeneous clients with clustered knowledge transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.08119, 2021.
Corinna Cortes, Mehryar Mohri, Michael Riley, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Sample selection bias
  correction theory. In International conference on algorithmic learning theory, pp. 38–53. Springer,
  2008.
Shai Ben David, Tyler Lu, Teresa Luu, and Dávid Pál. Impossibility theorems for domain adaptation.
  In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 129–136. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2010.
Xinran Gu, Kaixuan Huang, Jingzhao Zhang, and Longbo Huang. Fast federated learning in the
  presence of arbitrary device unavailability. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Steve Hanneke. Refined error bounds for several learning algorithms. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 17(1):4667–4721, 2016.
Steve Hanneke and Samory Kpotufe. On the value of target data in transfer learning. In NeurIPS,
  2019.
Steve Hanneke and Samory Kpotufe. A no-free-lunch theorem for multitask learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.15785, 2020.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning.
  In Hal Daumé III and Aarti Singh (eds.), Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5132–5143.
  PMLR, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J. Reddi, Sebastian U
  Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Breaking the centralized barrier for cross-device federated
  learning. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Prashant Khanduri, PRANAY SHARMA, Haibo Yang, Mingyi Hong, Jia Liu, Ketan Rajawat, and
  Pramod Varshney. STEM: A stochastic two-sided momentum algorithm achieving near-optimal
  sample and communication complexities for federated learning. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vladimir Koltchinskii. Local rademacher complexities and oracle inequalities in risk minimization.
  The Annals of Statistics, 34(6):2593–2656, 2006.
Nikola Konstantinov, Elias Frantar, Dan Alistarh, and Christoph Lampert. On the sample complexity
  of adversarial multi-source pac learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  5416–5425. PMLR, 2020.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. In I. Dhillon, D. Papailiopoulos, and V. Sze
  (eds.), Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, volume 2, pp. 429–450, 2020a.
Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  fedavg on non-iid data. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020b.
Mi Luo, Fei Chen, Dapeng Hu, Yifan Zhang, Jian Liang, and Jiashi Feng. No fear of heterogeneity:
 Classifier calibration for federated learning with non-IID data. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Domain adaptation: Learning bounds
  and algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:0902.3430, 2009.

Pascal Massart and Élodie Nédélec. Risk bounds for statistical learning. The Annals of Statistics, 34
  (5):2326–2366, 2006.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial intelli-
  gence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
H Brendan McMahan et al. Advances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and
  Trends® in Machine Learning, 14(1), 2021.
Aritra Mitra, Rayana Jaafar, George J. Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Linear convergence in federated
  learning: Tackling client heterogeneity and sparse gradients. In Thirty-Fifth Conference on Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Mehryar Mohri and Andres Munoz Medina. New analysis and algorithm for learning with drifting
 distributions. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 124–138. Springer,
 2012.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning. MIT
 press, 2018.
Tomoya Murata and Taiji Suzuki. Bias-variance reduced local sgd for less heterogeneous federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03198, 2021.
Yichen Ruan, Xiaoxi Zhang, Shu-Che Liang, and Carlee Joe-Wong. Towards flexible device partici-
  pation in federated learning. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics,
  pp. 3403–3411. PMLR, 2021.
Masashi Sugiyama, Matthias Krauledat, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Covariate shift adaptation by
 importance weighted cross validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(5), 2007a.
Masashi Sugiyama, Shinichi Nakajima, Hisashi Kashima, Paul Von Buenau, and Motoaki Kawanabe.
 Direct importance estimation with model selection and its application to covariate shift adaptation.
 In NIPS, volume 7, pp. 1433–1440. Citeseer, 2007b.
Guan Wang, Charlie Xiaoqian Dang, and Ziye Zhou. Measure contribution of participants in federated
  learning. 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 2597–2604, 2019.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective
   inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Jianyu Wang, Zachary Charles, Zheng Xu, Gauri Joshi, H Brendan McMahan, Maruan Al-Shedivat,
   Galen Andrew, Salman Avestimehr, Katharine Daly, Deepesh Data, et al. A field guide to federated
   optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06917, 2021a.
Lixu Wang, Shichao Xu, Xiao Wang, and Qi Zhu. Addressing class imbalance in federated learning.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 10165–10173,
  2021b.
Shiqiang Wang and Mingyue Ji. A unified analysis of federated learning with arbitrary client
  participation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.13648, 2022.
Cong Xie, Sanmi Koyejo, and Indranil Gupta. Asynchronous federated optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1903.03934, 2019.
Chengxu Yang, Qipeng Wang, Mengwei Xu, Zhenpeng Chen, Kaigui Bian, Yunxin Liu, and Xuanzhe
  Liu. Characterizing impacts of heterogeneity in federated learning upon large-scale smartphone
  data. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp. 935–946, 2021a.
Haibo Yang, Minghong Fang, and Jia Liu. Achieving linear speedup with partial worker participation
  in non-IID federated learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021b.
Haibo Yang, Xin Zhang, Prashant Khanduri, and Jia Liu. Anarchic federated learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 25331–25363. PMLR, 2022.
Xinwei Zhang, Mingyi Hong, Sairaj Dhople, Wotao Yin, and Yang Liu. Fedpd: A federated learning
  framework with optimal rates and adaptivity to non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.11418,
  2020.
Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated
  learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582, 2018.


                                                12
