Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E QUI M OD : A N E QUIVARIANCE M ODULE TO
I MPROVE V ISUAL I NSTANCE D ISCRIMINATION
 Alexandre Devillers & Mathieu Lefort
 Univ Lyon, UCBL, CNRS, INSA Lyon
 LIRIS, UMR5205, F-69622
 Villeurbanne, France
 {alexandre.devillers,mathieu.lefort}@liris.cnrs.fr



                                            A BSTRACT

         Recent self-supervised visual representation methods are closing the gap with su-
         pervised learning performance. Most of these successful methods rely on max-
         imizing the similarity between embeddings of related synthetic inputs created
         through data augmentations. This can be seen as a task that encourages embed-
         dings to leave out factors modified by these augmentations, i.e. to be invariant
         to them. However, this only considers one side of the trade-off in the choice of
         the augmentations: they need to strongly modify the images to avoid simple so-
         lution shortcut learning (e.g. using only color histograms), but on the other hand,
         augmentations-related information may be lacking in the representations for some
         downstream tasks (e.g. literature shows that color is important for bird and flower
         classification). Few recent works proposed to mitigate this problem of using only
         an invariance task by exploring some form of equivariance to augmentations. This
         has been performed by learning additional embeddings space(s), where some aug-
         mentation(s) cause embeddings to differ, yet in a non-controlled way. In this work,
         we introduce EquiMod a generic equivariance module that structures the learned
         latent space, in the sense that our module learns to predict the displacement in the
         embedding space caused by the augmentations. We show that applying that mod-
         ule to state-of-the-art invariance models, such as BYOL and SimCLR, increases
         the performances on the usual CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets. Moreover, while
         our model could collapse to a trivial equivariance, i.e. invariance, we observe that
         it instead automatically learns to keep some augmentations-related information
         beneficial to the representations.
         Source code is available at https://github.com/ADevillers/
         EquiMod


1   I NTRODUCTION

Using relevant and general representation is central for achieving good performances on downstream
tasks, for instance when learning object recognition from high-dimensional data like images. His-
torically, feature engineering was the usual way of building representations, but we can currently
rely on deep learning solutions to automate and improve this process of representation learning.
Still, it is challenging as it requires learning a structured latent space while controlling the precise
amount of features to put in representations: too little information will lead to not interesting rep-
resentations, yet too many non-pertinent features will make it harder for the model to generalize.
Recent works have focused on Self-Supervised Learning (SSL), i.e. determining a supervisory sig-
nal from the data with a pretext task. It has the advantages of not biasing the learned representation
toward a downstream goal, as well as not requiring human labeling, allowing the use of plentiful
raw data, especially for domains lacking annotations. In addition, deep representation learning en-
courages network reuse via transfer learning, allowing for better data efficiency and lowering the
computational cost of training for downstream tasks compared to the usual end-to-end fashion.
The performances of recent instance discrimination approaches in SSL of visual representation are
progressively closing the gap with the supervised baseline (Caron et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020a;b;


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chen & He, 2021; Bardes et al., 2021; Grill et al., 2020; He et al., 2020; Misra & Maaten, 2020;
Zbontar et al., 2021). They are mainly siamese networks performing an instance discrimination task.
Still, they have various distinctions that make them different from each other (see Liu (2021) for a
review and Szegedy et al. (2013) for a unification of existing works). Their underlying mechanism
is to maximize the similarity between the embedding of related synthetic inputs, a.k.a. views, cre-
ated through data augmentations that share the same concepts while using various tricks to avoid
a collapse towards a constant solution (Jing et al., 2021; Hua et al., 2021). This induces that the
latent space learns an invariance to the transformations used, which causes representations to lack
augmentations-related information.
Even if these models are self-supervised, they rely on human expert knowledge to find these relevant
invariances. For instance, as most downstream tasks in computer vision require object recognition,
existing augmentations do not degrade the categories of objects in images. More precisely, the
choice of the transformations was driven by some form of supervision, as it was done by experi-
mentally searching for the set of augmentations giving the highest object recognition performance
on the ImageNet dataset (Chen et al., 2020a). For instance, it has been found that color jitter is the
most efficient augmentation on ImageNet. One possible explanation is that color histograms are an
easy-to-learn shortcut solution (Geirhos et al., 2020), which is not removed by cropping augmen-
tations (Chen et al., 2020a). Indeed, as there are many objects in the categories of ImageNet, and
as an object category does not change when its color does, the loss of color information is worth
removing the shortcut. Still, it has been shown that color is an essential feature for some downstream
tasks (Xiao et al., 2020).
Thus, for a given downstream task, we can separate augmentations into two groups: the ones for
which the representations benefit from insensitivity (or invariance) and the ones for which sen-
sitivity (or variance) is beneficial (Dangovski et al., 2021). Indeed, there is a trade-off in the
choice of the augmentations: they require to modify significantly the images to avoid simple so-
lution shortcut learning (e.g. relying just on color histograms), yet some downstream tasks may
need augmentations-related information in the representations. Theoretically, this trade-off limits
the generalization of such representation learning methods relying on invariance. Recently, some
works have explored different ways of including sensitivity to augmentations and successfully im-
proved augmentations-invariant SSL methods on object classification by using tasks forcing sensi-
tivity while keeping an invariance objective in parallel. Dangovski et al. (2021) impose a sensitivity
to rotations, an augmentation that is not beneficial for the invariance task, while we focus in this
paper on sensitivity to transformations used for invariance. Xiao et al. (2020) proposes to learn as
many tasks as there are augmentations by learning multiple latent spaces, each one being invariant to
all but one transformation, however, it does not control the way augmentations-related information
is conserved. One can see this as an implicit way of learning variance to each possible augmentation.
Contrary to these works that do not control the way augmentations-related information is conserved,
here we propose to explore sensitivity by introducing an equivariance module that structures its la-
tent space by learning to predict the displacement in the embedding space caused by augmentations
in the pixel space.
The contributions of this article are the following:

       • We introduce a generic equivariance module EquiMod to mitigate the invariance to aug-
         mentations in recent methods of visual instance discrimination;

       • We show that using EquiMod with state-of-the-art invariance models, such as BYOL and
         SimCLR, boosts the classification performances on CIFAR10 and ImageNet datasets;

       • We study the robustness of EquiMod to architectural variations of its sub-components;

       • We observe that our model automatically learns a specific level of equivariance for each
         augmentation.

Sec. 2 will present our EquiMod module as well as the implementation details while in Sec. 3 we
will describe the experimental setup used to study our model and present the results obtained. The
Sec. 4 will position our work w.r.t. related work. Finally, in Sec. 5 we will discuss our current results
and possible future works.


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     E QUI M OD

2.1    N OTIONS OF INVARIANCE AND EQUIVARIANCE

As in Dangovski et al. (2021), we relate the notions of augmentations sensitivity and insensitivity
to the mathematical concepts of invariance and equivariance. Let T be a distribution of possible
transformations, and f denotes a projection from the input space to a latent space. That latent space
is said to be invariant to T if for any given input x the Eq. 1 is respected.

                                     ∀t ∈ T       f (t(x)) = f (x)                                    (1)

Misra & Maaten (2020) used this definition of invariance to design a pretext task for representation
learning. This formulation reflects that the embedding of a non-augmented input sample x will
not change if the input is transformed by any of the transformations in T . However, more recent
works (Bardes et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020a; Chen & He, 2021; Grill et al., 2020; Zbontar et al.,
2021) focused on another formulation of invariance defined by the following Eq. 2.

                              ∀t ∈ T , ∀t′ ∈ T          f (t(x)) = f (t′ (x))                         (2)

With this definition, the embedding produced by an augmented sample x is independent of the
transformation used. Still, note that Eq. 1 implies Eq. 2, and that if the identity function is part of
T , which is the case with recent approaches, then both definitions are indeed equivalent.
While insensitivity to augmentation is reflected by invariance, sensitivity can be obtained by achiev-
ing variance, i.e. replacing the equality by inequality in Eq. 1 or Eq. 2. Yet, this is not an interesting
property, as any injective function will satisfy this constraint. In this paper, we propose to use equiv-
ariance as a way to achieve variance to augmentations for structuring our latent space. Eq. 3 gives
the definition of equivariance used in the following work.

                                ∀t ∈ T , ∃ut       f (t(x)) = ut (f (x))                              (3)

With ut being a transformation in the latent space parameterized by the transformation t, it can be
seen as the counterpart of the transformation t but in the embedding space. With this definition, the
embeddings from different augmentations will be different and thus encode somehow information
related to the augmentations. Yet, if ut is always the identity then this definition of equivariance
becomes the same as invariance Eq.1. Indeed, one can see invariance as a trivial specific case of
equivariance. In the following, we only target non-trivial equivariance where ut produces some
displacement in the latent space. See Fig. 1 for a visual comparison of invariance and equivariance.

2.2    M ETHOD

EquiMod is a generic equivariance module that acts as a complement to existing visual instance
discrimination methods performing invariance (Bardes et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020a; Chen & He,
2021; Grill et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021). The objective of this module is to capture some
augmentations-related information originally suppressed by the learned invariance to improve the
learned representation. The main idea relies on equivariance, in the sense that our module learns
to predict the displacement in the embedding space caused by the augmentations. This way, by
having non-null displacement, we ensure embeddings contain augmentations-related information.
We first introduce a formalization for these existing methods (see Bardes et al. (2021) for an in-
depth explanation of this unification), before introducing how our approach adds on top.
Let t and t′ denote two augmentations sampled from the augmentations distribution T . For the given
input image x, two views are defined as vi := t(x) and vj := t′ (x). Thus, for N original images,
this results in a batch of 2N views, where the first N elements correspond to a first view (vi ) for
each of the images, and the last N elements correspond to a second view (vj ) for each of the images.
Following previous works, we note fθ an encoder parameterized by θ producing representations
from images, and gϕ a projection head parameterized by ϕ, which projects representations in an
embedding space. This way, the representations are defined as hi := fθ (vi ) as well as hj := fθ (vj ),


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                 Maximize
             Invariance          Equivariance                                                    similarity


                                                                                Invariance
                                                                                   Task


                                                            Figure 2: The model learns similar embed-
                                                            dings for an augmented view (zi′ ) and the
  Figure 1: On the left, invariance described by            prediction of the displacement in the embed-
  Eq. 1, on the right, equivariance considered              ding space caused by that augmentation (ẑi′ ),
  in this paper and described by Eq. 3.                     t is a learned representation of the parameters
                                                            of the transformation, see Sec. 2 for notation
                                                            details.


and the embeddings as zi := gϕ (hi ) as well as zj := gϕ (hj ). Then, the model learns to maximize
the similarity between zi and zj , while using diverse tricks to maintain a high entropy for the
embeddings, preventing collapse to constant representations.
To extend those preceding works, we introduce a second latent space to learn our equivariance
task. For this purpose, we first define a second projection head gϕ′ ′ parameterized by ϕ′ whose
objective is to project representations in our latent space. Using this projection head we note zi′ :=
gϕ′ ′ (hi ) and zj′ := gϕ′ ′ (hj ), the embeddings of the views vi and vj in this latent space we introduce.
Moreover, the way we define equivariance in Eq 3 requires us to produce the embedding of the
non-augmented image x, thus we note the representation ho := fθ (x), which is used to create
the embedding zo′ := gϕ′ ′ (ho ) for the given image x. Next, as mentioned in Sec.2.1, to learn an
equivariant latent space one needs to determine a transformation ut for any given t, this can be
done either by fixing it or by learning it. In this work, we learn the transformation ut . To this
end, we define uψ a projection parameterized by the learnable parameters ψ, referenced later as the
equivariance predictor (implementation details about how t is encoded and influences uψ are given
below in Sec. 2.3). The goal of this predictor is to produce ẑi′ from a given zo′ and t (resp. ẑj′ for zo′
and t′ ). One can see ẑi′ as an alternative way to obtain zi′ using the equivariance property defined by
Eq. 3. Instead of computing the embedding of the augmented view vi := t(x), we apply t via uψ
on the embedding zo′ of the original image x.
Therefore, to match this equivariance principle, we need to train gϕ′ ′ and uψ so that applying the
transformation via a predictor in the latent space (ẑi′ ) is similar to applying the transformation in the
input space and then computing the embedding (zi′ ). For this purpose, we denote (zi′ , ẑi′ ) as positive
pair (resp. (zj′ , ẑj′ )), and design our equivariance task so that our model learns to maximize the
similarity between the positive pairs. Yet, one issue with this formulation is that it allows collapsed
solutions, e.g. every z ′ being a constant. To avoid such simple solutions, we consider negative pairs
(as in Chen et al. (2020a); He et al. (2020)) to repulse embedding from other embedding coming
from views of different images. We use the Normalized Temperature-scaled cross entropy (NT-
Xent) loss to learn from these positive and negative pairs, thus defining our equivariance loss for the
positive pair of the invariance loss (i, j) as Eq. 4:

                                                        exp(sim(zi′ , ẑi′ )/τ ′ )
                          ℓEquiM od
                                    = − log P2N                                                               (4)
                           i,j
                                                k=1   1[k̸=i∧k̸=j] exp(sim(zi′ , zk′ )/τ ′ )
where τ ′ is a temperature parameter, sim(a, b) is the cosine similarity defined as a⊤ b/(∥a∥∥b∥),
and 1[k̸=i∧k̸=j] is the indicator function evaluated to 1 (0 otherwise) when k ̸= i and k ̸= j.
This way, we exclude from negative pairs the views of the same image, related to index i and j, that
are considered as positive pairs in the invariance methods. While we could consider these pairs as
negative and still be following 3, we found that not using them as negative nor as positive leads to
slightly better results. One hypothesis is that repulsing views that can be very close in the pixel


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


space (e.g. if the sampled augmentations modify weakly the original image) could induce training
instability. One can notice that gϕ′ ′ and uψ are learned simultaneously, thus they can influence each
other during the training phase. We finally define the total loss of the model as:

                                  L = LInvariance + λLEquiM od

with LEquiM od being the loss Eq. 4 applied to all pairs, both (i, j) and (j, i), of a batch and
LInvariance being the loss of the invariance baseline. λ is a hyperparameter that ponders the equiv-
ariant term of the loss.

2.3   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

We tested our module as a complement of 3 different baselines. The first one is SimCLR (Chen
et al., 2020a) as it represents a contrastive approach to instance discrimination and performs well
on CIFAR. The second one is BYOL (Grill et al., 2020), which offers a different kind of architec-
ture (as it is a bootstrapping approach rather than a contrastive one) while having the highest top-1
accuracy with linear evaluation on ImageNet using a ResNet50 backbone in a self-supervised fash-
ion. We also tested Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021) as it is not exactly a contrastive approach
nor a bootstrapping one to illustrate the generality of our approach, yet limited to CIFAR10 due to
computational limitation. Here are the details of each part of the architecture, including the baseline
ones and our equivariance module:

       • Encoder: we follow existing works and use a convolutional neural network for the encoder
         fθ , more specifically deep residual architectures from He et al. (2016).
       • Invariance projection head: for the projection head gϕ (and potential predictor as in
         BYOL Grill et al. (2020)), we used the same experimental setups as the original papers,
         except for SimCLR where we used a 3 layers projection head as in Chen & He (2021).
       • Equivariance projection head: the setup of our projection head gϕ′ ′ is a 3 layers Multi-
         Layer Perceptron (MLP), where each Fully-Connected (FC) layer is followed by a Batch
         Normalization (BN) and a ReLU activation, except the last layer which is only followed by
         a BN and no ReLU. Hidden layers have 2048 neurons each.
       • Equivariant predictor: the predictor uψ is a FC followed by a BN. Its input is the concate-
         nation of a representation of t and the input embedding zo′ . More precisely t is encoded by
         a numerical learned representation of the parameters that fully define it. More precisely, we
         reduce the augmentation to a vector composed of binary values related to the use of trans-
         formations (for transformations applied with a certain probability) and numerical values
         corresponding to some parameters (of the parameterized transformations). This vector is
         projected in a 128d latent space with a perceptron learned jointly with the rest of the model,
         see Sec.A.1 for details and examples of this encoding. This way, the input dimension of
         the predictor is the dimension of the latent space plus the dimension of the encoding of
         augmentations, while the output dimension is the same as the latent space.


3     E XPERIMENTS

3.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

In our experimentations, we tested our method on ImageNet (IN) (Deng et al., 2009) and CI-
FAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009). As mentioned before, we have used our module as a complement
to SimCLR, BYOL, and Barlow Twins, 3 state-of-the-art invariance methods with quite different
ideas, to test the genericity of our module. For these methods, we used the same experimental setup
as the original papers. As in previous works, while training on ImageNet we used a ResNet50 with-
out the last FC, but while training on CIFAR10 we used the CIFAR variant of ResNet18 (He et al.,
2016). For all our experimentations we used the LARS You et al. (2017) optimizer, yet, biases
and BN parameters were excluded from both weight decay and LARS adaptation as in Grill et al.
(2020)). Finally, we have fixed λ to 1 as it led to the best and more stable results.


                                                  5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1.1      S IM CLR
The model is trained for 800 epochs with 10 warm-up epochs and a cosine decay learning rate
schedule. We have used a batch size of 4096 for ImageNet and 512 for CIFAR10, while using an
initial learning rate of 2.4 for ImageNet (where we use 4.8 for SimCLR without EquiMod, as in
the original paper) and 4.0 for CIFAR10. For the optimizer, we fix the momentum to 0.9 and the
weight decay to 1e−6 . Both the invariant and equivariant latent space dimensions have been set to
128. Finally, we use τ ′ = 0.2 for our loss, but τ = 0.2 on ImageNet τ = 0.5 with CIFAR10 for
the loss of SimCLR (we refer the reader to the original paper for more information about the loss of
SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a)).

3.1.2      BYOL
The model learned for 1000 epochs1 (800 on CIFAR10) with 10 warm-up epochs and a cosine
decay learning rate schedule. The batch size used is 4096 for ImageNet and 512 for CIFAR10. We
have been using an initial learning rate of 4.8 for ImageNet (where we use 3.2 for BYOL without
EquiMod, as in the original paper) while using 2.0 for CIFAR10. Momentum of the optimizer is set
to 0.9 and weight decay to 1.5e−6 on ImageNet, but 1e−6 on CIFAR10. The invariant space has 256
dimensions while we keep our equivariant latent space to 128. Last, we use τ ′ = 0.2 for our loss,
and τbase = 0.996 for the momentum encoder of BYOL with a cosine schedule as in the original
paper (once again, we refer the reader to the paper for more details (Grill et al., 2020)).

3.1.3      BARLOW T WINS
We tested our method with Barlow Twins only on CIFAR10 with the following setup: 800 epochs
with 10 warm-up epochs and a cosine decay learning rate schedule, a batch size of 512, an initial
learning rate of 1.2, a momentum of 0.9 and weight decay of 1.5e−6 . Both the invariant and equiv-
ariant latent space has 128 dimensions, while we use τ ′ = 0.2 for our loss and λBarlow Twins = 0.005
for the loss of Barlow Twins (as in the original paper (Grill et al., 2020)).

3.2      R ESULTS

3.2.1      L INEAR EVALUATION
After training on either ImageNet or CIFAR10, we evaluate the quality of the learned representation
with the linear evaluation which is usual in the literature. To this end, we train a linear classifier on
top of the frozen representation, using the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) for 90 epochs, which
is sufficient for convergence, with a batch size of 256, a Nesterov momentum of 0.9, no weight
decay, an initial learning rate of 0.2 and a cosine decay learning rate schedule.
Results of this linear evaluation are presented in Table 1, while some additional results are present
in supplementary material Sec. A.3. Across all baselines and datasets tested, EquiMod increases the
performances of all the baselines used, except BYOL while trained on 1000 epochs. Still, it is worth
noting that under 100 and 300 epochs training (Sec. A.3), EquiMod improves the performances of
BYOL. Overall, this supports the genericity of our approach, and moreover, confirms our idea that
adding an equivariance task helps to extract more pertinent information than just an invariance task
and improves representations. On CIFAR10, we achieve the second-best performance after E-SSL,
yet, contrary to us, they tested their model on an improved hyperparameter setting of SimCLR.

3.2.2      E QUIVARIANCE MEASUREMENT
The way our model is formulated could lead to the learning of invariance rather than equivariance.
Indeed, learning an invariant latent space as well as the function identity for uψ is an admissible
solution. Therefore, to verify that our model is really learning equivariance, we define two metrics
of equivariance Eq.5 and Eq.6. The first one evaluates the absolute displacement toward zi′ caused
by the predictor uψ . One can see this as how much applying the augmentation t to zo′ in the latent
space via uψ makes the resulting embedding ẑi′ more similar to zi′ . This way, if our model is learning
invariance, we should observe an absolute displacement of 0, as uψ would be the identity. On the
   1
       We also performed 100 and 300 epochs training, see Sec. A.3.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                              ImageNet                 CIFAR10
        Method
                                                           Top-1 Top-5              Top-1 Top-5
        PIRL (Misra & Maaten, 2020)                         63.6     -                -       -
        E-SimCLR (Dangovski et al., 2021)                  68.3‡     -               94.1     -
        E-SimSiam (Dangovski et al., 2021)                 68.6‡     -               94.2     -
        SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020a)                         69.3    89.0              -       -
        SimSiam (Chen & He, 2021)                           71.3     -                -       -
        SwAV (w/o multi-crop) (Caron et al., 2020)          71.8     -                -       -
        Barlow Twins (Zbontar et al., 2021)                 73.2    91.0              -       -
        VICReg (Bardes et al., 2021)                        73.2    91.1              -       -
        BYOL (Grill et al., 2020)                           74.3    91.6              -       -
        SimCLR∗                                            71.57 90.48              90.96 99.73
        SimCLR∗ + EquiMod                                  72.30 90.84              92.79 99.78
        BYOL∗                                              74.03 91.51              90.44 99.62
        BYOL∗ + EquiMod                                    73.22 91.26              91.57 99.71
        Barlow Twins∗                                        -       -              86.94 99.61
        Barlow Twins∗ + EquiMod                              -       -              88.87 99.71

Table 1: Linear Evaluation; top-1 and top-5 accuracies (in %) under linear evaluation on ImageNet
and CIFAR10 (symbols ∗ denote our re-implementations, and ‡ denote only 100 epochs training).


contrary, if it is learning equivariance, we should observe a positive value, meaning that the uψ
plays its role in predicting the displacement in the embedding space caused by the augmentations.
A negative displacement means a displacement in the opposite direction, in other words, it means
that the predictor performs worse than the identity function. Furthermore, a small displacement does
not mean poor equivariance, for instance, if zo′ is very similar to zi′ , the room for displacement is
already very small. This is why we also introduce the second metric, which evaluates the relative
displacement toward zi′ caused by uψ . It reflects by which factor applying the augmentation t to zo′
in the latent space via uψ makes the resulting embedding ẑi′ less dissimilar to zi′ . Thus, if the model
is learning invariance, we should see no reduction nor augmentation of the dissimilarity, thus the
factor should remain at 1 while a model achieving equivariance would exhibit a positive factor.
                                                                       1 − sim(zi′ , zo′ )
             sim(zi′ , ẑi′ ) − sim(zi′ , zo′ )   (5)                                                 (6)
                                                                       1 − sim(zi′ , ẑi′ )
Fig. 3 shows the absolute equivariance measured for each augmentation. Note that this is performed
on a model already trained with the usual augmentation policy containing all the augmentations. If
an augmentation induces a large displacement, it means the embedding is highly sensitive to the
given augmentation. What we can see from Fig. 4, is that regardless of the dataset used, the model
achieves poor sensitivity to horizontal flip and grayscale. However, on ImageNet, we observe a
high sensitivity to color jitter as well as medium sensitivity to crop and gaussian blur. On CIFAR10
we observe a strong sensitivity to crop and a medium sensitivity to color jitter. Therefore, we can
conclude that our model truly learns an equivariance structure, and that the learned equivariance is
more sensitive to some augmentation such as crop or color jitter.

3.2.3     I NFLUENCE OF THE ARCHITECTURES

We study how architectural variations can influence our model. More precisely, we explore the
impact of the architecture of the gϕ′ ′ , uψ as well as the learned projection of t mentioned in Sec. A.1.
To this end, we train models for each architectural variation on CIFAR10, and report the top-1
accuracies under linear evaluation, the results are reported in Table 2. What we observe in Table 2a,
is that the projection head of the equivariant latent space benefits from having more layers, yet
this effect seems to plateau at some point. These results are in line with existing works (Chen et al.,
2020a). While testing various architectures for the equivariant predictor Table 2b, we note only small
performance variations, indicating that uψ is robust to architectural changes. Finally, looking at


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Absolute equivariance


                                                                            Relative equivariance
                            0.2                     ImageNet                                        15                         ImageNet
                                                    CIFAR10                                                                    CIFAR10
                                                                                                    10
                            0.1
                                                                                                    5
                             0
                                                                                                    0                            r
                                     p    ip      itter cale lur                                              p       ip    jitte cale Blur
                                  Cro H-fl Color j Grays    B                                              Cro    H-fl Color Grays

Figure 3: Absolute equivariance measure for                              Figure 4: Relative equivariance measure for
each augmentation (the dashed line represents                            each augmentation (the dashed line represents
invariance).                                                             invariance).


Table 2c, we observe that removing the projection of t only leads to a small drop in performance. On
the contrary, complex architectures (two last lines) lead to a bigger drop in accuracy. Furthermore,
while testing different output dimensions (lines 2 to 4), we note that using the same dimension for
the output and for the equivariant latent space led to the highest results. Some more analysis on
hyperparameter variations of our model, such as λ, batch size, or τ ′ can be found in Sec. A.2.

                                                                                                         Layers in the projection of t   Top-1
                                                                                                         None                            92.50
 Layers in gϕ′ ′                       Top-1       Layers in uψ     Top-1
                                                                                                         1 (O: 16-d)                     92.57
 None                                  88.46       1†               92.79
                                                                                                         1 (O: 128-d) †                  92.79
 1                                     91.58       2 (H: 16-d)      92.67
                                                                                                         1 (O: 2048-d)                   92.50
 2                                     92.58       2 (H: 128-d)     92.59
                                                                                                         2 (H: 16-d; O: 128-d)           92.47
 3†                                    92.79       2 (H: 2048-d)    92.70
                                                                                                         2 (H: 128-d; O: 128-d)          92.13
(a) Equivariance projec-                          (b) Equivariant predictor                              2 (H: 2048-d; O: 128-d)         92.05
tion head
                                                                                                              (c) Augmentation projector

Table 2: Top-1 accuracies (in %) under linear evaluation on CIFAR10 for some architectural varia-
tions of our module. H stands for hidden layer, O for output layer, † denotes default setup.


4                           R ELATED WORK

Most of the recent successful methods of SSL of visual representation learn a latent space where
embeddings of augmentations from the same image are learned to be similar. Yet, such instance
discrimination tasks admit simple constant solutions. To avoid such collapse, recent methods im-
plement diverse tricks to maintain a high entropy for the embeddings. Grill et al. (2020) rely on
a momentum encoder as well as an architectural asymmetry, Chen & He (2021) depend on a stop
gradient operation, Zbontar et al. (2021) rely on a redundancy reduction loss term, Bardes et al.
(2021) rely on a variance term as well as a covariance term in the loss, Chen et al. (2020a) use
negative pairs repulsing sample in a batch. In this work, our task also admits collapse solutions, thus
we make use of the same negative pairs as in Chen et al. (2020a) to avoid such collapse. The most
recent methods are creating pairs of augmentations to maximize the similarity between those pairs.
However, our addition does not rely on pairs of augmentations, and only needs a source image and
an augmentation. This is similar to Misra & Maaten (2020) which requires to have a source image
and an augmentation, however, they use these pairs to learn an invariance task while we use them to
learn an equivariance task.
Our approach is part of a line of recent works, which try to perform additional tasks of sensitivity to
augmentation while learning an invariance task. This is the case of E-SSL (Dangovski et al., 2021),
which simultaneously learns to predict rotations applied to the input image while learning an invari-
ance pretext task. This way, their model learns to be sensitive to the rotation transformation, usually


                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


not used for invariance. Where this can be considered as a form of equivariance (a rotation in input
space produces a predictable displacement in the prediction space) this is far from the equivariance
we explore in this paper. Indeed, E-SSL sensitivity task can be seen as learning an instance-invariant
pretext task, where for any given input, the output represents only the augmentation (rotation) used.
Here, we explore equivariance sensitivity both to images and to augmentations. Moreover, we only
consider sensitivity to the augmentations used for invariance. In LooC (Xiao et al., 2020), authors
propose to use as many different projection heads as there are augmentations and learn each of these
projection heads to be invariant to all but one augmentation. This way the projection heads can
implicitly learn to be sensitive to an augmentation. Still, they do not control how this sensitivity
occurs, where we explicitly define an equivariance structure for the augmentations-related informa-
tion. Note that a work has tried to tackle the trade-off from the other side, by trying to reduce the
shortcut learning occurring, instead of adding sensitivity to augmentations. Robinson et al. (2021)
shows that shortcut learning occurring in invariant SSL is partly due to the formulation of the loss
function and proposes a method to reduce shortcut learning in contrastive learning.
Some other works have also successfully used equivariance with representation learning. For in-
stance, Jayaraman & Grauman (2015) uses the same definition of equivariance as us and success-
fully learns an equivariant latent space tied to ego-motion. Still, their objective is to learn embodied
representations as well as using the learned equivariant space, in comparison we only use equiv-
ariance as a pretext task to learn representations. Moreover, we do not learn equivariance on the
representations, but rather on a non-linear projection of the representations. Lenc & Vedaldi (2015)
learns an equivariant predictor on top of representations to measure their equivariance, however, to
learn that equivariance, they require the use of strong regularizations.


5   C ONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES

Recent successful methods for self-supervised visual representation rely on learning a pretext task of
invariance to augmentations. This encourages the learned embeddings to discard information related
to transformations. However, this does not fully consider the underlying dilemma that occurs in the
choice of the augmentations: strong modifications of images are required to remove some possible
shortcut solutions, while information manipulated by the augmentation could be useful to some
downstream tasks. In this paper, we have introduced EquiMod, a generic equivariance module that
can complement existing invariance approaches. The goal of our module is to let the network learn
an appropriate form of sensitivity to augmentations. It is done through equivariance via a module
that predicts the displacement in the embedding space caused by the augmentations. Our method is
part of a research trend that performs sensitivity to augmentations. Nonetheless, compared to other
existing works, we perform sensitivity to augmentations also used for invariance, therefore reducing
the trade-off, while defining a structure in our latent space via equivariance.
Testing EquiMod across multiple invariance baseline models and datasets almost always showed
improvement under linear evaluation. It indicates that our model can capture more pertinent infor-
mation than with just an invariance task. In addition, we observed a strong robustness of our model
under architectural variations, which is a non-negligible advantage as training such methods is com-
putationally expensive, and so does the hyperparameters exploration. When exploring the sensitivity
to the various augmentations, we noticed that the latent space effectively learns to be equivariant to
almost all augmentations, showing that it captures most of the augmentations-related information.
For future work, we plan on testing our module on more baseline models or even as a standalone. As
EquiMod almost always improved the results in our tests, it suggests that EquiMod could improve
performances on many more baselines and datasets. Then, since E-SSL adds sensitivity to rotation,
yet still does not consider sensitivity to augmentations used for invariance, it would be interesting
to study if combining EquiMod and E-SSL can improve even further the performances. Another
research axis is to perform an in-depth study of the generalization and robustness capacity of our
model. To this end, we want to explore its capacity for transferability (fine-tuning) and few-shot
learning, both on usual object recognition datasets, but also on more challenging datasets containing
flowers and birds as in Xiao et al. (2020). Since the trade-off theoretically limits the generalization
on the learned representation, and since we reduce the effect of the trade-off, we hope that EquiMod
may show advanced generalization and robustness properties. On a distant horizon, the equivariant
structure learned by our latent space may open some interesting perspectives related to world model.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was performed using HPC resources from GENCI-IDRIS (Grant 2021-AD011013160
and 2022-A0131013831) and GPUs donated by the NVIDIA Corporation. We gratefully acknowl-
edge this support.

R EFERENCES
Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization
  for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906, 2021.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2006.09882, 2020.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. Big self-
  supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.10029, 2020b.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15750–15758, 2021.
Rumen Dangovski, Li Jing, Charlotte Loh, Seungwook Han, Akash Srivastava, Brian Che-
  ung, Pulkit Agrawal, and Marin Soljačić. Equivariant Contrastive Learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2111.00899, 2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard Zemel, Wieland Brendel,
  Matthias Bethge, and Felix A. Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. Nature
  Machine Intelligence, 2(11):665–673, 2020. Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre H. Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Mohammad Ghesh-
  laghi Azar. Bootstrap your own latent: A new approach to self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.07733, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Tianyu Hua, Wenxiao Wang, Zihui Xue, Sucheng Ren, Yue Wang, and Hang Zhao. On feature
  decorrelation in self-supervised learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision, pp. 9598–9608, 2021.
Dinesh Jayaraman and Kristen Grauman. Learning image representations tied to ego-motion. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1413–1421, 2015.
Li Jing, Pascal Vincent, Yann LeCun, and Yuandong Tian. Understanding dimensional collapse in
  contrastive self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.09348, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Karel Lenc and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding image representations by measuring their equiv-
  ariance and equivalence. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 991–999, 2015.
Ran Liu. Understand and Improve Contrastive Learning Methods for Visual Representation: A
  Review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.03259, 2021.
Ishan Misra and Laurens van der Maaten. Self-supervised learning of pretext-invariant representa-
   tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 6707–6717, 2020.
Joshua Robinson, Li Sun, Ke Yu, Kayhan Batmanghelich, Stefanie Jegelka, and Suvrit Sra. Can
  contrastive learning avoid shortcut solutions? Advances in neural information processing systems,
  34:4974–4986, 2021.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Tete Xiao, Xiaolong Wang, Alexei A. Efros, and Trevor Darrell. What should not be contrastive in
  contrastive learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.05659, 2020.
Yang You, Igor Gitman, and Boris Ginsburg. Large batch training of convolutional networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1708.03888, 2017.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03230, 2021.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   E NCODING OF THE AUGMENTATIONS

We use the classical augmentations of the literature, which depend on the dataset and model used,
applied in the given order:

       • Resized Crop: crop a subregion of the image;
       • Horizontal flip: flip the image with a given probability;
       • Color jitter: jitter the image on different aspects with a random order (brightness, satura-
         tion, contrast, and hue) and with a given probability;
       • Gray-scale: gray-scale the image with a given probability;
       • Gaussian blur (not used with CIFAR10 except in BYOL): blur the image using a sampled
         σ and with a given probability;
       • Solarize (applied only with BYOL): solarize the image with a given probability.

We refer the reader to the original papers (Chen et al., 2020a; Grill et al., 2020; Zbontar et al., 2021)
to know how the different methods parameterize these augmentations (e.g. values of the probability,
or intervals of values sampled, as factors in color jitter).
To encode these augmentations, we represent them by a numerical vector where some of the compo-
nents are binary values related to the use of augmentations (for those applied with some probability)
and some others are numerical values corresponding to some parameters (of the parameterized trans-
formations). We only consider the corresponding augmentations w.r.t. the tested dataset and model.
For each of these considered augmentations except crop, we define an element valued at 1 when
the augmentation is performed and valued at 0 otherwise (since each augmentation, but the crop,
is applied with a given probability it may be applied or not). Then, some augmentations require
additional elements. To this end, we define elements to represent these parameters using the follow-
ing direct ways (note that when a parametrized augmentation is not applied due to its probability of
application, its numerical components are set to some predefined default values):

       • Resized Crop (4 elements): x and y coordinates of the top-left pixel of the crop as well as
         width and height of the crop.


                                                   11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        • Color Jitter (8 elements): the jitter factors for brightness, saturation, contrast, and hue
          (1, 1, 1, 0 is the default encoding if color jitter is not applied), as well as their order of
          application. More precisely, to encode the order of modification, we use the following
          mapping {0 : brightness, 1 : contrast, 2 : saturation, 3 : hue}. For instance an encoding
          with ”1, 3, 2, 0” would mean that contrast jitter is first applied, then hue, contrast, and
          finally brightness (0, 1, 2, 3 is the default encoding if color jitter is not applied).
        • Gaussian Blur (1 element): the value of sigma used (0 if blur is not applied).

At this point, we have a numerical vector that represents which augmentations are applied or not
and what are their parameters if any, see the following Sec. A.1.1 and Sec. A.1.2 for some examples.
We then normalize this vector component-wise using experimental mean and standard deviation
computed over many examples, and we use a perceptron to project the constructed vector into a
128d latent space. This perceptron is learned jointly with the rest of the model.

A.1.1    E XAMPLE 1
Here is an example of one transformation applied during the learning of BYOL on ImageNet.
Let’s consider the randomly generated transformation composed of the following augmentations:

        • Crop at coordinates x, y=(12, 9) with width, height of (120, 96);
        • Probabilistic horizontal flip not triggered;
        • Probabilistic color jitter triggered with factors and order of: hue -0.09, contrast 1, saturation
          0.84, brightness 1.13;
        • Probabilistic gray-scale triggered;
        • Probabilistic blur not triggered;
        • Probabilistic solarize not triggered;

According to A.1, for the binary part representing the performed augmentations we have [0, 1, 1, 0,
0] for [No H-Flip, Yes Color jitter, Yes Gray-scale, No Blur, No Solarize] (one per augmentation,
except crop which is always performed), and for the parameterized transformations : [12, 9, 120, 96,
1.13, 1, 0.84, -0.09, 3, 1, 2, 0, 0] for [Crop X, Crop Y, Crop Width, Crop Height, Brightness Factor,
Contrast Factor, Saturation Factor, Hue Factor, Index of the First Color Modification Applied, Index
of the Second Color Modification Applied, Index of the Third Color Modification Applied, Index of
the Fourth Color Modification Applied, Default value for sigma (as blur is not triggered)]
Finally, this gives us the 18d vector [0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 12, 9, 120, 96, 1.13, 1, 0.84, -0.09, 3, 1, 2, 0, 0],
which is then normalized and given to a perceptron to project it to a 128d vector.

A.1.2    E XAMPLE 2
And here is another example this time with SimCLR on CIFAR10 (which uses a different augmen-
tation policy, thus solarization and blur are not considered).
Let’s consider the randomly generated transformation composed of the following augmentations:

        • Crop at coordinates x,y=(1, 2) with width,height of (24, 27);
        • Probabilistic horizontal flip triggered;
        • Probabilistic color jitter not triggered;
        • Probabilistic gray-scale not triggered;

For the binary part representing the performed augmentations, we have [1, 0, 0] for [Yes H-Flip, No
Color jitter, No Gray-scale]. And for the parametrized transformations : [1, 2, 24, 27, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0,
1, 2, 3] for [Crop X, Crop Y, Crop Width, Crop Height, Brightness Factor (Default), Contrast Factor
(Default), Saturation Factor (Default), Hue Factor (Default), Index of the First Color Modification
(Default), Index of the Second Color Modification (Default), Index of the Third Color Modification
(Default), Index of the Fourth Color Modification (Default)]. Note the default values for all the
parameters of the color jitter which is not triggered.


                                                    12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This gives us the 15d vector [1, 0, 0, 1, 2, 24, 27, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 2, 3], which is then normalized and
given to a perceptron to project it to a 128d vector.

A.2    I NFLUENCE OF HYPERPARAMETERS (λ, τ ′ AND BATCHSIZE )

In this section, similarly to Sec.3.2.3, we study how variations of minor hyperparameters can influ-
ence our model. To that purpose, we train models on CIFAR10 for each hyperparameter modification
and present the top-1 accuracy under linear evaluation.
We first inspect the influence of the λ, the weighting factor between our equivariance loss and
the invariance baseline loss. One can see Table 3a that when λ is small (< 1) there is a drop
in performance. As λ can be seen as weighting the importance between the equivariance and the
invariance terms of the loss, this confirms that our model learns better features when our equivariance
addition is considered with at least the same importance as the invariance task. On the opposite,
interestingly, where λ is set to high values such as 5 or 10, we do not observe a clear modification of
the performance. This tends to indicate that there is no degradation of the representation when the
equivariance is prioritized.
Then we study the temperature hyperparameter of the NT-Xent loss that we use to learn equivariance.
Similarly to what is reported in Chen et al. (2020a), we find Table 3b that the optimal values to be
around 0.2 and 0.5.
Finally, we explore the impact of the batch size on the learned representations. This hyperparameter
directly determines the number of negative pairs, therefore it highly influences the learning dynamic.
We observe Table 3c a decrease in performance where the batch size is too small (≤ 256) or too big
(≥ 1024). Once again, these findings are in line with the literature (Chen et al., 2020a).

      λ Factor    Top-1
      0           90.96
                                       Temperature τ ′     Top-1               Batch size     Top-1
      0.1         92.07
                                       0.05                92.13               64             92.23
      0.2         92.31
                                       0.1                 92.13               128            92.24
      0.5         92.37
                                       0.2 †               92.79               256            92.38
      1†          92.79
                                       0.5                 92.31               512 †          92.79
      2           92.33
                                       1                   92.14               1024           92.23
      5           92.81
      10          92.66             (b) Temperature of the NT-                     (c) Batch size
                                    Xent used in our equivariance
(a) Weighting factor between        loss
equivariance and invariance
losses

Table 3: Top-1 accuracies (in %) under linear evaluation on CIFAR10 for some hyperparameter
variations of our module. † denotes default setup.


A.3    A DDITIONAL RESULTS

The Table 4 shows the impact of the number of training epochs on the results of the linear evaluation
of BYOL with and without EquiMod.


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      ImageNet           CIFAR10
          Method
                                                    Top-1 Top-5        Top-1 Top-5
          BYOL∗ (100 epochs)                        62.09 84.01          -      -
          BYOL∗ + EquiMod (100 epochs)              65.55 86.74          -      -
          BYOL∗ (300 epochs)                        71.34 90.35          -      -
          BYOL∗ + EquiMod (300 epochs)              72.03 90.77          -      -
          BYOL∗ (1000 epochs)                       74.03 91.51        90.44 99.62
          BYOL∗ + EquiMod (1000 epochs)             73.22 91.26        91.57 99.71

Table 4: Linear Evaluation; top-1 and top-5 accuracies (in %) under linear evaluation on ImageNet
and CIFAR10 (symbols ∗ denote our re-implementations).


                                               14
