Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J OINT E MBEDDING S ELF -S UPERVISED L EARNING IN
THE K ERNEL R EGIME

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         The fundamental goal of self-supervised learning (SSL) is to produce useful rep-
         resentations of data without access to any labels for classifying the data. Modern
         methods in SSL, which form representations based on known or constructed rela-
         tionships between samples, have been particularly effective at this task. Motivated
         by a rich line of work in kernel methods performed on graphs and manifolds, we
         show that SSL methods likewise admit a kernel regime where embeddings are
         constructed by linear maps acting on the feature space of a kernel to find the op-
         timal form of the output representations for contrastive and non-contrastive loss
         functions. This procedure produces a new representation space with an inner prod-
         uct denoted as the induced kernel which generally correlates points which are re-
         lated by an augmentation in kernel space and de-correlates points otherwise. We
         analyze our kernel model on small datasets to identify common features of self-
         supervised learning algorithms and gain theoretical insights into their performance
         on downstream tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Self-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms are broadly tasked with learning from unlabeled data.
In the joint embedding framework of SSL, mainstream contrastive methods build representations
by reducing the distance between inputs related by an augmentation (positive pairs) and increasing
the distance between inputs not known to be related (negative pairs) (Chen et al., 2020; He et al.,
2020; Oord et al., 2018; Ye et al., 2019). Non-contrastive methods only enforce similarities between
positive pairs but are designed carefully to avoid collapse of representations (Grill et al., 2020;
Zbontar et al., 2021). Recent algorithms for SSL have performed remarkably well reaching similar
performance to baseline supervised learning algorithms on many downstream tasks (Caron et al.,
2020; Bardes et al., 2021; Chen & He, 2021).
In this work, we study SSL from a kernel perspective motivated by the rich history of study of
kernel algorithms on graphs and manifolds (Smola & Kondor, 2003; Ando & Zhang, 2006; Bellet
et al., 2013; Belkin & Niyogi, 2004). Our primary aim is to extend this line of work to cover
commonly used loss functions in modern SSL settings potentially providing useful insights into
their properties and performance. In standard SSL tasks, inputs are fed into a neural network and
mapped into a feature space which encodes the final representations used in downstream tasks (e.g.,
classification tasks). In the kernel setting, inputs are embedded in a feature space corresponding to
a kernel, and representations are constructed via an optimal mapping from this feature space to the
vector space for the representations of the data. Here, the task can be framed as one of finding an
optimal “induced” kernel, which is a mapping from the original kernel in the input feature space to
an updated kernel function acting on the vector space of the representations. Our results show that
such an induced kernel can be constructed using only manipulations of kernel functions and data that
encodes the relationships between inputs in an SSL algorithm (e.g., adjacency matrices between the
input datapoints).
More broadly, we make the following contributions:

      • For a contrastive and non-contrastive loss, we provide closed form solutions when the al-
        gorithm is trained over a single batch of data. These solutions form a new “induced” kernel
        which can be used to perform downstream supervised learning tasks.


                                                 1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • We show that a version of the representer theorem in kernel methods can be used to for-
         mulate kernelized SSL tasks as optimization problems. As an example, we show how to
         optimially find induced kernels when the loss is enforced over separate batches of data.
       • We empirically study the properties of our SSL kernel algorithms to gain insights about
         the training of SSL algorithms in practice. We study the generalization properties of SSL
         algorithms and show that the choice of augmentation and adjacency matrices encoding
         relationships between the datapoints are crucial to performance.

We proceed as follows. First, we provide a brief background of the goals of our work and the theo-
retical tools used in our study. Second, we show that kernelized SSL algorithms trained on a single
batch admit a closed form solution for commonly used contrastive and non-contrastive loss func-
tions. Third, we generalize our findings to provide a semi-definite programming formulation to solve
for the optimal induced kernel in more general settings and provide heuristics to better understand
the form and properties of the induced kernels. Finally, we empirically investigate our kernelized
SSL algorithms when trained on various datasets (code included in supplemental material).

1.1   N OTATION AND SETUP

We denote vectors and matrices with lowercase (x) and uppercase (X) letters respectively. The
vector 2-norm and matrix operator norm is denoted by ∥ · ∥. The Frobenius norm of a matrix M
is denoted as ∥M ∥F . We denote the transpose and conjugate transpose of M by M ⊺ and M †
respectively. We denote the identity matrix as I and the vector with each entry equal to one as 1.
For a diagonalizable matrix M , its projection onto the eigenspace of its positive eigenvalues is M+ .
For a dataset of size N , let xi ∈ X for i ∈ [N ] denote the elements of the dataset. Given a
kernel function k : X × X → R, let Φ(x) = k(x, ·) be the map from inputs to the reproducing
kernel Hilbert space (RKHS) denoted by H with corresponding inner product ⟨·, ·⟩H and RKHS
norm ∥ · ∥H . Throughout we denote Ks,s ∈ RN ×N to be the kernel matrix of the SSL dataset
where (Ks,s )ij = k(xi , xj ). We consider linear models W : H → RK which map features to
representations zi = W Φ(xi ). Let Z be the representation matrix which contains Φ(xi ) as rows of
the matrix. Thisqlinear function space induces a corresponding RKHS norm which can be calculated
                  PK               2
as ∥W ∥H =           i=1 ⟨Wi , Wi ⟩H where Wi ∈ H denotes the i-th component of the output of
the linear mapping W . This linear mapping constructs an “induced” kernel denoted as k ∗ (·, ·) as
discussed later.
The driving motive behind modern self-supervised algorithms is to maximize the information of
given inputs in a dataset while enforcing similarity between inputs that are known to be related. The
adjacency matrix A ∈ {0, 1}N ×N (also can be generalized to A ∈ RN ×N ) connects related inputs
xi and xj (i.e., Aij = 1 if inputs i and j are related by a transformation) and DA is a diagonal
matrix where entry i on the diagonal is equal to the number of nonzero elements of row i of A.


2     R ELATED WORKS

In this section, we briefly summarize some of the related works for this study. We include a more
detailed related works section in Appendix A.
Modern self-supervised learning approaches: Joint embedding approaches to SSL produce rep-
resentations by comparing representations of inputs via known relationships. Methods are denoted
as non-contrastive if the loss function is only a function of pairs that are related (Grill et al., 2020;
Chen & He, 2021; Zbontar et al., 2021; Bardes et al., 2021). Contrastive methods also penalize
similarities of representations that are not related. Popular algorithms include SimCLR (Chen et al.,
2020), SwAV (Caron et al., 2020), NNCLR (Dwibedi et al., 2021), contrastive predictive coding
(Oord et al., 2018), spectral contrastive loss (HaoChen et al., 2021), and many others. Separate from
the joint embedding framework, many methods in SSL form representations by predicting held-out
portions of the data typically in a generative model setting. Commonly used algorithms incorporate
autoencoder approaches (He et al., 2022; Radford et al., 2019; Vincent et al., 2010; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2020) which are used in both natural language processing and image processing tasks.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Standard SSL Approach                                 Kernel Approach                      = 𝐀 ∈ ℝ𝑁×𝑁
                                                                                                      (adjacency matrix
                   𝒙 ∈ 𝒳 (input)                                                                      encoding relations
                                          augment
                                                           𝒙𝟏 , … , 𝒙𝑵 ∈ 𝒳 (SSL dataset)                between inputs)
    augment
                                                                        Φ ⋅ :𝒳 → ℋ
      𝒙𝒊 ′ ∈ 𝒳                         𝒙𝒋 ′ ∈ 𝒳
                                                          Φ 𝒙𝟏 , … , Φ 𝒙𝑵 ∈ ℋ (RKHS)       k 𝒙𝒊 , 𝒙𝒋 = Φ 𝒙𝒊 , Φ 𝒙𝒋
               NN(⋅)              NN(⋅)
                                                                       𝑾∗ : ℋ → ℝ𝐾

NN(𝒙𝒊 ′) ∈ ℝ𝐾          SSL loss        NN(𝒙𝒋 ′) ∈ ℝ𝐾      𝐖 ∗ Φ 𝒙𝟏 , … , 𝐖 ∗ Φ 𝒙𝑵 ∈ ℝ𝐾     k ∗ 𝒙𝒊 , 𝒙𝒋 =
(representation)       function        (representation)          (representations)                  𝐖∗ Φ 𝒙𝒊 , 𝐖 ∗ Φ 𝒙𝒋



              Downstream Task                                Downstream Task                Downstream Task
                   (e.g. classifier)                             (e.g. classifier)           (e.g. kernel regression)


Figure 1: To translate the SSL setting into the kernel regime, we aim to find the optimal linear func-
tion which maps inputs from the RKHS into the K-dimensional feature space of the representations.
This new feature space induces a new optimal kernel denoted the “induced” kernel. Relationships
between data-points are encoded in an adjacency matrix (the example matrix shown here contains
pairwise relationships between datapoints).


Neural tangent kernels and gaussian processes: Prior work has connected the outputs of infinite
width neural networks to a corresponding gaussian process (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006; Neal,
1996; Lee et al., 2017). When trained using continuous time gradient descent, these infinite width
models evolve as linear models under the so called neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime (Jacot et al.,
2018; Arora et al., 2019a). The discovery of the NTK opened a flurry of exploration into the con-
nections between so-called lazy training of wide networks and kernel methods (Yang, 2019; Chizat
& Bach, 2018; Wang et al., 2022; Bietti & Mairal, 2019). Though the training dynamics of the NTK
has previously been studied in the supervised settings, one can analyze an NTK in a self-supervised
setting by using that kernel in the SSL algorithms that we study here. We perform some preliminary
investigation into this direction in our experiments.
Kernel and metric learning: Various works have proposed a series of graph-based kernels that
have ties to semi-supervised learning and appealing regularization properties over the geometric
structure of the data (Smola & Kondor, 2003; Belkin et al., 2006; Vishwanathan et al., 2010). Links
between spectral properties of the graphs and representations are often formed during the process of
learning (Belkin & Niyogi, 2004; Zhao & Liu, 2012). Throughout our study, we note connections to
these related works. From an algorithmic perspective, perhaps the closest lines of work are related
to kernel and metric learning (Bellet et al., 2013; Yang & Jin, 2006). Since our focus is on directly
kernelizing SSL methods to eventually analyze and better understand SSL algorithms, our end goal
is not to improve over these methods but instead, to extend them to the SSL setting. These works
are further summarized in Appendix A.

3     C ONTRASTIVE AND NON - CONTRASTIVE KERNEL METHODS
Stated informally, the goal of SSL in the kernel setting is to start with a given kernel function
k : X × X → R (e.g., RBF kernel or a neural tangent kernel) and map this kernel function to a new
“induced” kernel k ∗ : X × X → R which is a function of the SSL loss function and the SSL dataset.
For two new inputs x and x′ , the induced kernel k ∗ (x, x′ ) generally outputs correlated values if x
and x′ are correlated in the original kernel space to some datapoint in the SSL dataset or correlated
to separate but related datapoints in the SSL dataset as encoded in the graph adjacency matrix. If
no relations are found in the SSL dataset between x and x′ , then the induced kernel will generally
output an uncorrelated value.
To kernelize SSL methods, we consider a setting generalized from the prototypical SSL setting
where representations are obtained by maximizing/minimizing distances between augmented/un-
augmented samples. Translating this to the kernel regime, as illustrated in Figure 1, our goal is to
find a linear mapping W ∗ : H → RK which obtains the optimal representation of the data for a


                                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


given SSL loss function and minimizes the RKHS norm. This optimal solution produces an “induced
kernel” k ∗ (·, ·) which is the inner product of the data in the output representation space. Once
constructed, the induced kernel can be used in downstream tasks to perform supervised learning.
Due to a generalization of the representer theorem (Schölkopf et al., 2001), we can show that the
optimal linear function W ∗ must be in the support of the data. This implies that the induced kernel
can be written as a function of the kernel between datapoints in the SSL dataset.
Proposition 3.1 (Form of optimal representation). Given a dataset x1 , . . . , xN ∈ X , let k(·, ·) be
a kernel function with corresponding map Φ : X → H into the RKHS H. Let W : H → RK be
a function drawn from the space of linear functions W mapping inputs in the RKHS to the vector
space of the representation. For a risk function R(W Φ(x1 ), . . . , W Φ(xN )) ∈ R and any strictly
increasing function r : [0, ∞) → R, consider the optimization problem
                   W ∗ = arg min R(W Φ(x1 ), . . . , W Φ(xN )) + r (∥W ∥H ) .                      (1)
                            W ∈W

The optimal solutions of the above take the form
        optimal representation: W ∗ Φ(x) = M kX,x
                                                         ⊺           ⊺                             (2)
                 induced kernel: k ∗ (x, x′ ) = (M kX,x ) M kX,x′ = kX,x M ⊺ M kX,x′ ,
where M ∈ RK×N is a matrix that must be solved for and kX,x ∈ RN is a vector with entries
[kX,x ]i = k(xi , x).

Proposition 3.1, proved in Appendix B.1, provides a prescription for finding the optimal represen-
tations or induced kernels: i.e, one must search over the set of matrices M ∈ RK×N to find an
optimal matrix. This search can be performed using standard optimization techniques as we will
discuss later, but in certain cases, the optimal solution can be calculated in closed-form as shown
next for both a contrastive and non-contrastive loss function.

Non-contrastive loss    Consider a variant of the VICReg (Bardes et al., 2021) loss function below:
                                                          2
                                          1
                     LV IC = Z ⊺ I − 11⊺ Z − I              + β Tr [Z ⊺ LZ] ,                    (3)
                                          N               F

where β ∈ R+ is a hyperparameter that controls the invariance term in the loss and L = DA − A is
the graph Laplacian of the data. We note that the second term in the above loss function takes a role
akin to the Laplacian or manifold regularization term studied in kernel methods over graphs (Ando
& Zhang, 2006; Belkin et al., 2006). When the representation space has dimension K ≥ N and the
kernel matrix of the data is full rank, the induced kernel of the above loss function is:

                      ∗       ′            −1        1 ⊺ β               −1
                     k (x, x ) = kx,s Ks,s I − 11 − L                  Ks,s ks,x′ ,               (4)
                                                     N          2    +

where (·)+ projects the matrix inside the parentheses onto the eigenspace of its positive eigenvalues,
kx,s ∈ R1×N is the kernel row-vector with entry i equal to k(x, xi ) with ks,x equal to its transpose,
and Ks,s ∈ RN ×N is the kernel matrix of the training data for the self-supervised dataset where
entry i, j is equal to k(xi , xj ). When we restrict the output space of the self-supervised learning
task to be of dimension K < N , then the induced kernel only incorporates the top K eigenvectors
of I − N1 11⊺ − β2 L:
                                                            ⊺
                     k ∗ (x, x′ ) = kx,s Ks,s
                                          −1
                                              C:,≤K D≤K,≤K C:,≤K  −1
                                                                 Ks,s ks,x′ ,                      (5)

where CDC ⊺ = I − N1 11⊺ − β2 L is the eigendecomposition including only positive eigenvalues
sorted in descending order, C:,≤K denotes the matrix consisting of the first K columns of C and
   1/2
D≤K,≤K denotes the K × K matrix consisting of entries in the first K rows and columns. Proofs
of the above are in Appendix B.2.

Contrastive loss For contrastive SSL, we can also obtain a closed form solution to the induced
kernel for a variant of the spectral contrastive loss (HaoChen et al., 2021):
                                                               2
                                   Lsc = ∥ZZ ⊺ − (I + A)∥F ,                                       (6)


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where A is the adjacency matrix encoding relations between datapoints. When the representation
space has dimension K ≥ N , this loss results in the optimal induced kernel:
                             k ∗ (x, x′ ) = kx,s Ks,s
                                                  −1            −1
                                                      (I + A)+ Ks,s ks,x′ ,                        (7)
where (I + A)+ is equal to the projection of I + A onto its eigenspace of positive eigenvalues. In
the standard SSL setting where relationships are pair-wise (i.e., Aij = 1 if xi and xj are related by
an augmentation), then I + A has only positive or zero eigenvalues so the projection can be ignored.
If K < N , then we similarly project the matrix I + A onto its top K eigenvalues and obtain an
induced kernel similar to the non-contrastive one:
                                                             ⊺
                      k ∗ (x, x′ ) = kx,s Ks,s
                                           −1
                                               C:,≤K D≤K,≤K C:,≤K  −1
                                                                  Ks,s ks,x′ ,                     (8)
where as before, CDC ⊺ = I + A is the eigendecomposition including only positive eigenvalues
                                                                                         1/2
with eigenvalues in descending order, C:,≤K consists of the first K columns of C and D≤K,≤K is
the K × K matrix of the first K rows and columns. Proofs of the above are in Appendix B.3. Note,
that the induced kernels generally correlate data over the top eigenvalues of the graph adjacency
matrix in line with findings from previous works in kernel methods and spectral graph theory (Zhao
& Liu, 2007; Belkin & Niyogi, 2004).

3.1   G ENERAL FORM AS SDP

The closed form solutions for the induced kernel obtained above assumed the loss function was
enforced across a single batch. Of course, in practice, data are split into several batches. This
batched setting may not admit a closed-form solution, but by using Proposition 3.1, we know that
any optimal induced kernel takes the general form:
                                        k ∗ (x, x′ ) = kx,s Bks,x′ ,                               (9)
where B ∈ RN ×N is a positive semi-definite matrix. With constraints properly chosen so that the
solution for each batch is optimal (Balestriero & LeCun, 2022; HaoChen et al., 2022), one can find
the optimal matrix B ∗ by solving a semi-definite program (SDP). We perform this conversion to a
SDP for the contrastive loss here and leave proofs and further details including the non-contrastive
case to Appendix B.4.
Introducing some notation to deal with batches, assume we have N datapoints split into nbatches of
                                                        (j)
size b. We denote the i-th datapoint within batch j as xi . As before, xi denotes the i-th datapoint
                                         N ×N
across the whole dataset. Let Ks,s ∈ R         be the kernel matrix over the complete dataset where
[Ks,s ]i,j = k(xi , xj ), Ks,sj ∈ RN ×b be the kernel matrix between the complete dataset and batch
                                 (j)
j where [Ks,sj ]a,b = k(xa , xb ), and A(j) be the adjacency matrix for inputs in batch j. With
this notation, we now aim to minimize the loss function adapted from Equation (6) including a
regularizing term for the RKHS norm:
                        nX
                         batches                              2
                   L=              Ksj ,s BKs,sj − I + A(j)     + α Tr(BKs,s ),                   (10)
                                                                  F
                          j=1

where α ∈ R+ is a weighting term for the regularizer. Taking the limit of α → 0, we can find
the optimal induced kernel for a representation of dimension K > b by enforcing that optimal
representations are obtained in each batch:
                  min     Tr(BKs,s )
                B∈RN ×N

                     s.t. Ksj ,s BKs,sj = I + A(j)              ∀j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , nbatches }    (11)
                                                           +
                          B ⪰ 0, rank(B) = K,

where as before, where (I + A(j) )+ is equal to the projection of I + A(j) onto its eigenspace of
positive eigenvalues. Relaxing and removing the constraint that rank(B) = K results in an SDP
which can be efficiently solved using existing optimizers. Further details and a generalization of this
conversion to other representation dimensions is shown in Appendix B.4.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2    I NTERPRETING THE INDUCED KERNEL

The top eigenvectors of the adjacency matrix form the representations in the SSL tasks studied
here and are consistent with related approaches in kernel methods and spectral graph theory (Zhao
& Liu, 2007; Belkin & Niyogi, 2004). More generally, as a loose rule, the induced kernel will
correlate points that are close in the kernel space or related by augmentations in the SSL dataset
and uncorrelate points otherwise. Stated in the framework of (Wang & Isola, 2020), the induced
kernel increases alignment by enforcing correlation in datapoints in the traning set and achieves
uniformity by setting elements of the representation space to be orthogonal eigenvectors over the
dataset. As an example, note that in the contrastive setting (Equation (7)), if one calculates the
induced kernel k ∗ (xi , xj ) between two points in the SSL dataset indexed by i and j that are related
by an augmentation (i.e., Aij = 1), then the kernel between these two points is k ∗ (xi , xj ) = 1.
More generally, if the two inputs to the induced kernel are close in kernel space to different points
in the SSL dataset that are known to be related by A, then the kernel value will be close to 1. We
formalize this intuition below for the standard setting with pairwise augmentations.
Proposition 3.2. Given kernel function k(·, ·) with corresponding map Φ(·) into the RKHS H, let
{x1 , x2 , . . . xN } be an SSL dataset normalized such that k(xi , xi ) = 1 and formed by pairwise
augmentations (i.e., every element has exactly one neighbor in A) with kernel matrix Ks,s . Given
two points x and x′ , if there exists two points in the SSL dataset indexed by i and j which are related
by an augmentation (Aij =1) and ∥Φ(x) − Φ(xi )∥H ≤ 5∥|K −1          ∆ √
                                                                      ∥ N
                                                                           and ∥Φ(x′ ) − Φ(xj )∥H ≤
                                                                  s,s
    ∆ √
    −1
5∥|Ks,s ∥ N
            , then the induced kernel for the contrastive loss is at least k ∗ (x, x′ ) ≥ 1 − ∆.

We prove the above statement in Appendix B.5. The bounds in the above statement which depend on
                                                              −1
the number of datapoints N and the kernel matrix norm ∥Ks,s      ∥ are not very tight and solely meant
to provide intuition for the properties of the induced kernel. In more realistic settings, stronger cor-
relations will be observed for much weaker values of the assumptions. In light of this, we visualize
the induced kernel values and their relations to the original kernel function in Section 4.1 on a sim-
ple 2-dimensional spiral dataset. Here, it is readily observed that the induced kernel better connects
points along the data manifold that are related by the adjacency matrix.

3.3    D OWNSTREAM TASKS

In downstream tasks, one can apply the induced kernels directly on supervised algorithms such as
kernel regression or SVM. Alternatively, one can also extract representations directly by obtaining
the representation as k ∗ (x, ·) = M ks,x as shown in Proposition 3.1 and employ any learning
algorithm from these features. As an example, in kernel regression, we are given a dataset of size
                                          (t)
Nt consisting of input-output pairs {xi , yi } and aim to train a linear model to minimize the mean
squared error loss of the outputs (Williams & Rasmussen, 2006). The optimal solution using an
induced kernel k ∗ (·, ·) takes the form:
                               h                                              i
                                        (t)         (t)                   (t)     ∗−1
                   f ∗ (x) = k ∗ (x, x1 ), k ∗ (x, x2 ), . . . , k ∗ (x, xNt ) · Kt,t y,        (12)
       ∗−1
where Kt,t is the kernel matrix of the supervised training dataset with entry i, j equal to
      (t)   (t)
k ∗ (xi , xj ) and y is the concatenation of the targets as a vector. Note that since kernel methods
generally have complexity that scales quadratically with the number of datapoints, such algorithms
may be unfeasible in large-scale learning tasks unless modifications are made.
A natural question is when and why should one prefer the induced kernel of SSL to a kernel used in
the standard supervised setting perhaps including data augmentation? Kernel methods generally fit
a dataset perfectly so an answer to the question more likely arises from studying generalization. In
kernel methods, generalization error typically tracks with the norm of the classifier captured by the
complexity quantity sN (K) defined as (Mohri et al., 2018; Steinwart & Christmann, 2008):
                                               Tr(K) ⊺ −1
                                    sN (K) =           y K y,                                   (13)
                                                  N
where y is a vector of targets and K is the kernel matrix of the supervised dataset. Forpexample, the
generalization gap of an SVM algorithm can be bounded with high probability by O( sN (K)/N )
(see example proof in Appendix C.1) (Meir & Zhang, 2003; Huang et al., 2021). For kernel functions


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Comparison of the RBF kernel space (first row) and induced kernel space (second row).
The induced kernel is computed based on Equation 4, and the graph Laplacian matrix is derived
from the inner product neighborhood in the RBF kernel space, i.e., using the neighborhoods as data
augmentation. a) We plot three randomly chosen points’ kernel entries with respect to the other
points on the manifolds. When the neighborhood augmentation range used to construct the Lapla-
cian matrix is small enough, the SSL-induced kernel faithfully learns the topology of the entangled
spiral manifolds. b) When the neighborhood augmentation range used to construct the Laplacian
matrix is too large, it creates the “short-circuit” effect in the induced kernel space. Each subplot on
the second row is normalized by its largest absolute value for better contrast.


k(·, ·) bounded in output between 0 and 1, the quantity sN (K) is minimized in binary classification
when k(x, x′ ) = 1 for x, x′ drawn from the same class and k(x, x′ ) = 0 for x, x′ drawn from
distinct classes. If the induced kernel works ideally – in the sense that it better correlates points
within a class and decorrelates points otherwise – then the entries of the kernel matrix approach
these optimal values. This intuition is also supported by the hypothesis that self-supervised and
semi-supervised algorithms perform well by connecting the representations of points on a common
data manifold (HaoChen et al., 2021; Belkin & Niyogi, 2004). To formalize this somewhat, consider
such an ideal, yet fabricated, setting where the SSL induced kernel has complexity sN (K ∗ ) that does
not grow with the dataset size.
Proposition 3.3 (Ideal SSL outcome). Given a supervised dataset of N points for binary classifi-
cation drawn from a distribution with m−1 and m+1 connected manifolds for classes with labels
−1 and +1 respectively, if the induced kernel matrix of the dataset K ∗ successfully separates the
manifolds such that k ∗ (x, x′ ) = 1 if x, x′ are in the same manifold and k ∗ (x, x′ ) = 0 otherwise,
then sN (K ∗ ) = m−1 + m+1 = O(1).

The simple proof of the above is in Appendix C. In short, we conjecture that SSL should be preferred
in such settings where the relationships between datapoints are “strong” enough to connect similar
points in a class on the same manifold. We analyze the quantity sN (K) in Appendix D.4 to add
further empirical evidence behind this hypothesis.

4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we empirically investigate the performance and properties of the SSL kernel meth-
ods on a toy spiral dataset and portions of the MNIST and eMNIST datasets for hand-drawn digits
and characters (Cohen et al., 2017). As with other works, we focus on small-data tasks where ker-
nel methods can be performed efficiently without modifications needed for handling large datasets
(Arora et al., 2019a; Fernández-Delgado et al., 2014). For simplicity and ease of analysis, we per-
form experiments here with respect to the RBF kernel. Additional experiments reinforcing these
findings and also including analysis with neural tangent kernels can be found in Appendix D.

4.1   V ISUALIZING THE INDUCED KERNEL ON THE SPIRAL DATASET

For an intuitive understanding, we provide a visualization in Figure 2 to show how the SSL-induced
kernel disentangles manifolds in the representation space. In Figure 2, we study two entangled 1-D
spiral manifolds in a 2D space with 200 training points uniformly distributed on the spiral manifolds.
We use the non-contrastive SSL-induced kernel, following Equation (4), to demonstrate this result,


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               contrastive-MNIST                                 contrastive-EMNIST


             non-contrastive-MNIST                             non-contrastive-EMNIST


Figure 3: Depiction of MNIST and EMNIST full test set performances using the contrastive and
non-contrastive kernels (in red) and benchmarked against the supervised case with labels on all
samples (original + augmented) in black and with labels only on the original samples in blue, with
the number of original samples given by N ∈ {16, 64, 256} (each column) and the number of aug-
mented samples (in log2) in x-axis. The first row corresponds to Gaussian blur data-augmentation
(poorly aligned with the data distributions) and the second row corresponds to random rotations
(-10,10), translations (-0.1,0.1) and scaling (0.9,1.1). We set the SVM ℓ2 regularization to 0.001
and use the RBF kernel (NTK kernels in Appendix D.3). In all cases, the kernel representation
dimensions are unconstrained. Two key observations emerge. First, whenever the augmentation is
not aligned with the data distribution, the SSL kernels falls below the supervised case, especially as
N increases. Second, when the augmentation is aligned with the data distribution, both SSL kernels
are able to get close and even outperform the supervised benchmark with augmented labels.


whereas a contrastive SSL-induced kernel is qualitatively similar and left to Appendix D.1. In the
RBF kernel space shown in the first row of Figure 2, the value of the kernel is captured purely by
distance. Next, to consider the SSL setting, we construct the graph Laplacian matrix L by connecting
vertices between any training points with k(x1 , x2 ) > d, i.e., Lij = −1 if k(xi , xj ) > d and Lij =
0 otherwise. The diagonal entries of L are equal to the degree of the vertices, respectively. This
construction can be viewed as using the Euclidean neighborhoods of x as the data augmentation.
We choose β = 0.4, where other choices within a reasonable range lead to similar qualitative
results. In the second row of Figure 2, we show the induced kernel between selected points (marked
with an x) and other training points in the SSL-induced kernel space. When d is chosen properly, as
observed in the second row of Figure 2(a), the SSL-induced kernel faithfully captures the topology
of manifolds. However, the augmentation has to be carefully chosen as Figure 2(b) shows that when
d is too large, the two manifolds become mixed in the representation space.

4.2   C LASSIFICATION E XPERIMENTS

We explore in Figure 3 the supervised classification setting of MNIST and EMNIST which consist
of 28 × 28 grayscale images. (E)MNIST provide a strong baseline to evaluate kernel methods due to
the absence of background in the images making kernels such as RBF more aligned to measure input
similarities. In this setting, we explore two different data-augmentation (DA) policies, one aligned


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: MNIST classification task with 100 original training samples and 100 augmentations
per sample on the train and test set (full, 10, 000 samples) with baselines in the titles given by
supervised SVM using labels for all samples or original (100) samples only. We provide on the left
the contrastive kernel performances when ablating over the (inverse) of the SVM’s ℓ2 regularizer
y-axis and representation dimension (K) in the x-axis. Similarly, we provide on the right the non-
contrastive kernel performances when ablating over β on the y-axis and over the representation
dimension (K) on the x-axis. We observe, as expected, that reducing K prevents overfitting and
should be preferred over the ℓ2 regularizer, and that β acts jointly with the representation dimension
i.e. one only needs to tune one of the two.


with the data distribution (rotation+translation+scaling) and one largely misaligned with the data
distribution (aggressive Gaussian blur). Because our goal is to understand how much DA impacts the
SSL kernel compared to a fully supervised benchmark, we consider two (supervised) benchmarks:
one that employs the labels of the sampled training set and all the augmented samples and one that
only employs the sampled training set and no augmented samples. We explore a small training set
size going from N = 16 to N = 256 and for each case we produce a number of augmented samples
for each datapoint so that the total number of samples does not exceed 50, 000 which is a standard
threshold for kernel methods. We observed in Figure 3 that the SSL kernel is able to match and even
outperform the fully supervised case when employing the correct data-augmentation, while with
the incorrect data-augmentation, the performance is not even able to match the supervised case that
did not see the augmented samples. To better understand the impact of different hyperparameters
onto the two kernels, we also study in Figure 4 the MNIST test set performances when varying
the representation dimension K, the SVM’s ℓ2 regularization parameter, and the non-contrastive
kernel’s β parameter. We observe that although β is an additional hyper-parameter to tune, its
tuning plays a similar role to K, the representation dimension. Hence, in practice, the design of the
non-contrastive model can be controlled with a single parameter as with the contrastive setting. We
also interestingly observe that K is a more preferable parameter to tune to prevent over-fitting as
opposed to SVM’s ℓ2 regularizer.

5   D ISCUSSION
Our work explores the properties of SSL algorithms when trained via kernel methods. Connec-
tions between kernel methods and neural networks have gained significant interest in the supervised
learning setting (Neal, 1996; Lee et al., 2017) for their potential insights into the training of deep
networks. As we show in this study, such insights into the training properties of SSL algorithms can
similarly be garnered from an analysis of SSL algorithms in the kernel regime. Our theoretical and
empirical analysis, for example, highlights the importance of the choice of augmentations and en-
coded relationships between data points on downstream performance. Looking forward, we believe
that interrelations between this kernel regime and the actual deep networks trained in practice can be
strengthened particularly by analyzing the neural tangent kernel. In line with similar analysis in the
supervised setting (Yang et al., 2022; Seleznova & Kutyniok, 2022; Lee et al., 2020), neural tangent
kernels and their corresponding induced kernels in the SSL setting may shine light on some of the
theoretical properties of the finite width networks used in practice.

R EFERENCES
Rie Ando and Tong Zhang. Learning on graph with laplacian regularization. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 19, 2006.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


MOSEK ApS. The MOSEK optimization toolbox for MATLAB manual. Version 9.0., 2019. URL
 http://docs.mosek.com/9.0/toolbox/index.html.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On
  exact computation with an infinitely wide neural net. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019a.
Sanjeev Arora, Hrishikesh Khandeparkar, Mikhail Khodak, Orestis Plevrakis, and Nikunj Saun-
  shi. A theoretical analysis of contrastive unsupervised representation learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1902.09229, 2019b.
Mahdieh Soleymani Baghshah and Saeed Bagheri Shouraki. Kernel-based metric learning for semi-
 supervised clustering. Neurocomputing, 73(7-9):1352–1361, 2010.
Randall Balestriero and Yann LeCun. Contrastive and non-contrastive self-supervised learning re-
  cover global and local spectral embedding methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11508, 2022.
Adrien Bardes, Jean Ponce, and Yann LeCun. Vicreg: Variance-invariance-covariance regularization
  for self-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04906, 2021.
Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and
  structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Nov):463–482, 2002.
Mikhail Belkin and Partha Niyogi. Semi-supervised learning on riemannian manifolds. Machine
 learning, 56(1):209–239, 2004.
Mikhail Belkin, Partha Niyogi, and Vikas Sindhwani. Manifold regularization: A geometric frame-
 work for learning from labeled and unlabeled examples. Journal of machine learning research, 7
 (11), 2006.
Aurélien Bellet, Amaury Habrard, and Marc Sebban. A survey on metric learning for feature vectors
  and structured data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1306.6709, 2013.
Alberto Bietti and Julien Mairal. On the inductive bias of neural tangent kernels. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Stephen Boyd, Stephen P Boyd, and Lieven Vandenberghe. Convex optimization. Cambridge uni-
  versity press, 2004.
Vivien Cabannes. From weakly supervised learning to active labeling. PhD thesis, Ecole Normale
  Supérieure (ENS), 2022.
Vivien Cabannes, Loucas Pillaud-Vivien, Francis Bach, and Alessandro Rudi. Overcoming the curse
  of dimensionality with laplacian regularization in semi-supervised learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34:30439–30451, 2021.
Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1597–1607. PMLR, 2020.
Xinlei Chen and Kaiming He. Exploring simple siamese representation learning. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 15750–15758, 2021.
Yanping Chen, Eamonn Keogh, Bing Hu, Nurjahan Begum, Anthony Bagnall, Abdullah Mueen,
  and Gustavo Batista. The ucr time series classification archive, July 2015. www.cs.ucr.edu/
  ˜eamonn/time_series_data/.
Lenaic Chizat and Francis Bach. A note on lazy training in supervised differentiable programming.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.07956, 8, 2018.
Fan RK Chung. Spectral graph theory, volume 92. American Mathematical Soc., 1997.

                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gregory Cohen, Saeed Afshar, Jonathan Tapson, and Andre Van Schaik. Emnist: Extending mnist
  to handwritten letters. In 2017 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN), pp.
  2921–2926. IEEE, 2017.
Corinna Cortes, Mehryar Mohri, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. Two-stage learning kernel algorithms.
  In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 239–246, 2010.
Nello Cristianini, John Shawe-Taylor, Andre Elisseeff, and Jaz Kandola. On kernel-target alignment.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 14, 2001.
Marc Deisenroth and Jun Wei Ng. Distributed gaussian processes. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 1481–1490. PMLR, 2015.
Xiaowen Dong, Pascal Frossard, Pierre Vandergheynst, and Nikolai Nefedov. Clustering with multi-
  layer graphs: A spectral perspective. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 60(11):5820–
  5831, 2012.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Debidatta Dwibedi, Yusuf Aytar, Jonathan Tompson, Pierre Sermanet, and Andrew Zisserman. With
  a little help from my friends: Nearest-neighbor contrastive learning of visual representations. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 9588–9597,
  2021.
Manuel Fernández-Delgado, Eva Cernadas, Senén Barro, and Dinani Amorim. Do we need hun-
 dreds of classifiers to solve real world classification problems? The journal of machine learning
 research, 15(1):3133–3181, 2014.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 33:21271–21284, 2020.
Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-supervised
   deep learning with spectral contrastive loss. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
   34:5000–5011, 2021.
Jeff Z HaoChen, Colin Wei, Ananya Kumar, and Tengyu Ma. Beyond separability: Analyzing
   the linear transferability of contrastive representations to related subpopulations. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2204.02683, 2022.
Charles R Harris, K Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J Van Der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David
  Cournapeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J Smith, et al. Array program-
  ming with numpy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, 2020.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 9729–9738, 2020.
Kaiming He, Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, Yanghao Li, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Masked au-
  toencoders are scalable vision learners. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16000–16009, 2022.
Thomas Hofmann, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander J Smola. Kernel methods in machine learn-
  ing. The annals of statistics, 36(3):1171–1220, 2008.
Steven CH Hoi, Rong Jin, and Michael R Lyu. Learning nonparametric kernel matrices from pair-
  wise constraints. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, pp.
  361–368, 2007.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hsin-Yuan Huang, Michael Broughton, Masoud Mohseni, Ryan Babbush, Sergio Boixo, Hartmut
  Neven, and Jarrod R. McClean. Power of data in quantum machine learning. Nature Communi-
  cations, 12(1), May 2021. doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-22539-9. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1038/s41467-021-22539-9.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Ashesh Jain, Swaminathan VN Vishwanathan, and Manik Varma. Spf-gmkl: generalized multiple
  kernel learning with a million kernels. In Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD international
  conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 750–758, 2012.
Jaehoon Lee, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Samuel S Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, and Jascha
  Sohl-Dickstein. Deep neural networks as gaussian processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00165,
  2017.
Jaehoon Lee, Samuel Schoenholz, Jeffrey Pennington, Ben Adlam, Lechao Xiao, Roman Novak,
  and Jascha Sohl-Dickstein. Finite versus infinite neural networks: an empirical study. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:15156–15172, 2020.
Jason D Lee, Qi Lei, Nikunj Saunshi, and Jiacheng Zhuo. Predicting what you already know helps:
  Provable self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:309–
  323, 2021.
Ron Meir and Tong Zhang. Generalization error bounds for bayesian mixture algorithms. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 4(Oct):839–860, 2003.
Aditya Krishna Menon. Large-scale support vector machines: algorithms and theory. Research
  Exam, University of California, San Diego, 117, 2009.
Mehryar Mohri, Afshin Rostamizadeh, and Ameet Talwalkar. Foundations of machine learning.
 MIT press, 2018.
Radford M Neal. Priors for infinite networks. In Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks, pp. 29–53.
  Springer, 1996.
Roman Novak, Lechao Xiao, Jiri Hron, Jaehoon Lee, Alexander A. Alemi, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein,
  and Samuel S. Schoenholz. Neural tangents: Fast and easy infinite neural networks in python. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://github.com/
  google/neural-tangents.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Pretten-
   hofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
   E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   12:2825–2830, 2011.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes in machine learning. In Summer school on machine
  learning, pp. 63–71. Springer, 2003.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Ralf Herbrich, and Alex J Smola. A generalized representer theorem. In
  International conference on computational learning theory, pp. 416–426. Springer, 2001.
Mariia Seleznova and Gitta Kutyniok. Analyzing finite neural networks: Can we trust neural tangent
 kernel theory? In Mathematical and Scientific Machine Learning, pp. 868–895. PMLR, 2022.
Alexander J Smola and Risi Kondor. Kernels and regularization on graphs. In Learning theory and
  kernel machines, pp. 144–158. Springer, 2003.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


KP Soman, R Loganathan, and V Ajay. Machine learning with SVM and other kernel methods. PHI
  Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2009.

Ingo Steinwart and Andreas Christmann. Support vector machines. Springer Science & Business
  Media, 2008.

Jos F Sturm. Using sedumi 1.02, a matlab toolbox for optimization over symmetric cones. Opti-
  mization methods and software, 11(1-4):625–653, 1999.

Vladimir Vapnik. The nature of statistical learning theory. Springer science & business media,
  1999.

Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Isabelle Lajoie, Yoshua Bengio, Pierre-Antoine Manzagol, and
  Léon Bottou. Stacked denoising autoencoders: Learning useful representations in a deep network
  with a local denoising criterion. Journal of machine learning research, 11(12), 2010.

S Vichy N Vishwanathan, Nicol N Schraudolph, Risi Kondor, and Karsten M Borgwardt. Graph
  kernels. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 11:1201–1242, 2010.

Julius Von Kügelgen, Yash Sharma, Luigi Gresele, Wieland Brendel, Bernhard Schölkopf, Michel
  Besserve, and Francesco Locatello. Self-supervised learning with data augmentations provably
  isolates content from style. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:16451–16467,
  2021.

Sifan Wang, Xinling Yu, and Paris Perdikaris. When and why pinns fail to train: A neural tangent
   kernel perspective. Journal of Computational Physics, 449:110768, 2022.

Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  9929–9939. PMLR, 2020.

Colin Wei, Kendrick Shen, Yining Chen, and Tengyu Ma. Theoretical analysis of self-training with
  deep networks on unlabeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03622, 2020.

Zixin Wen and Yuanzhi Li. Toward understanding the feature learning process of self-supervised
  contrastive learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11112–11122.
  PMLR, 2021.

Christopher KI Williams and Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian processes for machine learning,
  volume 2. MIT press Cambridge, MA, 2006.

Hao Xia, Steven CH Hoi, Rong Jin, and Peilin Zhao. Online multiple kernel similarity learning for
  visual search. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 36(3):536–549,
  2013.

Greg Yang. Scaling limits of wide neural networks with weight sharing: Gaussian process behavior,
  gradient independence, and neural tangent kernel derivation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04760,
  2019.

Greg Yang, Edward J Hu, Igor Babuschkin, Szymon Sidor, Xiaodong Liu, David Farhi, Nick Ry-
  der, Jakub Pachocki, Weizhu Chen, and Jianfeng Gao. Tensor programs v: Tuning large neural
  networks via zero-shot hyperparameter transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03466, 2022.

Liu Yang and Rong Jin. Distance metric learning: A comprehensive survey. Michigan State Uni-
  versiy, 2(2):4, 2006.

Mang Ye, Xu Zhang, Pong C Yuen, and Shih-Fu Chang. Unsupervised embedding learning via in-
 variant and spreading instance feature. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6210–6219, 2019.

Dit-Yan Yeung and Hong Chang. A kernel approach for semisupervised metric learning. IEEE
  Transactions on Neural Networks, 18(1):141–149, 2007.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 12310–
  12320. PMLR, 2021.
Zheng Zhao and Huan Liu. Spectral feature selection for supervised and unsupervised learning. In
  Proceedings of the 24th international conference on Machine learning, pp. 1151–1157, 2007.
Zheng Alan Zhao and Huan Liu. Spectral feature selection for data mining. Taylor & Francis, 2012.
Mingkai Zheng, Shan You, Fei Wang, Chen Qian, Changshui Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, and Chang
 Xu. Ressl: Relational self-supervised learning with weak augmentation. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34:2543–2555, 2021.
Xiaojin Jerry Zhu. Semi-supervised learning literature survey. 2005.
Jinfeng Zhuang, Jialei Wang, Steven CH Hoi, and Xiangyang Lan. Unsupervised multiple kernel
   learning. In Asian Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 129–144. PMLR, 2011.


                                               14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     R ELATED WORKS AND TOPICS
A.1   J OINT EMBEDDING SSL ALGORITHMS IN PRACTICE

Joint embedding approaches form representations by comparing representations of jointly chosen
inputs that have known relations. These methods also can hold out portions of the data, but this
is not necessarily a requirement. Any joint-embedding SSL algorithm requires a properly chosen
loss function and access to a set of observations and known pairwise positive relation between those
observations. Methods are denoted as non-contrastive if the loss function is only a function of pairs
that are related (Grill et al., 2020; Chen & He, 2021; Zbontar et al., 2021). One common method
using the VICReg loss (Bardes et al., 2021), for example, takes the form
           K                                      K                    N N
                                                                   γ XX
          X                 q                    X
 Lvic =α       max 0, 1− Cov(Z)k,k +β                 Cov(Z)2k,j +           (A)i,j ∥Zi,. − Zj,. ∥22 .
                                                                   N i=1 j=1
         k=1                                  j=1,j̸=k


                                                                                                  (14)
We adapt the above for the non-contrastive loss we study in our work.
Contrastive methods also penalize similarities of representations that are not related. Popular algo-
rithms include SimCLR (Chen et al., 2020), SwAV (Caron et al., 2020), NNCLR (Dwibedi et al.,
2021), contrastive predictive coding (Oord et al., 2018), and many others. The spectral contrastive
loss, for example takes the form (HaoChen et al., 2021):
                                                             h                2 i
                    Lsc = −2Ex,x+ f (x)⊺ f (x+ ) + Ex,x− f (x)⊺ f (x− )

                                                                                  ,              (15)

where x, x+ are positive pairs and x, x− are negative pairs. We consider a variant of the spectral
contrastive loss in our work.

A.2   T HEORETICAL STUDIES OF SSL

In tandem with the success of SSL in deep learning, a host of theoretical tools have been devel-
oped to help understand how SSL algorithms learn (Arora et al., 2019b; Balestriero & LeCun, 2022;
HaoChen et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2021). Findings are often connected to the underlying graph con-
necting the data distribution (Wei et al., 2020; HaoChen et al., 2021) or the choice of augmentation
(Wen & Li, 2021). Wang & Isola (2020) study the theoretical properties of good SSL algorithms
showing that alignment and uniformity are two important criteria for successfully building repre-
sentations. We also note that prior work on SSL has analyzed the importance of the choice of
augmentation in building positive pairs (Zheng et al., 2021; Von Kügelgen et al., 2021). Building
representations from known relationships between datapoints is also studied in spectral graph the-
ory (Chung, 1997). We employ findings from this body of literature to provide intuition behind the
properties of the algorithms discussed here.

A.3   K ERNEL METHODS

Kernel methods have been connected to properties of graphs and manifolds in a long line of work.
Smola & Kondor (2003); Vishwanathan et al. (2010), among others, introduce a family of kernels on
graphs which offer nice regularization properties for their corresponding RKHS. Similar methods
have been proposed for semi-supervised learning via graph-based methods (Zhu, 2005; Hofmann
et al., 2008) and manifold regularization (Belkin et al., 2006). These methods generally introduce
terms into a loss function which regularize the solution depending on the geometric structure of the
data. Properties of the features have also been tied to results in spectral graph theory (Zhao & Liu,
2007; 2012; Dong et al., 2012), where the top features generally correspond to the top eigenvalues
of the graph Laplacian. More recently, kernel methods have been employed to more efficiently
regularize data based on the Laplacian and improve semi-supervised learning algorithms (Cabannes
et al., 2021; Cabannes, 2022).
As stated in the main text, perhaps the closest lines of work are related to kernel and metric learning
(Bellet et al., 2013; Yang & Jin, 2006) In kernel learning, prior works have proposed constructing a
kernel via a learning procedure; e.g., via convex combinations of kernels (Cortes et al., 2010), kernel


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


alignment (Cristianini et al., 2001), and unsupervised kernel learning to match local data geometry
(Zhuang et al., 2011). Prior work in distance metric learning using kernel methods aim to produce
representations of data in unsupervised or semi-supervised settings by taking advantage of links
between data points. For example, (Baghshah & Shouraki, 2010; Hoi et al., 2007) learn to construct
a kernel based on optimizing distances between points embedded in Hilbert space according to a
similarity and dissimilarity matrix. Yeung & Chang (2007) perform kernel distance metric learning
in a semi-supervised setting where pairwise relations between data and labels are provided. Xia et al.
(2013) propose an online procedure to learn a kernel which maps similar points closer to each other
than dissimilar points. Many of these works also use semi-definite programs to perform optimization
to find the optimal kernel.


B     D EFERRED PROOFS

B.1   R EPRESENTER THEOREM

Theorem B.1 (Representer theorem for self-supervised tasks; adapted from Schölkopf et al. (2001)).
Let xi ∈ X for i ∈ [N ] be elements of a dataset of size N , k : X × X → R be a kernel function
with corresponding map Φ : X → H into the RKHS H, and r : [0, ∞) → R be any strictly
increasing function. Let W : H → RK be a linear function mapping inputs to their corresponding
representations. Given a regularized loss function of the form

                            R (W Φ(x1 ), . . . , W Φ(xN )) + r (∥W ∥H ) ,                          (16)

where R(W Φ(x1 ), . . . , W Φ(xN )) is an error function that depends on the representations of the
dataset, the minimizer W ∗ of this loss function will be in the span of the training points {Φ(xi ), i ∈
{1, . . . , N }}, i.e. for any ϕ ∈ H:

                             W ∗ ϕ = 0 if ⟨ϕ, Φ(xi )⟩H = 0 ∀i ∈ [N ].                              (17)


Proof. Decompose W = W∥ + W⊥ , where W⊥ Φ(xi ) = 0 for all i ∈ [N ]. For a loss function L
of the form listed above, we have

  L(W∥ + W⊥ ) = R (W∥ + W⊥ )Φ(x1 ), . . . , (W∥ + W⊥ )Φ(xN ) + r ∥W∥ + W⊥ ∥H
                                                                                       (18)
                  = R W∥ Φ(x1 ), . . . , W∥ Φ(xN ) + r ∥W∥ + W⊥ ∥H .

Where in the terms in the sum, we used the property that W⊥ is not in the span of the data. For the
regularizer term, we note that
                                                q
                         r(∥W∥ + W⊥ ∥H ) = r        ∥W∥ ∥2H + ∥W⊥ ∥2H
                                                                                              (19)
                                           ≥ r(∥W∥ ∥H ).

Therefore, strictly enforcing W ⊥ = 0 minimizes the regularizer while leaving the rest of the cost
function unchanged.


As a consequence of the above, all optimal solutions must have support over the span of the data.
This directly results in the statement shown in Proposition 3.1.
Remark B.2. The representer theorem renders the problem of optimization tractable over a finite
dataset for a given SSL loss function (Hofmann et al., 2008; Soman et al., 2009). In certain cases,
as we show in the main text, such optimization have nice closed form solutions. Nevertheless,
approximate methods of optimization can be used to find closed form solutions for loss functions
where closed form solutions do not exist or are not expected to exist. Many optimizers exist to
perform this optimization including potentially approximations that allow for incorporation of larger
datasets (Hofmann et al., 2008; Deisenroth & Ng, 2015; Jain et al., 2012; Menon, 2009; Rasmussen,
2003).


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.2   C LOSED FORM NON - CONTRASTIVE LOSS

Throughout this section, for simplicity, we define M := I − N1 11⊺ . With slight abuse of notation,
we also denote X ∈ RN ×D as a matrix whose i-th row contains the features of Φ(xi ).
                                            — Φ(x1 )⊺ —
                                                           
                                                       ⊺
                                          — Φ(x2 )       —
                                    X=             ..                                        (20)
                                                    .      
                                            — Φ(xN )⊺          —

Note that if the RKHS is infinite dimensional, one can apply the general form of the solution as
shown in Proposition 3.1 to reframe the problem into the finite dimensional setting below. As a
reminder, we aim to minimize the VICreg cost function:
                                                           2
                C∗ =      min     ∥W X ⊺ M XW ⊺ − I∥F + β Tr [W X ⊺ LXW ⊺ ] .                     (21)
                       W ∈RK×D


By applying the definition of the Frobenius norm and from some algebra, we obtain:
                                              2
          C(W ) = ∥W X ⊺ M XW ⊺ − I∥F + β Tr [W X ⊺ LXW ⊺ ]
                                              2
                   = ∥W X ⊺ M XW ⊺ − I∥F + Tr [W X ⊺ (βL + 2M − 2M ) XW ⊺ ]
                   = K + ∥W X ⊺ M XW ⊺ ∥2F − 2 Tr [W X ⊺ M XW ⊺ ]
                                                                                                  (22)
                     + Tr [W X ⊺ (βL + 2M − 2M ) XW ⊺ ]
                   = K + ∥W X ⊺ M XW ⊺ ∥2F − Tr [W X ⊺ (2M − βL) XW ⊺ ]
                   = K + ∥XW ⊺ W X ⊺ M ∥2F − Tr [XW ⊺ W X ⊺ M (2M − βL)] .

The optimum of the above formulation has the same optimum as the following optimization problem
defined as C ′ (W ):
                       C ′ (W ) = ∥XW ⊺ W X ⊺ M − (M − βL/2) ∥2F .                          (23)

Since M is a projector and M (2M − βL) = 2M − βL (since the all-ones vector is in the kernel
of L), then we can solve the above by employing the Eckart-Young theorem and matching the K-
dimensional eigenspace of XW ⊺ W X ⊺ M with that of the top K eigenspace of M − βL/2.
One must be careful in choosing this optimum as W X ⊺ M XW ⊺ can only take positive eigenval-
ues. Therefore, this is achieved by choosing the optimal W ∗ to project the data onto this eigenspace
as                                   h                              i⊺
                                           +                1/2
                              W ∗ = X (s) C:,≤K (I − D)≤K,≤K ,                                   (24)

where we set the eigendecomposition of N1 11⊺ + β2 L as CDC ⊺ = N1 11⊺ + β2 L and C:,≤K is the
                                                              1/2
matrix consisting of the first K rows of C. Similarly, (I − D)≤K,≤K denotes the top left K × K
                                                  +
matrix of (I − D). Also in the above, X (s) denotes the pseudo-inverse of X. If the diagonal
matrix I − D contains negative entries, which can only happen when β is set to a large value, then
                        1/2
the values of (I − D)       for those entries is undefined. Here, the optimum choice is to set those
entries to equal zero. In practice, this can be avoided by setting β to be no larger two times than the
degree of the graph.
Note, that since W only appears in the cost function in the form W ⊺ W , the solution above is only
unique up to an orthogonal transformation. Furthermore, the rank of XW ⊺ W X ⊺ M is at most
N − 1 so a better optimum cannot be achieved by increasing the output dimension of the linear
transformation beyond N . To see that this produces the optimal induced kernel, we simply plug in
the optimal W ∗ :
      k ∗ (x, x′ ) := (W ∗ x)⊺ (W ∗ x′ )
                                                                         + ⊺
                           +

                                         1/2          1/2    ⊺
                 = x⊺ X (s) C:,≤K (I − D)≤K,≤K (I − D)≤K,≤K C:,≤K   X (s)    x′                   (25)
                         −1                      ⊺     −1
                 = kx,s Ks,s C:,≤K (I − D)≤K,≤K C:,≤K Ks,s ks,x′ .

                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now, it needs to be shown that W ∗ is the unique norm optimizer of the optimization problem.
To show this, we analyze the following semi-definite program which is equivalent since the cost
function is over positive semi-definite matrices of the form W ⊺ W :
                     min    Tr(B)
                  B∈RD×D
                                                           ⊺     1/2                             (26)
                        s.t. XBX ⊺ M = C:,≤K (I − D)≤K,≤K C:,≤K := PK
                           B⪰0
                                                          ⊺1/2
To lighten notation, we denote PK = C:,≤K (I − D)≤K,≤K C:,≤K    and simply use X for X. The
                                            ⊺
above can easily be derived by setting B = W W in Equation (23). This has corresponding dual
                                     max       Tr(Y ⊺ PK )
                                    Y ∈RN ×N                                                     (27)
                                        s.t. I − X ⊺ Y M X ⪰ 0

                                                                        ⊺                    ⊺
The optimal primal can be obtained from W ∗ by B ∗ = (W ∗ ) W ∗ = X + PK (X + ) . The
                                                                        ⊺
optimal dual can be similarly calculated and is equal to Y ∗ = (X + ) X + . A straightforward
calculation shows that the optimum value of the primal and dual formulation are equal for the given
solutions. We now check whether the chosen solutions of the primal and dual satisfy the KKT
optimality conditions (Boyd et al., 2004):
                          Primal feasibility: XB ∗ X ⊺ M = PK , B ∗ ⪰ 0
                            Dual feasibility: I − X ⊺ Y ∗ M X ⪰ 0                                (28)
                    Complementary slackness: (I − X ⊺ Y ∗ M X) B ∗ = 0.
The primal feasibility and dual feasibility criteria are straightforward to check. For complementary
slackness, we note that
                                                 ⊺               ⊺                         ⊺
     (I − X ⊺ Y ∗ M X) B ∗ = X + LK X + − X ⊺ X + X + M XX + LK X +
                                                 ⊺                       ⊺
                             = X + LK X + − X + M LK X +
                                                 ⊺                    ⊺                         (29)
                             = X + LK X + − X + LK X +
                             = 0.
In the above we used the fact that M LK = LK since M is a projector and LK is unchanged by
that projection. This completes the proof of the optimality.

B.3   C ONTRASTIVE LOSS

For the contrastive loss, we follow a similar approach as above to find the minimum norm so-
lution that obtains the optimal representation. Note, that the loss function contains the term
                              2
∥XW ⊺ W X ⊺ − (I + A)∥F . Since XW ⊺ W X ⊺ is positive semi-definite, then this is opti-
                     ⊺      ⊺
mized when XW W X matches the positive eigenspace of (I + A) defined as (I + A)+ .
Enumerating the eigenvalues of A as vi with corresponding eigenvalues ei , then (I + A)+ =
P                       †
   i:ei ≥−1 (ei + 1)vi vi . More generally, if the dimension of the representation is restricted such
that K < N , then we abuse notation and define
                                               K
                                                     max(ei + 1, 0)vi vi† ,
                                               X
                               (I + A)+ =                                                        (30)
                                               i=1

where ei are sorted in descending order.
To find the minimum RKHS norm solution, we have to solve a similar SDP to Equation (26):
                                     min     Tr(B)
                                    B∈RD×D
                                        s.t. XBX ⊺ = (I + A)+                                    (31)
                                             B⪰0

                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This has corresponding dual
                                       max      Tr (Y ⊺ (I + A)+ )
                                     Y ∈RN ×N                                                     (32)
                                          s.t. I − X ⊺ Y X ⪰ 0

                                                    ⊺                                         ⊺
The optimal primal is B ∗ = X + (I +A)+ (X + ) . The optimal dual is equal to Y ∗ = (X + ) X + .
Directly plugging these in shows that the optimum value of the primal and dual formulation are equal
for the given solutions. As before, we now check whether the chosen solutions of the primal and
dual satisfy the KKT optimality conditions (Boyd et al., 2004):
                              Primal feasibility: XB ∗ X ⊺ = (I + A)+ , B ∗ ⪰ 0
                          Dual feasibility: I − X ⊺ Y ∗ X ⪰ 0                                     (33)
                  Complementary slackness: (I − X ⊺ Y ∗ X) B ∗ = 0.
The primal feasibility and dual feasibility criteria are straightforward to check. For complementary
slackness, we note that
                                                 ⊺               ⊺                            ⊺
  (I − X ⊺ Y ∗ X) B ∗ = X + (I + A)+ X + − X ⊺ X + X + XX + (I + A)+ X +
                                                 ⊺                          ⊺
                       = X + (I + A)+ X + − X + (I + A)+ X +                                    (34)
                       = 0.
In the above, we used the fact that X + X is a projection onto the row space of X. This completes
the proof of the optimality.

B.4   O PTIMIZATION VIA SEMI - DEFINITE PROGRAM

In general scenarios, Proposition 3.1 gives a prescription for calculating the optimal induced kernel
for more complicated optimization tasks since we note that the optimal induced kernel k ∗ (x, x′ )
must be of the form below:
                                      k ∗ (x, x′ ) = kx,s Bkx⊺ ′ ,s ,                            (35)
where kx,s is a row vector whose entry i equals the kernel k(x, xi ) between x and the i-th datapoint
and B ∈ RN ×N is a positive semi-definite matrix.
For example, such a scenario arises when one wants to apply the loss function across nbatches batches
of data. To frame this as an optimization statement, assume we have N datapoints split into batches
                                                                 (k)
of size b each. We denote the i-th datapoint within batch k as xi . As before, xi denotes the i-th
datapoint across the whole dataset. We define the following variables:

      • Ks,s ∈ RN ×N (kernel matrix over complete dataset including all batches) where
        [Ks,s ]i,j = k(xi , xj )
      • Ks,sk ∈ RN ×b (kernel matrix between complete dataset and dataset of batch k) where
                              (k)
        [Ks,sk ]i,j = k(xi , xj ); similarly, Ksk ,s ∈ Rb×N is simply the transpose of Ks,sk
      • A(k) is the adjacency matrix for inputs in batch k with corresponding graph Laplacian L(k)

In what follows, we denote the representation dimension as K.

Non-contrastive loss function In the non-contrastive setting, we consider a regularized version of
the batched loss of Equation (3). Applying the reduction of the loss function in Equation (23), we
consider the following loss function where we want to find the minimizer B:
        nX
         batches                                                        2
                                    1               1
  L=             Ksj ,s BKs,sj I − 11⊺ − I − 11⊺ − βL(j) /2                + α Tr(BKs,s ), (36)
         j=1
                                    b               b                    F

where α ∈ R+ is a hyperparameter. The term Tr(BKs,s ) regularizes for the RKHS norm of the
resulting solution given by B. For simplicity, we denote as before M = I − 1b 11⊺ . Taking the limit


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


α → 0 and enforcing a representation of dimension K, the loss function above is minimized when
we obtain the optimal representation, i.e. we must have that

                               Ksj ,s BKs,sj M = M − βL(j) /2           ,                  (37)
                                                                      K

where M − βL(j) /2 K denotes the projection of M − βL(j) /2 onto the eigenspace of the top K
positive singular values (this is the optimal representation as shown earlier).
Therefore, we can find the optimal induced kernel by solving the optimization problem below:
             min Tr(BKs,s )
           B∈RN ×N

                s.t. Ksi ,s BKs,si M = M − βL(j) /2            ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , nbatches } (38)
                                                               K
                    B ⪰ 0, rank(B) = K,
Relaxing the constraint rank(B) = K forms an SDP which can be solved efficiently using existing
SDP solvers (ApS, 2019; Sturm, 1999).

Contrastive loss As shown in Section 3.1, the contrastive loss function takes the form
                     nX
                      batches                             2
                 L=           Ksj ,s BKs,sj − I + A(j)        + α Tr(BKs , s)                        (39)
                                                                   F
                           j=1

, where α ∈ R+ is a weighting term for the regularizer. In this setting, the optimal representation of
dimension K is equal to
                                    Ksj ,s BKs,sj − I + A(j)        ,                             (40)
                                                                 K
where I + A(j) K denotes the projection of I + A(j) onto the eigenspace of the top K positive
singular values (this is the optimal representation as shown earlier). Taking the limit of α → 0, have
a similar optimization problem:
                   min Tr(BKs,s )
                 B∈RN ×N

                       s.t. Ksi ,s BKs,si = I + A(i)         ∀i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , nbatches }       (41)
                                                           K
                          B ⪰ 0, rank(B) = K.
As before, relaxing the rank constraint results in an SDP.

B.5   P ROOF OF KERNEL CLOSENESS

Our goal is to prove Proposition 3.2 copied below.
Proposition 3.2. Given kernel function k(·, ·) with corresponding map Φ(·) into the RKHS H, let
{x1 , x2 , . . . xN } be an SSL dataset normalized such that k(xi , xi ) = 1 and formed by pairwise
augmentations (i.e., every element has exactly one neighbor in A) with kernel matrix Ks,s . Given
two points x and x′ , if there exists two points in the SSL dataset indexed by i and j which are related
by an augmentation (Aij =1) and ∥Φ(x) − Φ(xi )∥H ≤ 5∥|K −1          ∆ √
                                                                      ∥ N
                                                                           and ∥Φ(x′ ) − Φ(xj )∥H ≤
                                                                       s,s

    −1
      ∆ √
5∥|Ks,s ∥   N
              , then the induced kernel for the contrastive loss is at least k ∗ (x, x′ ) ≥ 1 − ∆.

Note, the adjacency matrix A for pairwise augmentations takes the form below assuming augmented
samples are placed next to each other in order.
                                                               
                                        0 1
                                     1 0                       
                                                0 1
                                                               
                                                               
                                A=
                                     
                                               1 0             
                                                                .                         (42)
                                                     ..         
                                     
                                                       .       
                                                                
                                                         0 1
                                                          1 0

Before proceeding, we prove a helper lemma that shows that ∥ks,xa − ks,xb ∥ is small if ∥Φ(xa ) −
Φ(xb )∥ is also relatively small with a factor of dependence on the dataset size.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma B.3. Given kernel function k(·, ·) with map Φ(·) into RKHS H and an SSL dataset {xi }N     i=1
normalized such that k(xi , xi ) = 1, let Ks,s be the kernel√matrix of the SSL dataset. If ∥Φ(xa ) −
                       −1              −1               −1
Φ(xb )∥H ≤ ϵ, then Ks,s   ks,xa − Ks,s    ks,xa ≤ ∥Ks,s    ∥ N ϵ.

Proof. We have that
    −1           −1           −1
   Ks,s ks,xa − Ks,s ks,xa ≤ Ks,s ∥ks,xa − ks,xa ∥
                                  "N                                              #1/2
                                   X
                              −1                                                2
                           = Ks,s      (⟨Φ(xi ), Φ(xa )⟩H − ⟨Φ(xi ), Φ(xb )⟩H )
                                             i=1
                                          "N                                           #1/2
                                           X
                                    −1                                             2            (43)
                               =   Ks,s            (⟨Φ(xi ), Φ(xa ) − Φ(xb )⟩H )
                                             i=1
                                          "N                                            #1/2
                                           X
                                    −1
                               ≤   Ks,s            ∥Φ(xi )∥2H ∥Φ(xa ) − Φ(xb )∥2H
                                             i=1
                                  −1
                                          √
                               = Ks,s         Nϵ



We are now ready to prove Proposition 3.2.

                  −1
Proof. Note that Ks,s xi = ei where ei is the vector with a 1 placed on entry i and zeros elsewhere.
From equation Equation (7), we have that
k ∗ (x, x′ ) = kx,s Ks,s
                     −1            −1
                         (I + A)+ Ks,s ks,x′
              −1                               −1
          = (Ks,s ks,x − ei + ei )⊺ (I + A)+ (Ks,s ks,x′ − ej + ej )
          = e⊺i (I + A)+ ej + (Ks,s
                                −1
                                    ks,x − ei )⊺ (I + A)+ ej + e⊺i (I + A)+ (Ks,s
                                                                              −1
                                                                                  ks,x′ − ej )
                  −1                          −1
              + (Ks,s ks,x − ei )⊺ (I + A)+ (Ks,s ks,x′ − ej ).
                                                                                                (44)

Note that e⊺i (I + A)+ ej = 1 since Aij = 1. Therefore,
   k ∗ (x, x′ ) = 1 + (Ks,s
                        −1
                            ks,x − ei )⊺ (I + A)+ ej + e⊺i (I + A)+ (Ks,s
                                                                      −1
                                                                          ks,x′ − ej )
                     −1                          −1
                 + (Ks,s ks,x − ei )⊺ (I + A)+ (Ks,s ks,x′ − ej )
                     −1                              −1
                                                                                                (45)
             ≥ 1 − ∥Ks,s ks,x − ei ∥ (I + A)+ ej + ∥Ks,s ks,x′ − ej ∥ (I + A)+ ei
                    −1                            −1
                 + Ks,s ks,x − ei      (I + A)+ ∥Ks,s ks,x′ − ej ∥.

                               ∆ √
Let ∥Φ(x) − Φ(xi )∥ ≤ ϵ = 5∥|K −1     and ∥Φ(x′ ) − Φ(xj )∥ ≤ ϵ = 5∥|K −1
                                                                       ∆ √
                                                                              and by applying
                              s,s ∥ N                                 s,s ∥ N
Lemma B.3, we have
   k ∗ (x, x′ ) ≥ 1 − ∥Ks,s
                        −1                              −1
                            ks,x − ei ∥ (I + A)+ ej + ∥Ks,s ks,x′ − ej ∥ (I + A)+ ei
                     −1                          −1
                + Ks,s  ks,x − ei (I + A)+ ∥Ks,s    ks,x′ − ej ∥
                    √      −1
                              √          −1 2    2
             ≥ 1 − 2 2∥Ks,s ∥ N ϵ − 2∥Ks,s ∥ N ϵ
                     √           −1
                                     √                                                          (46)
             ≥ 1 − (2 2 + 2)∥Ks,s   ∥ Nϵ
                       −1
                           √
             ≥ 1 − 5∥Ks,s ∥ Nϵ
             = 1 − ∆.

                      the fact that A is block diagonal with pairwise constraints (see Equation (42))
In the above, we used √
so (I + A)+ ei = 2 and (I + A)+ = 2.



                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     I DEALIZATION OF DOWNSTREAM TASKS
In this section, we prove Proposition 3.3 copied below.
Proposition 3.3 (Ideal SSL outcome). Given a supervised dataset of N points for binary classifi-
cation drawn from a distribution with m−1 and m+1 connected manifolds for classes with labels
−1 and +1 respectively, if the induced kernel matrix of the dataset K ∗ successfully separates the
manifolds such that k ∗ (x, x′ ) = 1 if x, x′ are in the same manifold and k ∗ (x, x′ ) = 0 otherwise,
then sN (K ∗ ) = m−1 + m+1 = O(1).

Proof. There are m+1 + m−1 total manifolds in the dataset. Assume some ordering of these mani-
folds from {1, 2, . . . , m+1 + m−1 } and let #(i) be the number of points in the i-th manifold.
The rows and columns of the kernel matrix K ∗ can be permuted such that it becomes block diagonal
with m+1 + m−1 blocks with block i equal to #(i)   1
                                                      1#(i) 1⊺#(i) where 1k is the all ones vector of
length k. I.e., K ∗ permuted accordingly takes the form below:
                  ⊺
    1                                                                                     
     #(1) 1#(1) 1#(1)
                          1         ⊺
                        #(2) 1#(2) 1#(2)
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                            . (47)
                                           ..
   
                                              .
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                      1                       ⊺
                                                #(m+1 +m−1 ) 1#(m+1 +m−1 ) 1#(m+1 +m−1 )


Each block of the above is clearly a rank one matrix with eigenvalue 1. Let ymi ∈ R#(i) be the
vector containing all labels for entries in manifold i. Then we have
                                            m+1 +m−1
                                                  X                            2
                         y ⊺ (K ∗ )−1 y =                #(i)−1 ⟨1#(i) , ymi ⟩
                                              i=1
                                            m+1 +m−1                                             (48)
                                                  X              p
                                       =                 #(i)−1 ( #(i))2
                                                  i=1
                                       = m+1 + m−1 .



C.1   P ROOF OF GENERALIZATION BOUND

For sake of completeness, we include an example proof of the generalization bound referred to in the
main text. Common to classic generalization bounds for kernel methods from several prior works
(Huang et al., 2021; Meir & Zhang, 2003; Mohri et al., 2018; Vapnik, 1999; Bartlett & Mendelson,
2002), the norm of the linear solution in kernel space correlates with the resulting bound on the
generalization error. We closely follow the methodology of (Huang et al., 2021), though other
works follow a similar line of reasoning.
Given a linear solution in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space denoted by w, we aim to bound the
generalization error in the loss function ℓ(y, y ′ ) = | min(1, max(−1, y)) − y ′ | where y ′ denotes
binary classification targets in {−1, 1}, y is the output of the kernel function equal to y = ⟨w, x⟩
for a corresponding input x in the Hilbert space or feature space. For our purposes, the solution w
is given by e.g., Equation (12) equal to
                                        Nt
                                        X          ∗−1
                                                            (t)
                                   w=             Kt,t y i ϕ xi ,                                (49)
                                         i=1
           (t)                              (t)
where ϕ(xi ) denotes the mapping of xi to the Hilbert space of the kernel. Given this solution,
we have that                             q
                                                 ∗−1
                                   ∥w∥ = y ⊺ Kt,t     y.                                   (50)
The norm above controls, in a sense, the complexity of the resulting solution as it appears in the
resulting generalization bound.


                                                        22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Given input and output spaces X and Y respectively, let D be a distribution of input/output pairs over
the support X × Y. Slightly modifying existing generalization bounds via Rademacher complexity
arguments (Huang et al., 2021; Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002; Mohri et al., 2018), we prove the
following generalization bound.
Theorem C.1 (Adapted from Section 4.C of (Huang et al., 2021)). Let x1 , . . . , xN and y1 , . . . , yNt
(with y the corresponding vector storing the scalars
                                               q      yi as entries) be our training set of N indepen-

                                                  Tr(K) PNt   −1               (t)
dent samples drawn i.i.d. from D. Let w =           N     i=1  K     y  i
                                                                          ϕ  x i     denote the solution
to the kernel regression problem normalized by the trace of the data kernel. For an L-lipschitz loss
function ℓ : Y × Y → [0, b], with probability 1 − δ for any δ > 0, we have
                             Nt                      √          p                         r
                          1 X                       2 2L + 3b Tr(K)y ⊺ K −1 y                log(2/(δ(e − 1)))
Ex,y∼D [ℓ(⟨w, x⟩, y)]−          ℓ(⟨w, xi ⟩, yi ) ≤     √                              +3b
                         Nt i=1                          2                N                          2N
                                                                                                    (51)

To prove the above, we apply a helper theorem and lemma copied below.
Theorem C.2 (Concentration of sum; see Theorem 3.1 in Mohri et al. (2018)). Let G be a family of
functions mapping from Z to [0, 1]. Given N independent samples z1 , . . . , zn from Z, then for any
δ > 0, with probability at least 1 − δ, the following holds:
                                         N
                                                                 r
                                     1 X                           log(2/δ)
                       Ez [g(z)] −          g(zi ) ≤ 2RS (G) + 3
                                                      b                      ,                  (52)
                                    N i=1                             2N

      b S (G) denotes the empirical Rademacher complexity of G equal to
where R
                                          "        N
                                                               #
                              b S (G) = Eσ sup   1 X
                             R                        σi g(zi ) ,                                  (53)
                                            g∈G N i=1

where σi are independent uniform random variables over {−1, +1}.
Lemma C.3 (Talagrand’s lemma; see Lemma 4.2 in Mohri et al. (2018)). Let Φ : R → R be
L-Lipschitz. Then for any hypothesis set G of real-valued functions,
                                       b S (Φ ◦ G) ≤ LR
                                       R              b S (G).                                     (54)

Now, we are ready to prove Theorem C.1.

Proof. We consider a function class Gγ defined as the set of linear functions on the reproduc-
ing kernel Hilbert space such that Gγ = {⟨w, ·⟩ : ∥w∥2 ≤ γ}. Given a dataset of inputs
x1 , . . . , xN in the reproducing kernel Hilbert space with corresponding targets y1 , . . . , yN , let
ϵw (xi ) = ℓ(⟨w, x⟩, yi ) ∈ [0, b]. The inequality in Theorem C.2 applies for any given Gγ but
we would like this to hold for all γ ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . } since ∥w∥ can be unbounded. Since our loss
function ℓ is bounded between [0, b], we multiply it by 1/b so that it is ranged in [0, 1] as needed for
Theorem C.2. Then, we apply Theorem C.2 to ϵw (xi ) over the class Gγ for each γ ∈ {1, 2, 3, . . . }
with probability δγ = δ(e − 1)e−γ . This implies that
                       N
                                          "            N
                                                                      #     r
                    1 X                            1 X                        log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + γ
  Ex [ϵw (x)] −           ϵw (xi ) ≤ 2Eσ sup               σi ϵv (xi ) + 3b                          .
                    N i=1                      2
                                            ∥v∥ ≤γ N  i=1
                                                                                       2N
                                                                                                   (55)
This shows that for any γ, the above inequality holds with probability 1 − δ(e − 1)e−γ . However,
we need to show this holds P  for all γ simultaneously. To achieve this, we apply a union bound which
                                 ∞              P∞
holds with probability 1 − γ=1 δγ = 1 − γ=1 δ(e − 1)e−γ = 1 − δ.
To proceed, we consider the inequality where γ = ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉ copied below.
                N
                                  "                  N
                                                                   #   r
             1 X                                  1 X                    log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
Ex [ϵw (x)]−       ϵw (xi ) ≤ 2Eσ        sup            σi ϵv (xi ) +3b                              .
             N i=1                  ∥v∥2 ≤⌈∥w∥2 ⌉ N i=1                              2N
                                                                                            (56)


                                                  23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Applying Talagrand’s lemma (Lemma C.3) followed by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
                 N
                                    "                   N
                                                                       #      r
              1 X                                   1 X                          log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
Ex [ϵw (x)] −       ϵw (xi ) ≤ 2Eσ        sup               σi ϵv (xi ) + 3b
              N i=1                  ∥v∥2 ≤⌈∥w∥2 ⌉ N i=1                                      2N
                                      "                   N
                                                                         #      r
                                                       1 X                         log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
                             ≤ 2LEσ          sup              σi ⟨v, xi ⟩ + 3b
                                        ∥v∥2 ≤⌈∥w∥2 ⌉ N i=1                                    2N
                                      "                          N
                                                                            #      r
                                                             1 X                      log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
                             ≤ 2LEσ          sup      ∥v∥            σi xi + 3b
                                        ∥v∥2 ≤⌈∥w∥2 ⌉       N i=1                                 2N
                                      "               N
                                                                #        r
                                                 1 X                        log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
                             ≤ 2LEσ ⌈∥w∥⌉                σi xi + 3b                                      .
                                                 N i=1                                   2N
                                                                                                   (57)
                                  N
Expanding out the quantity N1 i=1 σi xi and noting that the random variables are independent,
                               P

we have                               "                         #
                 N                                    N
                                                                         r
              1 X                                1 X                        log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
Ex [ϵw (x)] −       ϵw (xi ) ≤ 2LEσ ⌈∥w∥⌉                σi xi + 3b
              N i=1                              N i=1                                   2N
                                               v                            
                                                uN N                                r
                               2L               uX X                                   log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
                             =    ⌈∥w∥⌉Eσ      t           σi σj k(xi , xj ) + 3b
                                N                 i=1 j=1
                                                                                                   2N
                                          v                                 
                                          u
                                                   N N
                                                                                    r
                               2L                                                      log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
                                          u
                                          u X X
                             ≤    ⌈∥w∥⌉tEσ                  σi σj k(xi , xj ) + 3b
                                N                 i=1 j=1
                                                                                                   2N
                                  v
                                  uN                    r
                               2L u X                     log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
                             =    t    k(xi , xi ) + 3b
                               N i=1                                  2N
                                                        r
                               2L      p                   log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
                             =    ⌈∥w∥⌉ Tr(K) + 3b                                     .
                               N                                       2N
                                                                                         (58)
Since we normalize such that Tr(K) = N , we have
                       N
                                                    r
                     1 X              2L              log(2/(δ(e − 1))) + ⌈∥w∥2 ⌉
      Ex [ϵw (x)] −       ϵw (xi ) ≤ √ ⌈∥w∥⌉ + 3b
                    N i=1              N                            2N
                                                    r
                                      2L              log(2/(δ(e − 1)))        ⌈∥w∥⌉     (59)
                                   ≤ √ ⌈∥w∥⌉ + 3b                         + 3b √
                                       N                      2N                  2N
                                      √                    r
                                     2 2L + 3b                log(2/(δ(e − 1)))
                                   =    √       ⌈∥w∥⌉ + 3b                      .
                                          2N                         2N
Plugging in ∥w∥2 = y ⊺ K −1 y and noting that we normalized the kernel to have Tr(K) = N thus
completes the proof.



D    N UMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
All of our implementations are based on the common Python scientific library Numpy/Scipy (Harris
et al., 2020) and runs on CPU (no GPU used). Kernel algorithms were performed using the Scikit-
learn package (Pedregosa et al., 2011). Hyperparameters were chosen via a grid search over the
kernel algorithm parameters (e.g., regularization terms) and the loss function hyperparameters where
appropriate. For calculation of the neural tangent kernel, we used the neuraltangents package (Novak
et al., 2020).


                                                 24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.1   V ISUALIZING THE CONTRASTIVE INDUCED KERNEL ON THE SPIRAL DATASET


Figure 5: Inner products comparison in the RBF kernel space (first row) and induced kernel space
(second row). The induced kernel is computed based on Equation 7 and the graph adjacency matrix
A is derived from the inner product neighborhood in the RBF kernel space, i.e., using the neighbor-
hoods as data augmentation. We plot three randomly chosen points’ kernel entries with respect to
the other points on the manifolds. a) When the neighborhood augmentation range used to construct
the adjacency matrix is small enough, the SSL-induced kernel faithfully learns the topology of the
entangled spiral manifolds. b) When the neighborhood augmentation range used to construct the
adjacency matrix is too large, it creates the “short-circuit” effect in the induced kernel space. Each
subplot on the second row is normalized by dividing its largest absolute value for better contrast.

Here, we provide the contrastive SSL-induced kernel visualization in Figure 5 to show how the SSL-
induced kernel is helping to manipulate the distance and disentangle manifolds in the representation
space. In Figure 5, we study two entangled 1-D spiral manifolds in a 2D space with 200 training
points uniformly distributed on the spiral manifolds. We use the contrastive SSL-induced kernel,
following Equation 7, to demonstrate this result, whereas the non-contrastive SSL-induced kernel
is provided earlier in the main text. We use the radial basis function (RBF) kernel to calculate the
inner products between different points and plot a few points’ RBF neighborhoods in the first row of
                                       −x2 ∥2
Figure 2, i.e., k(x1 , x2 ) = exp(− ∥x12σ 2   ). As we can see, the RBF kernel captures the locality of
the 2D space. Next, we use the RBF kernel space neighborhoods to construct the adjacency matrix
A and any training points with k(x1 , x2 ) > d are treated as connected vertices, i.e., Aij = 1 and
Aij = 0 otherwise. The diagonal entries of A are 0. This construction can be considered as using
the Euclidean neighborhoods of x as the data augmentation. In the second row of Figure 5, we
show the selected points’ inner products with the other training points in the SSL-induced kernel
space. Given σ, when d is chosen small enough, we can see in the second row of Figure 5(a) that the
SSL-induced kernel faithfully captures the topology of manifolds and leads to a more disentangled
representation. Figure 5(b) shows that when d is too large, i.e., an improper data augmentation,
the SSL-induced kernel leads to the “short-circuit” effect, and the two manifolds are mixed in the
representation space.

D.2   T IME S ERIES DATA AND CIFAR10

We also add in table 1 additional empirical validation on a few time-series datasets extracted from
UCR (Chen et al., 2015) as well as a few controlled experiments on CIFAR10. For the latter we pro-
pose the same set-up as in our MNIST experiments: i.e., translation and rotation data-augmentation.
For the UCR experiments, we implement translations and add white noise as data-augmentation.
Surprisingly, despite such simple augmentations, the SSL induced kernel achieves similar perfor-
mance to the supervised baselines.

D.3   MNIST WITH NEURAL TANGENT KERNELS

In further exploring the performance of SSL kernel methods on small datasets, we perform further
numerical experiments on the MNIST dataset using kernel functions derived from the neural tangent
kernel (NTK) of commonly used neural networks (Jacot et al., 2018). We use the neural-tangents
package to explicitly calculate the NTK for a given architecture (Novak et al., 2020). The basic
setup is repeated from Section 4.2 where two different types of augmentations are performed on im-


                                                  25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Method        CIFAR10 CIFAR10 CIFAR10 CIFAR10 JapaneseVowels ECG200 ECGFiveDays
   training size/#DA    100/20 100/30 200/20 300/20
Original kernel (w/ DA) 23.07   22.99   29.33   30.65       85.13      70.00    53.07
Original kernel (no DA) 21.49   21.49   26.81   29.16       84.86      64.00    52.49
          SSL            22.68  23.62   27.52   29.53       93.78      68.00    52.84

Table 1: Test set accuracy on various datasets comparing the different methods. For CIFAR10,
the same augmentation was used as for MNIST (rotation + translation) while for the time-series
dataset, translation and white noise was used. Every implementation uses the same methodology
and hyperparameter tuning as that of the fig. 3 experiment.

                                                       Test Set Accuracy
                             Num. Augmentations         16       32    64   128    256    512    1024
 Augmentation      Samples   Algorithm
 Gaussian blur     16        self-supervised           32.3   32.3   32.6   29.1   32.8   32.3   32.5
                             baseline (no augment)     21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8
                             baseline (augmented)      34.8   34.9   35.0   35.0   35.0   35.0   35.0
                   64        self-supervised           71.8   71.8   71.6   71.4   72.1
                             baseline (no augment)     65.0   65.0   65.0   65.0   65.0
                             baseline (augmented)      74.6   74.6   74.7   74.7   74.7
                   256       self-supervised           87.5   88.0   88.0
                             baseline (no augment)     86.5   86.5   86.5
                             baseline (augmented)      88.6   88.6   88.6
 translate, zoom   16        self-supervised           34.2   35.2   36.0   36.8   37.3   37.5   38.0
 rotate                      baseline (no augment)     21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8   21.8
                             baseline (augmented)      37.5   38.5   39.3   40.2   41.1   41.5   41.7
                   64        self-supervised           73.4   74.8   75.3   75.9   76.8
                             baseline (no augment)     65.0   65.0   65.0   65.0   65.0
                             baseline (augmented)      77.7   78.8   79.4   79.7   80.0
                   256       self-supervised           90.4   91.0   91.5
                             baseline (no augment)     86.5   86.5   86.5
                             baseline (augmented)      90.4   90.8   91.1

Table 2: NTK for 3-layer fully connected network: Test set accuracy of SVM using the neural
tangent kernel of a 3 layer fully connected network in only a supervised (baseline) setting or via the
induced kernel in a self-supervised setting. The induced kernel for the SSL algorithm is calculated
using the contrastive induced kernel. Numbers shown above are the test set accuracy for classifying
MNIST digits for small dataset sizes with the given number of samples. Due to the quadratic scaling
of memory and runtime for kernel methods, we restricted analysis to more feasible settings where
there were less than 25,000 total samples (number of augmentations times number of samples).


ages. As before, we consider augmentations by Gaussian blurring of the pixels or small translations,
rotations, and zooms.
Test set accuracy results are shown in Table 2 for the NTK associated to a 3-layer fully connected
network with infinite width at each hidden layer. Similarly, in Table 3, we show a similar analysis
for the NTK of a CNN with seven convolutional layers followed by a global pooling layer. We
use the contrastive induced kernel for the SSL kernel algorithm. The findings are similar to those
reported in the main text. The SSL method performs similarly to the baseline method without any
self-supervised learning but including labeled augmented datapoints in the training set. In some
cases, the SSL method even outperforms the baseline augmented setting.

D.4   A NALYSIS OF DOWNSTREAM SOLUTION

To empirically analyze generalization, we track the complexity quantity sN (K) here defined in
Equation (13) and copied below:
                                               Tr(K) ⊺ −1
                                    sN (K) =        y K y,                                        (60)
                                                 N

                                                  26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                        Test Set Accuracy
                              Num. Augmentations         16       32    64    128    256    512    1024
 Augmentation      Samples    Algorithm
 Gaussian blur     16         self-supervised           28.4   28.4   28.4   28.4    28.3   28.3    28.4
                              baseline (no augment)     25.6   25.6   25.6   25.6    25.6   25.6    25.6
                              baseline (augmented)      26.6   26.6   26.6   26.6    26.6   26.6    26.6
                   64         self-supervised           60.0   60.0   60.1   60.1    60.1
                              baseline (no augment)     55.6   55.6   55.6   55.6    55.6
                              baseline (augmented)      56.5   56.5   56.5   56.5    56.5
                   256        self-supervised           87.6   87.9   87.6
                              baseline (no augment)     81.5   81.5   81.5
                              baseline (augmented)      82.9   82.9   82.9
 translate, zoom   16         self-supervised           33.4   33.8   34.4   34.6    35.1   35.4    35.3
 rotate                       baseline (no augment)     25.6   25.6   25.6   25.6    25.6   25.6    25.6
                              baseline (augmented)      30.6   30.7   30.8   31.6    31.7   31.9    32.0
                   64         self-supervised           70.7   72.7   73.2   73.8    74.3
                              baseline (no augment)     55.6   55.6   55.6   55.6    55.6
                              baseline (augmented)      66.0   67.8   68.8   69.5    70.2
                   256        self-supervised           91.9   92.3   92.6
                              baseline (no augment)     81.5   81.5   81.5
                              baseline (augmented)      89.5   90.0   90.3

Table 3: NTK for 7-layer convolutional neural network: Test set accuracy of SVM using the
neural tangent kernel of a CNN with 7 layers of 3 × 3 convolution followed by a global pooling
layer. The induced kernel for the SSL algorithm is calculated using the contrastive induced kernel
and compared to the standard SVM using the kernel itself with or without augmentation. Numbers
shown above are the test set accuracy for classifying MNIST digits for small dataset sizes with the
given number of samples. Due to the quadratic scaling of memory and runtime for kernel methods,
we restricted analysis to more feasible settings where there were less than 25,000 total samples
(number of augmentations times number of samples).


                                                      Figure 6: Depiction of sN (K) (Equation (13))
                                                      for the case of MNIST classification as depicted
                                                      in the left figure in Figure 4 computed on the
                                                      training set. This setting considers MNIST clas-
                                                      sification with the contrastive kernel on a 10000-
                                                      sample dataset with 100 original MNIST samples
                                                      and 100 augmentations. sN (K) for the super-
                                                      vised baselines for the full dataset (including la-
                                                      beled augmented samples) and only the original
                                                      dataset (no augmented samples) are calculated as
                                                      approximately 1534 and 203 respectively. Many
                                                      values of sN (K) are smaller than the baseline
                                                      numbers especially at points where the test set
                                                      accuracy for the SSL induced kernel was com-
                                                      paritively larger. Here, we recover the trend of
                                                      the test set performances obtained from Figure 4
                                                      showing that sN (K) is potentially a good indi-
                                                      cator of test accuracy.


where y is a vector of targets and K is the kernel matrix of the supervised
                                                                        p        dataset. As a reminder,
the generalization gap can be bounded with high probability by O( sN (K)/N ), and in the main
text, we provided heuristic indication that this quantity may be reduced when using the induced
kernel. Here, we empirically analyze whether this holds true in the MNIST setting considered in the
main text. As shown in Figure 6, the SSL induced kernel produces smaller values of sN (K) than its
corresponding supervised counterpart. We calculate this figure by splitting the classes into binary
parts (even and odd integers) in order to construct a vector y that mimics a binary classification task.
Comparing this to the test accuracy results reported in Figure 4, it is clear that sN (K) also correlates


                                                   27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


inversely with test accuracy as expected. The results here lend further evidence to the hypothesis
that the induced kernel better correlates points along a data manifold as outlined in Proposition 3.3.


                                                 28
