Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S PATIAL G ENERALIZATION OF
V ISUAL I MITATION L EARNING
WITH P OSITION -I NVARIANT R EGULARIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         How the visual imitation learning models can generalize to novel unseen visual
         observations is a highly challenging problem. Such a generalization ability is very
         crucial for their real-world applications. Since this generalization problem has
         many different aspects, we focus on one case called spatial generalization, which
         refers to generalization to unseen setup of object (entity) locations in a task, such
         as a novel setup of object locations in the robotic manipulation problem. In this
         case, previous works observe that the visual imitation learning models will overfit
         to the absolute information (e.g., coordinates) rather than the relational information
         between objects, which is more important for decision making. As a result, the
         models will perform poorly in novel object location setups. Nevertheless, so far,
         it remains unclear how we can solve this problem effectively. Our insight into
         this problem is to explicitly remove the absolute information from the features
         learned by imitation learning models so that the models can use robust, relational
         information to make decisions. To this end, we propose a novel, position-invariant
         regularizer for generalization. The proposed regularizer will penalize the imitation
         learning model when its features contain absolute, positional information of objects.
         We carry out experiments on the MAGICAL and ProcGen benchmark, as well as a
         real-world robot manipulation problem. We find that our regularizer can effectively
         boost the spatial generalization performance of imitation learning models. Through
         both qualitative and quantitative analysis, we verify that our method does learn
         robust relational representations.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Imitation learning is a class of algorithms that enable robots to acquire behaviors from human demon-
strations (Hussein et al., 2017). The recent advance in deep learning has boosted the development of
visual imitation learning and supported its applications like autonomous driving, robotic manipulation,
and human-robot interaction (Hussein et al., 2017).
In spite of its success, visual imitation learning methods still face many practical challenges. One
major challenge is its ability to generalize to novel unseen visual observations, which is very common
when we deploy the trained models (Toyer et al., 2020; Park et al., 2021). In the literature, this
generalization problem is also known as the robustness problem. The problem covers many different
aspects. For example, here we can identify two basic generalization capabilities: observational
generalization and spatial generalization (Figure 1). Observational generalization refers to the
generalization to novel visual textures. The changes in background color, object texture, or ambient
light in the robotic manipulation task are examples of observational generalization. Such kind of
visual change does not affect the physics structure (e.g., the position of object and targets) and only
requires the robot to reason about semantic meanings correctly. In contrast, spatial generalization
refers to the generalization to unseen setup of objects’ (entities) locations in one task, which instead
requires physical common sense about space and object. Consider the task of letting a warehouse
robot move a box to some target region. If we set the initial position of the box to a place that is not
covered by the demonstration dataset, then the imitation learning methods must be able to perform
spatial generalization so as to succeed. In reality, the generalization challenge usually emerges as a


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Examples of Visual Generalization                    What should be in the feature?

        Train           Test               Train          Test            Absolute Info   Relation Info


     Observational Generalization         Spatial Generalization           Remove!           Keep


Figure 1: Left and Middle: Two kinds of visual generalization. The examples are based on the
MAGICAL benchmark provided by Toyer et al. (2020), in which a robot is required to relocate a box
to a target region. The left figure shows an example of observational generalization, in which the only
change during the testing phase is the visual texture of objects. The middle figure shows an example
of spatial generalization. The object setup in the testing phase is unseen. Right: To achieve spatial
generalization, we suggest that absolute information should be removed from the feature while the
relational information should be kept. We propose a novel, position-invariant regularizer for this
purpose.


combination of different generalization capabilities. In this paper, we focus on the study of spatial
generalization.
For better spatial generalization, the visual imitation learning models should be able to obtain
knowledge about objects and their spatial relations with proper inductive biases. Some work finds that
vanilla deep visual imitation learning models strongly overfit to the absolute position of objects (Toyer
et al., 2020), which suggests that they do not extract relational information of objects to make decisions
like humans (Doumas et al., 2022). Since the representation learning methods can usually lead to
good semantic representations (features) and lead to generalization, Chen et al. (2021) investigate
the use of self-supervised representation learning methods in visual imitation learning. However,
they find that these general-purpose representations fail to improve the generalization performance
of vanilla visual imitation learning models effectively. Aside from these works, we also notice that
some works propose variants of vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) to improve spatial
generalization (Yuan et al., 2021), though these methods are not for imitation learning. Moreover,
they make additional assumptions, such as the availability of object information. So far, it remains
unclear how to ensure spatial generalization in visual imitation learning.
Based on these observations, our main insight into this problem is to explicitly remove the absolute,
positional information from the learned features in the visual imitation learning models. Note that
this does not mean that the decision-making process is not dependent on absolute information. Rather,
we expect that the model can extract the relational information (e.g., distance, direction) from the
absolute information to make robust decisions. To this end, we propose a novel position-invariant
regularizer called POINT. This regularizer will penalize the imitation learning model when it finds
that the learned feature highly correlates with absolute, positional information. As a result, the
imitation learning model has to discover more robust relational features. To validate our idea, we
test the proposed regularizer on the MAGICAL (Toyer et al., 2020) and ProcGen (Cobbe et al.,
2020) benchmark, as well as a real-world robot manipulation problem. We find that our method can
effectively improve spatial generalization performance. Furthermore, we conduct qualitative and
quantitative analysis and find that the imitation learning models can indeed learn relational features
with our proposed regularizer.
To summarize, our contributions in this paper are as follows.

       • We define the spatial generalization problem of visual imitation learning models and propose
         a novel position-invariant regularizer called POINT to tackle this problem.
       • We test our method on MAGICAL and ProcGen benchmarks, as well as a real-world
         robot manipulation problem. We find that our proposed regularizer can improve the spatial
         generalization performance of previous imitation learning models effectively.
       • Through qualitative and quantitative studies, we verify that our proposed regularizer does
         make the visual imitation learning models extract relational information.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2    R ELATED W ORK

Imitation Learning Imitation learning (IL) is a classical method to solve sequential decision-
making problems with expert demonstration data. Existing imitation learning methods consist of
two classes of algorithms: behavioral cloning (Bain & Sammut, 1995) and inverse reinforcement
learning (Ng et al., 2000). Behavioral cloning is a supervised learning method that directly fits experts’
actions. Inverse reinforcement learning instead proposes to infer a reward function from experts’
demonstrations and use it to train an RL agent. Both of these methods suffer from the generalization
problem. In this paper, we mainly focus on behavioral cloning since it is simple yet effective in visual
domains, and does not involve dangerous online interactions like IRL (Park et al., 2021).

Generalizable Policy Learning The generalization problem of imitation learning has been a
long-standing problem. Since the problem also exists in reinforcement learning and most of the
solutions can be adapted to the case of imitation, we discuss the works from both fields here. One
existing branch of work is the domain randomization (Tobin et al., 2017). The basic idea of domain
randomization is to collect data from diverse setups, such as different backgrounds and textures.
As a result, the trained model will be able to discover more robust features. Resembling this idea,
another line of work tries to solve this problem with data augmentation (Yarats et al., 2020; Hansen
& Wang, 2021), which augments the input or the learned features according to some heuristics. For
example, MixReg (Wang et al., 2020) proposes a mixture augmentation method and leads to better
out-of-distribution generalization. OREO (Park et al., 2021) proposes to mask out the objects in
the feature map so that the model will not fit a specific object in the observation. CLOP (Bertoin &
Rachelson, 2022) finds it important to shuffle the feature map locally to ensure robustness. Though
not exactly a data augmentation approach, De Haan et al. (2019) propose to randomly mask out
the semantic components in the learned feature and check whether they are correlated with correct
expert actions. Aside from works using diverse data or data augmentation, some works also approach
this problem by incorporating proper inductive biases into the design of policy networks (Dasari
& Gupta, 2020). For instance, SORNet (Yuan et al., 2021) uses a variant of vision-transformer to
solve robotics tasks that require relational reasoning. However, SORNet is not aimed at imitation
learning or reinforcement learning. Zhou et al. (2022) propose to use an attentional architecture to
solve a compositional, object-centric reinforcement learning problem. The idea of these methods
is to leverage the relational inductive bias of the attention operations. Wen et al. (2022) propose
PrimeNet, which introduces a shortcut into the neural network to ensure that the model focus on more
meaningful areas. Representation learning methods are another approach for generalization. Some
works use pretrained representation. For instance, Yen-Chen et al. (2020) use a pretrained model
on MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) to provide representation for imitation learning in robotics
manipulation. The pretrained model over large datasets provides more robust object representations
and can generalize the policy to unseen objects. Besides pretrained representation, self-supervised
representation learning (Mandi et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2021) on the demonstration dataset can also
improve the generalization in some cases. However, Chen et al. (2021) suggest that self-supervised
representations do not improve the generalization performance in general.
We refer readers to (Kirk et al., 2021) for comprehensive knowledge of this field. Our work differ-
entiates from all these existing works by explicitly defining the spatial generalization problem and
proposing to remove the nonrobust positional information from the representation.


3    P RELIMINARIES

Notations We model the sequential decision making problem as a Markov Decision Process
M = (S, A, R, T ). S is the state space. A is the action space. R is the reward function. T is the
transition dynamics. The agent’s state at timestep t is st ∈ S. The agent takes action at and receives
reward rt = R(st , at ). Its state at timestep t + 1 is then st+1 ∼ T (st , at ). The objective of the agent
                            PT
is to maximize the return t=0 γ t rt , where γ ∈ (0, 1] is a discount factor.
For the imitation learning problem studied here, the agent has no access to R and T , but it is provided
with a fixed expert demonstration dataset D = {τi }. Here, each τi = (sE        E E       E       E    E
                                                                           0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , ...sT , aT ) is
an expert trajectory that can achieve high performance (return) in M. Therefore, the agent should
learn the behavior by leveraging the given demonstration dataset.


                                                     3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               Gradient of fooling D
                           Encoder fθ                                                         π          Action


      Input si                                    Feature fi
                                   Periodic                                                 BC Model
                                   Copy

                                                               Sample
                                                                                                         Paired
                             ~                                                                D
                             fθ      π~                             pi = (xi , yi )
                                                               Sample                                    Not
                          Target Model                                                                   Paired
                                                                    pj = (xj , yj )      Discriminator
    Input s j              GradCAM++             Importance
                                                  Heatmap
                                                                              Proposed Regularization

Figure 2: Overview of our method. The blue branch above is the common imitation learning (BC)
pipeline. Our proposed regularizer is shown in the light pink box at the bottom. The regularizer first
uses the GradCAM++ algorithm to find out the important areas based on which the latest BC model
makes decisions. Then it samples the coordinates from the discovered important areas and trains a
discriminator network D to calculate whether these sampled coordinates are paired with the feature
fi . The BC model (encoder fθ ) is then trained to fool the discriminator D. When the encoder fθ is
able to fool D, the absolute positional information is removed from the feature as desired.


Behavioral Cloning One classical imitation learning algorithm is the Behavioral Cloning (BC). BC
turns the imitation learning problem into a supervised learning problem. It fits the expert’s action ai
given the observation si . For the visual imitation learning problem, the BC model can be divided into
two consecutive parts: a vision encoder fθ (which is usually a convolutional neural network), and a
policy head π. The fθ first encodes si to the feature fi = fθ (si ), and the π then uses it to predict the
expert’s action. The BC algorithm minimizes the following negative log-likelihood objective:
                                  LBC = E(si ,ai )∈D [− log π(ai |fθ (si ))] .                                (1)
Due to its simplicity, BC is widely used in visual imitation learning. Therefore, we study the spatial
generalization of BC in this paper.

GradCAM Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (GradCAM) (Selvaraju et al., 2017;
Chattopadhay et al., 2018) is a class of algorithms that can interpret the deep vision models by
visualizing the important region for decision making. Its basic idea is to calculate the gradient at each
feature map and aggregate them into an importance map. In this paper, we leverage GradCAM as a
rough object detector in the proposed regularizer. We refer readers to the original paper for more
technical details.

4      M ETHOD
In this section, we present our position-invariant regularizer for spatial generalization. As is discussed
before, our basic idea is to remove the absolute positional information from the features of the BC
model. In the following parts, we first present a formalized description of the idea and its practical
challenges in Section 4.1. Then, we discuss how to handle these challenges with GradCAM and
adversarial training in Section 4.2 and 4.3. Finally, we provide a summary of the overall algorithm in
Section 4.4. We illustrate our method in Figure 2 and provide the pseudo code in Algorithm 1.

4.1     F ORMULATION AND C HALLENGES

For the tasks that involve spatial generalization, there usually exist multiple objects in the observed
states, such as the agent, the target object, and the goal. For the state si , we denote each of these objects


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in si as oji , and their positions as (xji , yij ). Then, our idea can be formulated as the minimization
problem of each I((xj , yj ), f ), where I is the mutual information. Note that we use the notation
xj , yj , f to indicate the corresponding random variables of xji , yij , fi . However, this formulation
leads to many practical challenges. First, since each (xji , yij ) is not provided directly by si and should
be inferred, we have to either train some object key-point detectors to detect the underlying objects
in the training set, or annotate the objects by ourselves. However, both of these approaches can be
difficult and tedious in practice. Second, even if we have P     ideal key-point detectors, we have to deal
with a hard optimization problem in the summation form j I((xj , yj ), f ). This can be intractable
when there are many objects in the observed state.
Fortunately, we find that the previous works on the interpretation of deep learning models like
GradCAM provide useful tools to handle these challenges. It can reduce the problem to a much
simpler form. We discuss our observations as follows.

4.2   P ROBLEM R EDUCTION WITH G RAD CAM

GradCAM is an interpretation method that can tell which part of the image is crucial in the decision
process of a deep learning model. Given a BC model (fθ , π) and input s, GradCAM outputs an
importance heatmap of the same resolution as the input s. The heatmap indicates the importance of
each pixel when we use this BC model for prediction. One nice property of this generated heatmap is
that it is smooth and usually coincides with the meaningful objects in the input s. Therefore, we can
consider the GradCAM as a rough object detector here.
We propose to sample pi = (xi , yi ) from the generated heatmap, and then minimize the I(p, f ). We
find that this new objective can act as a proxy for the original objective in practice. Concretely, if pi
is always far from a specific object like ok , then we know that ok is irrelevant to the decision process
of the current model. In this case, we conjecture that I((xk , yk ), f ) should be low enough to meet
our requirement. On the contrary, if pi always coincides with a certain object like ol , then we actually
minimize I(p, f ) ≈ I((xl , yl ), f ) as we want.

4.3   L OSS F UNCTIONS

Now, our remaining work is to reduce the mutual information I(p, f ). However, we find that jointly
estimating and minimizing the mutual information in our vision-based tasks is hard in practice. Since
our ultimate goal is to minimize the information of p in f , we instead propose an adversarial training
framework to achieve this goal.
Specifically, we introduce a discriminator network D to play a two-player min-max game with the
BC model as follows.
                 min max E(si ,ai )∼D,(sj ,aj )∼D [log D(pi , fi ) + log(1 − D(pj , fi ))] .             (2)
                  fθ   D


In this min-max game, the discriminator D tries to tell the joint distribution of p and f , denoted as
Pp,f , from the product of their marginal distributions Pp⊗f . Meanwhile, the BC model is trying to
fool the discriminator by removing the information of p from f . Applying the convergence theory
of the generative adversarial network (GAN) (Goodfellow et al., 2020), we know that when fθ is
a global minimizer of Equation 2, Pp,f = Pp⊗f , which implies that I(p, f ) = 0. Therefore this
min-max game fulfills our requirement.
In practice, we train D to minimize the following binary classification loss function:
                 LD = −E(si ,ai )∼D,(sj ,aj )∼D [log D(pi , fi ) + log(1 − D(pj , fi ))] .               (3)
However, for the encoder fθ , we find that using −LD as the loss function for training will result in
instabilities. We assume this is because the fi term is present in both of the two terms in Equation 2,
which is different from that in the original GAN objective. Therefore, we propose to use the following
loss function for optimization, which we find works well empirically:
                                   Lreg = E(si ,ai )∼D [log D(pi , fi )] .                               (4)
Combining the BC loss, the loss function to train the fθ and π is then
              L = LBC + λLreg = E(si ,ai )∼D [− log π(ai |fθ (si )) + λ log D(pi , fi )] .               (5)


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                          Distractor
                             Distractor


       MR-T1                MR-T1D               MR-T2               MR-T2D               MR-T3

Figure 3: The MAGICAL tasks used in our experiments. The grey robot is required to move the
target objects (we mark them with red dots) to the target region. The red curve shows a possible plan
to solve the task (the interaction details like releasing box are omitted). The long horizontal nature of
this task brings additional challenges aside from the spatial generalization problem.


4.4   S UMMARY OF THE A LGORITHM

Finally, we put everything together and summa- Algorithm 1: POINT
rize our algorithm in Algorithm 1. We use Grad-
CAM++ (Chattopadhay et al., 2018), an improved Initialize parameters of the BC model: fθ ,
version of GradCAM, to calculate the heatmap. We      π, and the discriminator D. Initialize
find that it can deal with multi-object observation   target model f˜θ , π̃ with fθ , π.
better than GradCAM. Similar to the target network   while not converged do
in the deep reinforcement learning, we propose to        Sample  a batch {(si , ai )} from D.
use a target model in the GradCAM calculation.           Calculate each importance heatmap
This target model periodically copies the weights         by Hi = GradCAM(f˜θ , π̃, si ).
of the latest BC model. This ensures that the pi         Sample each pi from Hi .
terms in Equation 2 will change slowly throughout        Optimize the BC model by Eqn. 5.
the training so that the optimization of the min-max     Optimize the discriminator by Eqn. 3.
game between D and fθ becomes stable. Our python         Periodically update f˜θ , π̃ with fθ , π.
implementation of this algorithm is in the supple-
mentary material and Appendix A.1.


5     E XPERIMENTS

In the experiments, we first test the performance of our method on two benchmarks that require
spatial generalization: MAGICAL and ProcGen. We study the generalization according to the IID
protocol (Kirk et al., 2021). This means that the training and testing task distributions are the same,
though the test instance will be unseen. Then, we provide an analysis of our algorithm through both
qualitative and quantitive studies. Finally, we extend our method to a real robot manipulation problem.


5.1   TASK S ETUP

MAGICAL The MAGICAL benchmark simulates a 2D robotic manipulation problem in a ware-
house room. The tasks provided by the MAGICAL involve complex interactions between the agent
and multiple objects, which require effective spatial generalization..
In the experiments, we use a variant of its MatchRegion task. In this task, a robot is required to go
across a square room to move some objects to a target region specified by a dashed rectangle. We set
up several task instances of the MatchRegion task: MatchRegion-Target-1, MatchRegion-Target-2,
MatchRegion-Target-2-Distract, MatchRegion-Target-3, MatchRegion-Target-3-Distract. We provide
an illustration of these tasks in Figure 3. For each MatchRegion-Target-X task (MR-TX), there is
no distractor object in the room, so the robot only needs to move all the X objects into the target
location. However, for the MatchRegion-Target-X-Distract task (MR-TXD), there is an additional
distractor object in the room. This object is also randomly placed in the room during testing. The
existence of this distractor object not only increases the risk of learning spurious features but also
adds to the difficulty of learning secure motions. As we will discuss later, even the existence of one


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Evaluation result on the MAGICAL and ProcGen benchmark. We show the average score
on three random seeds. Our method can achieve state-of-the-art results compared with the baselines.

 Method      Vanilla     Dropout       Crop      Cutout      MixReg        OREO        CLOP        Ours
 MR-T1        0.09         0.28        0.42        0.19        0.26         0.21        0.16       0.63
             ±0.02        ±0.04       ±0.03       ±0.03        ±0.02       ±0.03       ±0.06      ±0.05
 MR-T1D       0.19         0.32        0.44        0.27        0.41         0.27        0.21       0.60
             ±0.06        ±0.11       ±0.03       ±0.03        ±0.10       ±0.06       ±0.02      ±0.08
 MR-T2        0.25         0.48        0.46        0.43        0.44         0.37        0.32       0.75
             ±0.03        ±0.03       ±0.04       ±0.05        ±0.05       ±0.05       ±0.07      ±0.07
 MR-T2D       0.27         0.35        0.38        0.32        0.33         0.27        0.23       0.70
             ±0.06        ±0.03       ±0.04       ±0.03        ±0.03       ±0.03       ±0.04      ±0.04
 MR-T3        0.23         0.51        0.47        0.32        0.48         0.42        0.35       0.66
             ±0.02        ±0.03       ±0.05       ±0.04        ±0.05       ±0.04       ±0.07      ±0.03

 Coinrun      0.75         0.81        0.80        0.76        0.79         0.69        0.82       0.87
             ±0.05        ±0.03       ±0.02       ±0.03        ±0.03       ±0.03       ±0.05      ±0.02
 Jumper       0.63         0.61        0.64        0.66        0.67         0.63        0.68       0.72
             ±0.07        ±0.06       ±0.03       ±0.04        ±0.03       ±0.05       ±0.02      ±0.04
 Ninja        0.65         0.69        0.71        0.72        0.68         0.67        0.67       0.79
             ±0.06        ±0.02       ±0.02       ±0.02        ±0.02       ±0.01       ±0.02      ±0.02
 Leaper       0.48         0.52        0.52        0.47        0.46         0.48        0.51       0.59
             ±0.07        ±0.04       ±0.02       ±0.03        ±0.01       ±0.04       ±0.07      ±0.05
 Miner        0.16         0.28        0.25        0.21        0.23         0.22        0.19       0.35
             ±0.07        ±0.05       ±0.02       ±0.07        ±0.03       ±0.02       ±0.04      ±0.04
 Starpilot    0.33         0.53        0.61        0.39        0.55         0.35        0.42       0.71
             ±0.05        ±0.14       ±0.08       ±0.06        ±0.10       ±0.03       ±0.04      ±0.12
 Fruitbot     0.01         0.17        0.48        0.00        0.21         0.09        0.36       0.56
             ±0.04        ±0.11       ±0.04       ±0.06        ±0.07       ±0.05       ±0.06      ±0.02
 Bigfish      0.05         0.08        0.16        0.10        0.09         0.09        0.12       0.16
             ±0.04        ±0.04       ±0.03       ±0.05        ±0.01       ±0.02       ±0.02      ±0.04


distractor object can lead to a significant increase of generalization difficulty. The study of more
distractors is carried out in the analysis part.
For each of the tasks above, we collect its human demonstration dataset by ourselves. For each
demonstration trajectory, we randomly set up the initial position of the objects, target region, and the
robot. Note that the demonstration dataset provided by the original MAGICAL benchmark uses a
fixed initial position setup. However, we find that this setup is too strict for spatial generalization if
no other dataset or pretraining tasks are available to provide prior knowledge. For MR-T1, we collect
50 trajectories. For each of the other tasks, we collect 100 trajectories. The collection of all these
trajectories takes 2 hours. We also study the outcome of using a different number of trajectories in
the later analysis part.

ProcGen The ProcGen benchmark is an arcade-game-based benchmark. These arcade games
involve interactions between many semantic objects, including the player, monsters (or traps),
bonuses, and tools. Though it is designed to test the generalization ability of RL agents, we use
it to test the spatial generalization of imitation learning here. We use 8 environments: Coinrun,
Jumper, Ninja, Leaper, Miner, Starpilot, Fruitbot, and Bigfish. We follow the ‘easy’ generalization
evaluation protocol used in previous works. We first train a PPO agent (Schulman et al., 2017) to
collect demonstrations in the first 200 levels of ProcGen and use these demonstrations to train the
imitation learning model. We use 64 expert trajectories in the experiment. Then for the evaluation,
we test the imitation learning models at all levels. We remove the background of the game throughout
training and testing since this requires observational generalization.

5.2   BASELINES

For the vanilla BC policy, we train an IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018) policy, whose encoder is a
residual convolutional neural network. We also try vision-transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021) and
relational network (Santoro et al., 2017) that have relational biases, but we find that they perform
worse than IMPALA and do not report their results here. Then, we implement the following baselines
for comparison. (1) Dropout. Dropout (Srivastava et al., 2014) is a widely-used regularization
method in deep learning. Many works also find it useful for improving the performance of imitation
learning. (2) Crop Crop is a popular data augmentation method used in the state-of-the-art visual RL
algorithms like DrQ (Yarats et al., 2020) and RAD (Laskin et al., 2020), it encourages translation


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                           Estimated 𝐼((𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑦 𝑖 ), 𝐟)
                                                                          Object    Dropout       Ours

                                                                                       3.21        1.20

                                                                                       3.14        1.26

                                                                                       3.02        1.09

                                                                                       2.75        1.12

                    Dropout                          Ours

Figure 4: Left: The GradCAM++ importance heatmap of the dropout model and our model on the
MR-T1D task. The red region indicates the most important region, while the dark blue indicates the
least important region. The results suggest that the dropout model attends to the red distractor and is
not robust. In contrast, our model is able to attend to correct objects. Right: MI between feature and
object’s position. Our model contains less bits about absolute position information.


invariance to the perspective. (3). Cutout Cutout (DeVries & Taylor, 2017) is a data augmentation
method. During training, it randomly erases part of the input image. (4). MixReg MixReg (Wang
et al., 2020) is a data augmentation method. It generates interpolated, synthetic training data based
on the original training dataset. (5). OREO OREO (Park et al., 2021) is an object-aware data
augmentation method. It randomly drops the features of certain objects. (6) CLOP (Bertoin &
Rachelson, 2022) CLOP is a locality-aware data augmentation method. It randomly shuffles the
feature map of the policy network in a small, local region.

5.3   R ESULTS

MAGICAL The result on MAGICAL is shown in Table 1. The performance is defined by the
success rate of the trained policy, which is the number of target objects that are successfully transferred
to the target region, divided by the total number of target objects. We observe that our method is
able to achieve state-of-the-art results and outperform the baselines by a large margin. Concretely, it
improves the success rate by about 30%. Besides, we find that most of the previous regularization
methods do increase the success rate of the vanilla version and their results are similar to each other.
This shows that they may solve some common issues in the generalization problem. However, their
performance gap from our method suggests that we tackle a different issue here, which is overfitting
to absolute positions.

ProcGen The result on ProcGen is shown in Table 1. The performance is calculated as the
normalized agent’s reward in the test environment (with respect to the random agent’s and expert’s
performance). Though we observe some improvement, the performance gain is smaller in this case
compared to that of MAGICAL. We hypothesize that this is because the decision-making process of
ProcGen is highly dependent on the local image patches, as suggested by CLOP. In this case, the BC
model does not need to perform long-range reasoning across objects frequently, and suffers less from
the risk of overfitting to absolute positional information. Our result here also suggests that we need
task-specific inductive biases so as to achieve good generalization performance.

5.4   A NALYSIS

Qualitative Results To understand whether our method is robust, we use GradCAM++ to visu-
alize the importance heatmap of the learned models. For simplicity, we show the result on the
MatchReigion-Target-1-Distract task. We compare the result of our model to the model trained with
dropout here (Figure 4). We notice that the dropout model tends to focus on the red distractor object
rather than the correct target object. In contrast, our model is able to focus on the correct objects.
Even when the distance between the agent and the object is large, it can attend to the agent and the
object simultaneously. The visualization results suggest that our regularizer indeed leads to relational
features even when the vision network IMPALA does not have an explicit relational inductive bias.
To understand this, we further use MINE estimator (Belghazi et al., 2018) to measure the MI between


                                                    8
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               0.8                                                        0.8

                                                                                                                    Gripper              Workspace
Success Rate


                                                           Success Rate
               0.6                                                        0.6
                                                                                                                    Camera               Camera
               0.4                                                        0.4

               0.2                                                        0.2

                0                                                          0
                       0        1       2         3                              25%    50%    75%    100%
                 Dropout   MixReg   CutOut   # of                           Dropout MixReg CutOut Dataset Size
                 CLOP      OREO     Ours     Distractors                    CLOP    OREO       Ours


  Figure 5: The generalization Figure 6: The variation of per- Figure 7: The setup of real-
  performance to different num- formance on MAGICAL using world robot manipulation exper-
  ber of distractors on MR-T1D. the datasets of different sizes. iments.


  the learned representation and the position of different objects. Our representation indeed contains
  much fewer bits about the absolute position compared with dropout as expected.

  Unseen Number of Distractors A robust model should base its decision on robust relational
  information. As a result, for the MAGICAL tasks, it should be able to ignore the distractor and
  generalize to an unseen number of distractors. Therefore, we test whether our model trained on
  MR-T1D (where only one distractor presents) can generalize to MR-T1D with the unseen number of
  distractors (e.g., 0, 2, 3). We also compare the results with the previous models. The result is shown
  in Figure 5. We find that our model is able to generalize to the case of 0, 2, 3, though the performance
  is lower than the case of 1 (training scenario). In contrast, the prior model, such as the dropout model,
  fails in these unseen cases totally. This echoes our qualitative analysis results.

  Number of Demonstrations We also study whether the proposed method works when the amount
  of expert demonstrations is limited. For this purpose, we test our method on the MAGICAL with
  25%, 50%, 75% of expert demonstrations. We show the averaged performance in Figure 6. We find
  that our method can achieve consistent improvement, though the performance decreases as the dataset
  becomes smaller. This result suggests that we still require a certain amount of diverse data to achieve
  spatial generalization.

   5.5               R EAL -W ORLD E XPERIMENTS

 Finally, we test whether our method scales to the real-world pick-                                              Table 2: The success rate of
 and-place manipulation problem. We extend the MR-T1D to a                                                       the real-world experiments. Our
 UR10 robot arm with a Robotiq parallel-jaw gripper (Figure 7).                                                  method is also effective here.
 As suggested by Hsu et al. (2022), we use a gripper camera                                                      Each test consists of 20 trials.
 and a workspace camera to provide observation. For the BC
 model, we use two separate IMPALA encoders to process each                                                        Method      Dropout      Ours
 camera image, concatenate their output features along with the                                                   0 Dis. Obj     35%        55%
 z-coordinate of gripper, and feed them into an MLP. We use the
 proposed regularizer to regularize the workspace branch. We                                                      1 Dis. Obj     35%        60%
 collect 75 human demonstrations for training. We compare our                                                     2 Dis. Obj     20%        50%
 method to dropout with different numbers of distract objects. The
 result is shown in Table 2. Our method also achieves a large                                                     3 Dis. Obj     10%        45%
 improvement in this problem. We provide detailed setup and
 qualitative results in the Appendix A.4 and A.3.

   6                 C ONCLUSION
 In this paper, we studied the spatial generalization problem of imitation learning. To solve this
 problem, we proposed a novel position-invariant regularizer to remove the absolute positional
 information from the features. Through experiments on the MAGICAL and ProcGen benchmarks, as
 well as a robot manipulation system, we confirmed that previous methods do overfit to the absolute
 position and showed that our proposed approach can effectively solve this problem. We hope that the
 proposed method can inspire future generalization research.


                                                                                           9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide the python source code of the main algorithm and the full model in the supplementary
material. We will make our project publicly available.

R EFERENCES
Michael Bain and Claude Sammut. A framework for behavioural cloning. In Machine Intelligence
 15, pp. 103–129, 1995.
Mohamed Ishmael Belghazi, Aristide Baratin, Sai Rajeshwar, Sherjil Ozair, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron
 Courville, and Devon Hjelm. Mutual information neural estimation. In International Conference
 on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
David Bertoin and Emmanuel Rachelson. Local feature swapping for generalization in reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Aditya Chattopadhay, Anirban Sarkar, Prantik Howlader, and Vineeth N Balasubramanian. Grad-
  cam++: Generalized gradient-based visual explanations for deep convolutional networks. In IEEE
 Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), 2018.
Xin Chen, Sam Toyer, Cody Wild, Scott Emmons, Ian Fischer, Kuang-Huei Lee, Neel Alex, Steven H
  Wang, Ping Luo, Stuart Russell, et al. An empirical investigation of representation learning for
  imitation. In Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (NeurIPS),
  2021.
Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to
  benchmark reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2020.
Sudeep Dasari and Abhinav Gupta. Transformers for one-shot visual imitation. In Conference on
  Robot Learning (CoRL), 2020.
Pim De Haan, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Sergey Levine. Causal confusion in imitation learning. In
  Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 32, 2019.
Terrance DeVries and Graham W Taylor. Improved regularization of convolutional neural networks
  with cutout. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.04552, 2017.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An image
  is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference
  on Learning Representation (ICLR), 2021.
Leonidas AA Doumas, Guillermo Puebla, Andrea E Martin, and John E Hummel. A theory of
  relation learning and cross-domain generalization. Psychological review, 2022.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron,
  Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance
  weighted actor-learner architectures. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
  2018.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial networks. Communications of the
  ACM, 63(11):139–144, 2020.
Nicklas Hansen and Xiaolong Wang. Generalization in reinforcement learning by soft data augmen-
  tation. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2021.
Kyle Hsu, Moo Jin Kim, Rafael Rafailov, Jiajun Wu, and Chelsea Finn. Vision-based manipulators
  need to also see from their hands. In International Conference on Learning Representation (ICLR),
  2022.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ahmed Hussein, Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Eyad Elyan, and Chrisina Jayne. Imitation learning: A
  survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(2):1–35, 2017.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Robert Kirk, Amy Zhang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. A survey of generalisation in
  deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09794, 2021.
Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
 2020.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2014.
Zhao Mandi, Fangchen Liu, Kimin Lee, and Pieter Abbeel. Towards more generalizable one-shot
  visual imitation learning. 2022 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA), 2022.
Andrew Y Ng, Stuart J Russell, et al. Algorithms for inverse reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 1, pp. 2, 2000.
Jongjin Park, Younggyo Seo, Chang Liu, Li Zhao, Tao Qin, Jinwoo Shin, and Tie-Yan Liu. Object-
  aware regularization for addressing causal confusion in imitation learning. In Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
Adam Santoro, David Raposo, David G Barrett, Mateusz Malinowski, Razvan Pascanu, Peter
  Battaglia, and Timothy Lillicrap. A simple neural network module for relational reasoning. In
 Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Ramprasaath R Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh,
  and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localiza-
  tion. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 618–626, 2017.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The Journal of Machine
  Learning Research (JMLR), 15(1):1929–1958, 2014.
Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Domain
  randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In IEEE/RSJ
  International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017.
Sam Toyer, Rohin Shah, Andrew Critch, and Stuart Russell. The magical benchmark for robust
  imitation. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Kaixin Wang, Bingyi Kang, Jie Shao, and Jiashi Feng. Improving generalization in reinforcement
  learning with mixture regularization. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.
Chuan Wen, Jianing Qian, Jierui Lin, Jiaye Teng, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Yang Gao. Fighting fire
  with fire: Avoiding dnn shortcuts through priming. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2022.
Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
  deep reinforcement learning from pixels. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions (ICLR), 2020.
Lin Yen-Chen, Andy Zeng, Shuran Song, Phillip Isola, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Learning to see before
  learning to act: Visual pre-training for manipulation. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics
  and Automation (ICRA), 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wentao Yuan, Chris Paxton, Karthik Desingh, and Dieter Fox. Sornet: Spatial object-centric
 representations for sequential manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2021.
Allan Zhou, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Aravind Rajeswaran. Policy architectures for compo-
  sitional generalization in control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05960, 2022.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX
A.1    I MPLEMENTATION OF THE A LGORITHM

We provide the core training code of our project in the supplementary material, which comes from
our whole project. The code shows all the training details and the model implementation. It is divided
into three files.

       • bc.py This python file provides the main training routine. The main class is the
         BehaviorCloning. The training routine is its train method.
       • model.py This python file provides the implementation of BC policy model (Model) and
         the discriminator (DiscrimModel).
       • network.py This python file provides the implementation of the IMPALA en-
         coder (ResNetBase) used by the BC policy model.

Note that these files are for illustration purpose. The whole runnable project will be made publicly
available.

A.2    H YPERPARAMETERS

The size of image observation is (64, 64) in all the experiments. We use the Adam optimizer (Kingma
& Ba, 2015) for the optimization of both the discriminator and the BC model. The learning rate
of the optimizers is 0.0003. We also add a weight decay of 0.0001 to the BC model. We use a
batchsize of 128 throughout the experiments (batch size). We will sample 4 points for each
batch (sample n). We repeat the training of discriminator for 4 steps (repeat). For the discrim-
inator (DiscrimModel), its embedding size is set to 64 (e dim). For the choice of λ, we use
λ = 1.0 for the MAGICAL, and 0.1 otherwise. All the other details and hyperparameters can be
found in the source code in the supplementary material.

A.3    Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS OF THE M ANIPULATION P ROBLEM

In this section, we provide some qualitative results of the real-world manipulation problem. Recall
that in this task, the robot is required to move a red cube to a target location specified by a green area.
We show the importance heatmap of the dropout model (Figure 8) and our model (Figure 9). As is
shown in the figures, we find that dropout model tends to attend more to the round distractor object
compared with our model. However, due to the visual complexity, we find that our model sometimes
may attend the shadow in the background.

A.4    S ETUP OF R EAL ROBOT

The observation of the robot include two resized 64 × 64 RGB images coming from the gripper
camera and the workspace camera, and the z coordinate of the gripper. We use a discretized action
space, so it will become easier for human to collect the demonstration via the keyboard. There are 8
actions in total, [x, y, z] move [backward/forward] by 2cm, and gripper [open/close] by 1cm. We only
consider to regularize the workspace camera. This is because the gripper-camera can only observe a
very limited area on the workspace in our case and the gripper is always at the center. As a result,
the spatial generalization issue is minor for the gripper-camera and we find it do not help much to
regularize it.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: The GradCAM++ importance heatmap of dropout model in the real-world manipulation
problem. The dropout model tends to attend the round distractor object.


Figure 9: The GradCAM++ importance heatmap of our model in the real-world manipulation problem.
Our model attends less to the round distractor object. However, due to the visual complexity, we find
that our model sometimes may attend the shadow in the background.


                                                14
