Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F EATURE D ROPOUT: R EVISITING THE ROLE OF
AUGMENTATIONS IN C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT
         What role do augmentations play in contrastive learning? Recent work suggests that
         good augmentations are label-preserving with respect to a specific downstream task. We
         complicate this picture by showing that label-destroying augmentations can be useful in the
         foundation model setting, where the goal is to learn diverse, general-purpose representations
         for multiple downstream tasks. We perform contrastive learning experiments on a range of
         image and audio datasets with multiple downstream tasks (e.g. for digits superimposed on
         photographs, predicting the class of one vs. the other). We find that Viewmaker Networks,
         a recently proposed model for learning augmentations for contrastive learning, produce
         label-destroying augmentations that stochastically destroy features needed for different
         downstream tasks. These augmentations are interpretable (e.g. altering shapes, digits, or
         letters added to images) and surprisingly often result in better performance compared to
         expert-designed augmentations, despite not preserving label information. To support our
         empirical results, we theoretically analyze a simple contrastive learning setting with a linear
         model. In this setting, label-destroying augmentations are crucial for preventing one set of
         features from suppressing the learning of features useful for another downstream task. Our
         results highlight the need for analyzing the interaction between multiple downstream tasks
         when trying to explain the success of foundation models.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, foundation models (Bommasani et al., 2021) have exhibited remarkable progress on a range
of AI tasks (Devlin et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019; Ramesh et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021; Brown et al.,
2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Alayrac et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022). A crucial
characteristic of foundation models is that they can be adapted for a range of downstream tasks. For example,
a foundation model trained on ImageNet should ideally not only perform well at object classification, but
should also have learned general features useful for localization, segmentation, and other visual tasks. Indeed,
this is borne out by recent work showing the high accuracy of foundation models on a range of downstream
tasks (Chen et al., 2020b), as well as a range of analysis work showing models learn high-level semantic
features including texture, color, pose, and style (Goh et al., 2021).
One popular strategy for training foundation models involves training models to match transformed versions
(known as views or augmentations) of the same input. For example, image views might include common data
augmentations such as cropping or color jitter (Chen et al., 2020b), while views for speech might include pitch
modulation or spectrogram masking (Kharitonov et al., 2021; Park et al., 2019). This family of objectives
includes contrastive approaches such as SimCLR and MoCo, as well as non-contrastive approaches such as
BYOL and SwAV (Chen et al., 2020b; He et al., 2020; Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020).
Given the central importance of these views for defining the self-supervised task, much work has focused on
the question of what views lead to high-quality representations. The prevailing consensus, exemplified by

                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(Tian et al., 2020), holds that views should be label-preserving with respect to a downstream task. In other
words, because the contrastive loss will produce representations which are invariant to features that vary
across views, any information we wish to preserve in the representations should not be altered by such views.
As Tian et al. (2020) write: “A good set of views are those that share the minimal information necessary to
perform well at the downstream task.”
Here, we question whether this assumption—in particular, with its focus on a single task—is enough to
explain why contrastive foundation models succeed on a range of downstream tasks. In Section 2, we observe
that the actual choice and application of views in practice does not align with this prevailing consensus. For
example, complete invariance to several common data augmentations (e.g. shifts in brightness or cropping) is
undesirable since augmentations of inputs from different classes can collide. Furthermore, in many cases
there are explicit ways to specify invariances (e.g. converting images to grayscale) that researchers avoid
in favor of specifying them indirectly via augmentations (e.g. hue shifts). These observations suggest that
specifying invariances is not the sole role of these views.
Instead, we suspect that augmentations serve as a form of feature dropout—preventing any one feature from
becoming a shortcut feature and suppressing the learning of other features. We study this idea empirically in
Viewmaker Networks, a recently proposed method that appears to learn to drop out different features in the
input via adversarial training. We apply viewmaker and expert views to datasets with two associated down-
stream tasks, one involving classifying the main input (e.g., an image or audio recording) and one involving
a simple overlaid element (e.g., a digit, shape, letter, or speech snippet). We observe that the viewmaker
augmentations selectively obscure these overlaid features. Despite this, the viewmaker representations still
learn both downstream tasks well, while expert views often struggle on one or the other. This further suggests
that being label-preserving is not a necessary property of good views, as long as the label information is still
sometimes accessible.
Finally, we formalize the intuition that feature dropout can aid learning with a theoretical analysis of a simple
linear contrastive setting. In this setting, we characterize how the noisiness of each feature directly determines
how quickly features are learned, and uncover an interaction between features governing how fast they are
learned. In particular, we show how learning one feature quickly can suppress the learning of other features,
and show that adding noise to the “easiest” feature can increase the rate at which other features are learned.
This further indicates that label-destroying augmentations may have a direct role in ensuring that contrastive
models learn a broad range of features for downstream tasks.
Overall, these findings suggest the need to revisit common assumptions about the role of augmentations for
contrastive learning in the foundation model setting, and move towards a better understanding of how to train
generalist models that learn diverse features from unlabeled data.


2    C OMMON PRACTICES ARE AT ODDS WITH THE “ INVARIANCE ” EXPLANATION

We begin by briefly exploring several common augmentations used in contrastive learning for natural images,
and explore how they come into conflict with the common assumption described above. First, we observe
that many common augmentations can affect the label of the input, depending on the downstream task. For
example, many downstream image recognition tasks require color information (e.g. identifying bird species)
or brightness (e.g. scene or time-of-day classification), implying that invariance to these characteristics
would be undesirable. Yet hue shifts, greyscaling, and brightness shifts are common augmentations used in
contrastive learning Chen et al. (2020b); He et al. (2020)
Second, repeated application of some augmentations causes challenges for all downstream tasks. For example,
applying brightness shifts repeatedly results in any image turning completely black or completely white.
Thus the class label cannot be truly invariant to this augmentation, since inputs from different classes can

                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


experience an “augmentation collision” at this black or white image (this is formalized in Appendix B).1 This
argument also applies to other augmentations, including shifts in contrast2 and random masking.
Third, some augmentations are commonly used despite ways of explicitly encoding invariance to them. For
example, two image augmentations are hue shifts and greyscaling. Invariance to both of these augmentations
can be explicitly encoded by always converting an image to greyscale. Yet doing so is not common practice
because color information is still desirable for many downstream tasks.
The contradictions between the invariance rationale for augmentations in contrastive learning and these
common practices suggest the need for additional explanations for the role of augmentations.

3     V IEWMAKER N ETWORKS S UCCEED D ESPITE D ESTROYING L ABEL I NFORMATION
As another point of evidence that good views need not be label-preserving, we consider the behavior of
viewmaker networks (Tamkin et al., 2021b), a generative model which produces augmentations for contrastive
learning. Intuitively, viewmakers learn a stochastic augmentation policy that makes the contrastive task as
hard as possible for the encoder. The stochastic augmentations are parameterized as additive perturbations
bounded by an L1 norm, meaning the viewmaker can alter but not completely destroy the original image.
Formally, given an input x ∈ N, a viewmaker network Vψ is trained jointly with an encoder Eθ to optimize
the minimax expression:

                                           Vψ (x, δ1 )                   Vψ (x, δ2 )
                  max min L Eθ x + ϵ                        , Eθ x + ϵ
                    ψ    θ               ||Vψ (x, δ1 )||1              ||Vψ (x, δ2 )||1
Here L is a multiview loss function (e.g. (Chen et al., 2020b; He et al., 2020)), x is a minibatch of inputs,
|| · ||1 is the L1 norm, ϵ is the distortion budget controlling the strength of the views, and δ1 , δ2 ∼ N (0, 1)
are random inputs that enable the viewmaker to learn a stochastic augmentation policy. We clamp the output
of the viewmaker for images to [0, 1] as in Tamkin et al. (2021b).
Viewmaker networks learn to stochastically alter different parts of the input, including task-relevant features,
meaning that these augmentations are not label-preserving. Nevertheless, as we will see shortly, viewmaker
networks enable strong performance on multiple downstream tasks, including often better performance than
expert-designed augmentations. Moreover, this feature dropout capability of viewmaker networks may help
them to learn many features well rather than focusing on the easiest ones.

3.1   DATASETS

We consider the behavior of viewmaker networks on four datasets, including three image and one audio
dataset. Each dataset is constructed in such a way as to support two distinct downstream classification tasks,
enabling us to examine how well each downstream task is learned. The presence of two downstream tasks
enables us to analyze the foundation model setting where we wish to learn features relevant for multiple
downstream tasks, as opposed to one set or the other.

Image datasets The three image datasets are based on the canonical CIFAR-10 image-recognition dataset
(Krizhevsky, 2009) (MIT-License). One task is always to predict the CIFAR-10 object label (e.g. airplane
or bird). The other task is dependent on an additional feature overlaid on the image: C+Shapes: The
CIFAR-10 image is overlaid with one of three randomly-colored shapes: a square, a triangle, or a circle.
   1
     Note that invariance is not to be confused with the related but distinct property of equivariance, often discussed as a
desirable property of network architectures (e.g. see Fukushima & Miyake (1982); Chen et al. (2020a))
   2
     Continuous reduction in contrast eventually produces single-color images, given finite precision images


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The second task is to predict what shape was overlaid (N=3 classes). C+Digits: The CIFAR-10 images
are overlaid with four copies of a randomly-sampled digit from the MNIST dataset. The second task is to
predict the digit class (N=10 classes). C+Letters: The CIFAR-10 images are overlaid with four copies of a
randomly-colored English letter. The second task is to predict the class of the letter (N=26 classes).

Audio dataset The audio dataset is created by overlaying the audio of a spoken digit (from the AudioMNIST
dataset (Becker et al., 2018), MIT License) with a random background sound (collected from one of three
possible classes: cafe, machinery, and traffic) (Saki et al., 2016; Saki & Kehtarnavaz, 2016). The tasks are to
predict the digit class (N=10 classes) and to predict the sound class (N=3 classes). Inputs are presented to the
network as log mel spectrograms.

3.2   E XPERIMENTS

Pretraining We pretrain with the SimCLR algorithm for 200 epochs with a batch size of 256 and a
temperature of 0.1. We use a ResNet-18 model with standard modifications for smaller inputs (including a
smaller stride and no initial maxpool) as used in Tamkin et al. (2021b). For the expert augmentations, we
use the standard SimCLR augmentations for the image datasets (Chen et al., 2020b), and the SpecAug (Park
et al., 2019) augmentations for the audio datasets, which randomly mask out different frequency and time
bands, as well as the WaveAug (Kharitonov et al., 2021) augmentations, which alter various properties of the
waveform such as the pitch and speed. For the viewmaker augmentations, we use a budget of ϵ = 0.05P for
the image datasets, and ϵ = 0.125P for the audio datasets, where P is the number of pixels in the input.

Linear Evaluation We evaluate the quality of the learned representations by training a linear softmax
classifier on top of the prepool representations. We train for 100 epochs, using the same parameters as
Viewmaker (Tamkin et al., 2021b), training separate linear classifiers using the same pretrained network for
each downstream task (Chen et al., 2020b). Augmentations are applied during training but not evaluation.

3.3   R ESULTS

Qualitative evidence of feature dropout Visually, the viewmaker augmentations seem to stochastically
alter different aspects of the input, as shown in Figure 1. In addition to modifying the background of
each input, the viewmaker also selectively modifies the additional synthetic features added to each domain:
C+Digits: The viewmaker augmentations selectively add pixels to the MNIST digits, making it difficult to
distinguish which number is present. C+Shapes: The viewmaker augmentations sometimes draw squares
around the shape in the center, making it difficult to determine the shape class. C+Letters: The viewmaker
draws letter-like markings on top of the letters, obscuring the letter identity and color. Audio: The viewmaker
identifies the narrow band corresponding to the speech and applies perturbations to it. As can be seen in
Figure 1, these label-destroying augmentations are quite common, occuring in a sizeable fraction of the
sampled views.

Quantitative evidence of feature dropout We also measure this selectivity of features quantitatively in
Appendix C.2 and Figure 4. We augment images 1,200 times and observe the impact on the predictive
probability of the correct object class. Two clear modes appear for the viewmaker augmentations, but not
expert augmentations. This corresponds to the fraction of time the viewmaker destroys the overlaid feature
information (low P(correct object class)) and preserves it (high P(correct object class)).

Viewmaker succeeds despite destroying label information As shown in Table 1 and Table 2, viewmaker
networks are able to achieve good accuracy on both tasks, while expert augmentations frequently achieve
lower performance on one or both tasks. For example, on the image tasks, while expert views achieve slightly

                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Comparison of viewmaker and expert augmentations on datasets with multiple features. The
viewmaker augmentations adapt to the particular semantics of the input data, and make targeted perturbations
which remove the class-relevant information of the synthetic features (e.g. occluding the digit, shape, letter, or
speech). Despite this, the encoder network is still able to learn strong representations. Rows (from top): Digits,
Shapes, Letters, Audio. Columns (from left): Expert augmentations, viewmaker augmentations, difference
between original and viewmaker augmentation, rescaled to [0,1]. Center image in each grid is the original.
Audio Expert views shown are Spectral views.

                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Viewmaker (CIFAR-10)      Expert (CIFAR-10)    Viewmaker (Object)        Expert (Object)
    CIFAR-10 Only               84.5                       86.2                  -                     -
    C+Shape                     79.8                       76.0                100.0                100.0
    C+Digit                     69.3                       58.8                 94.3                 86.7
    C+Letter                    71.9                       74.8                 96.9                 94.1

Table 1: Transfer accuracy on different features. Viewmaker networks are able to achieve good performance
across multiple downstream tasks, while expert views sometimes falter. Networks are pretrained on the
datasets on the left, and transfer accuracy is reported for the different conditions on the columns. Runs are
averages of three seeds (with the exception of CIFAR-10 Only, which is taken from (Tamkin et al., 2021b)).

                                         Speech Accuracy                Background Sound Accuracy
                              Viewmaker      Spectral     Waveform   Viewmaker       Spectral   Waveform
         Speech Only              92.4         97.0         76.7         -               -          -
         Bkgd. Sound Only          -            -            -         100.0           32.64      100.0
         Speech + Sound           60.8         10.1         53.6       97.0            47.2       43.3

Table 2: Audio transfer accuracies. Viewmaker networks achieve good performance across multiple tasks,
while expert views sometimes suffer catastrophic drops as another feature is added. Networks are pretrained
on the datasets on the left, and transfer accuracy is reported for the different conditions on the columns. Runs
are averages of three seeds.


higher performance on the image only, they experience a large drop in accuracy when the synthetic feature is
added. In two of these cases (Shape and Digit) the viewmaker models are able to achieve a higher accuracy
on both the image and the synthetic feature, while on the third (Letters) viewmakers achieve slightly lower
accuracy on the images but achieve half the error on the synthetic object. For the audio experiments the picture
is similar—the viewmaker is able to avoid catastrophic drops in performance learning both features together,
achieving the highest accuracy on both, while the expert views experience larger drops and worse overall
performance. Note that the high performance of expert views for our control tasks (CIFAR-10/Speech/Sound
Only) indicates that the viewmaker views are not merely better all-around views, but that they specifically
help the model learn multiple features.
These results provide additional evidence that label-preserving views are not necessary for learning good
representations—and that the ability to perform feature dropout may improve learning of multiple tasks.


4    T HEORETICAL A NALYSIS OF F EATURE I NTERACTIONS IN A L INEAR
     C ONTRASTIVE S ETTING

In this section, we theoretically analyze a simple linear model that captures the essence of how label-destroying
augmentations can improve downstream accuracy. We study a setting where the data contains many underlying
features that are relevant to downstream classification tasks, and where these features are preserved to varying
degrees across augmentations. We will show that a linear model trained with a contrastive objective learns
these features, and that adding noise to one feature can speed the learning of other features during gradient
descent. One difference between the linear setting we theoretically analyze and Section 3 is that in this section
we add stochastic Gaussian noise to destroy features across augmentations, as opposed to the more bimodal
feature dropout behavior seen in Figure 1.

                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    (4)
                   vk                µk       (4)                          Representation fΘ (w)
                                             uk

         (2)                                              θ1T w1                θ2T w2          ...          T
                                                                                                            θK wK
        uk                                 (3)
                                          vk
                                 (3)
             (1)
                                uk
          vk
                                       (2)                    θ1                    θ2                         θK
                                     vk
                                           (1)
                                          uk
                                                    w11   w12       w13   w21   w21       w23   ...   wK1   wK2     wK3
        −µk
                                                                                  Input w
                          (a)                                                       (b)

Figure 2: We show how label-destroying augmentations can aid learning of other features in a linear contrastive
                                                                                                               (i)
setting: (a) The correlation of the kth feature of an augmentation pair, shown for d = 2. Each pair uk
      (i)
and vk have correlated projections onto the ground truth µk direction, representing the feature conserved
across augmentations. (b) Feedforward linear network which computes the representation fΘ (w). As each
feature µk is learned (θk → µk ) the representations of the two views fΘ (u(i) ), fΘ (v (i) ) become more similar,
decreasing the contrastive loss.


4.1   DATA M ODEL AND S ETTING

We study a model which consists of data with K distinct features, each corresponding to some ground truth
unit-vector directions µ1 , . . . , µK ∈ Rd . We sample each data point u ∈ RK×d and its augmentation (a.k.a.
its positive pair or its view) v ∈ RK×d as follows. For k ∈ 1, . . . , K, the kth row of u, which we denote uk ,
is drawn from the Gaussian distribution N (0, Id ). The kth row of the augmentation, vk , is drawn from the
same distribution, but is correlated with uk in the µk -direction (and is otherwise independent in the other

  T           T
                       p of the correlation is governed by parameter αk ∈ [0, 1] in the following sense:
directions). The strength
vk µk = αk uk µk + 1 − αk2 ξ, where ξ ∼ N (0, 1). Thus the larger αk , the stronger the correlation in that
feature across the two views. Figure   2(a)
                                          visualizes the correlation
                                                                      of (uk , vk ) in an augmented pair. Formally,
                                              Id    αk µk µTk
we can write that (uk , vk ) ∼ N 0,                              , for a vector α ∈ [0, 1]k .
                                          αk µk µTk    Id
We will learn a model Θ ∈ RK×d , which represents a collection of K feature extractors, as pictured
in Figure 2(b). The model Θ, with rows {θk }k∈[K] , maps a data point w ∈ RK×d to a representation
fΘ (w) ∈ RK by computing a score wkT θk for each element in the representation. That is, (fΘ (w))k = wkT θk .
Our goal is that the model Θ will be useful for a downstream classification task which depends on the
ground truth features. A good representation will capture ground truth features that are correlated across
augmentations, such that θk is aligned with µk or −µk .

Training. We will study the the evolution of Θ as we optimize a standard constrictive learning objective
using gradient descent (Dosovitskiy et al., 2014; Chen et al., 2020b). At each round of gradient descent,
we sample a fresh batch of m data points and their augmentations, (U, V ) := {(u(i) , v (i) }i∈[m] . For each
                                                                                     (i)      (j)
i, j ∈ [m], we compute a similarity score zij := ⟨fΘ (u(i) ), fΘ (v (j) )⟩ = k (θkT uk )(θkT vk ) using the dot
                                                                            P
                                                                                           exp(zij )
product of their K-dimensional representations. We then compute the logits pij := P ′ exp(z          ′)
                                                                                                        using the
                                                                                                       j      ij
softmax function, and use the classwise cross entropy loss function L(Θ; U, V ) := − log(pii ).

                                                                7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   M AIN R ESULT

We will study gradient descent (GD) on the cross entropy loss, and consider how adding noise to one feature
affects the learning of the other features. As suggested earlier, we can measure how well we learn the kth
feature by measuring the alignment of θk with µk or    −µ  k.   A natural way to measure this alignment is the
                                                       |µT
                                                         k θk |
acute angle between ±µk and θk , given by arccos ∥θk ∥2 . Lemma E.1 in Appendix E proves that this
quantity directly determines the test accuracy on a natural downstream linear classification task.
                                                     ′
        p we say we add noise to some feature k of a data point v, if for some β ∈ [0, 1), we let ṽk′ =
Formally,
βvk′ + 1 − β ξ, where ξ ∼ N (0, Id ), and ṽk = vk for k ̸= k ′ . Thus if (u, v) were a pair generated with
                 2
the correlation coefficients {αk }k∈[K] , then the distribution of (u, ṽ) comes from the modified correlation
coefficients {α̃}k∈[K] with the single modification α̃k′ = βαk . We now present our main theorem:
Theorem 4.1 (Noise improves feature learning). There exists a universal constant C, such that the following
holds. Let Θ(t+1) = Θ(t) − η(∇L(U, V ; Θ) + λΘ(t) ), and Θ̃(t+1) = Θ(t) − η(∇L(U, Ṽ ; Θ) + λΘ(t) ),
where Ṽ is V with any amount of added noise in the k ′ feature. This has the effect of changing αk′ to α̃k′
                                                            1−α2k′                                        α (1−α2 )
for any α̃k′ < αk′ . Then for any k ̸= k ′ , if |θkT µk | ≤
                                                            C ∥θk  ∥, ∥θk′ ∥3 ≤ |θkT′ µk |, and ∥θk ∥2
                                                                                                       ≤ k C k′ ,
                                                            (t+1)                              (t+1)
                                                        |µT
                                                          k θk      |                     |µT
                                                                                            k θ̃k      |
then for a small enough step size η, EU,V arccos          (t+1)         > EU,Ṽ arccos       (t+1)         .
                                                        ∥θk     ∥2                        ∥θ̃k     ∥2


                                                                                                           1−α2
We briefly comment on the three assumptions on Θ in the theorem. The first assumption, |θkT µk | ≤ C k′ ∥θk ∥
requires that θk is not too aligned with µk – that is, the result applies to all features k that aren’t already
learned too well. The second two assumptions are satisfied if the k ′ th feature has been learned to some extent,
and the norm of θk and θk′ are small, which can be enforced throughout training with ℓ2 regularization.
The theorem guarantees that at any point in training, if we add noise to the k ′ th feature, the next step of GD
learns all other features better than if we didn’t add noise. To validate the implication of this result for the
complete trajectory of GD, we include simulations in Appendix D. Our experiments show that introducing
noise part-way through training to dominant features can significantly speed the alignment of weak features,
with only a small cost to the alignment of the dominant features. We prove our result in Appendix E, including
intuition and a technical overview of the steps in Section E.3.


5     R ELATED WORK

Understanding contrastive and multiview learning Many prior works have laid the foundations for current
contrastive and multiview learning algorithms (Becker & Hinton, 1992; Hadsell et al., 2006; Dosovitskiy
et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2018; Bachman et al., 2019; Misra & van der Maaten, 2020; He et al., 2020; Chen
et al., 2020b). Several works perform analysis studies of contrastive learning to identify important factors
(Cole et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2021) or how contrastive models differ from supervised learning (Yang et al.,
2020; Ericsson et al., 2021a; Karthik et al., 2021). HaoChen et al. (2021) study contrastive learning using the
concept of an augmentation graph. This model assumes the fraction of non-label preserving augmentations is
“extremely small;” interestingly, we show in practice it can quite large and still yield good performance. Wang
et al. (2022) theoretically study contrastive learning under an assumption of label-preserving augmentations,
though they show that such an assumption alone does not suffice to learn. Most relevant to our work, Tian
et al. (2020); Ericsson et al. (2021b) study how the information shared between different views impacts
learning of downstream tasks. We complicate this picture by analyzing the foundation model setting where
a single model must learn features that are useful for multiple tasks that are not known in advance. In this
setting, we find that label-destroying perturbations, thought to be harmful by Tian et al. (2020), are useful for
preventing one feature from suppressing others.

                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Feature suppression Our work is closely connected to the notion of feature suppression (Hermann &
Lampinen, 2020), where the presence of one feature can crowd out or suppress the learning of other features.
Several works have explored the relevance of this concept in contrastive learnings. For example, the original
SimCLR paper (Chen et al., 2020b) noted that color jitter augmentation was necessary to prevent the network
for using only the color profile of the input to solve the contrastive task. Followup work (Chen et al., 2021)
explores this phenomenon in more detail, characterizing how different hyperparameters and dataset features
affect feature suppression. Other works have attempted to address feature suppression in contrastive learning,
either via auxiliary losses (Li et al., 2020) or by modifying representations in the latent space (Robinson
et al., 2021). Our work relates to these in two ways. First, we empirically and theoretically investigate feature
suppression as an alternate rationale for the role of augmentations, as opposed to invariance. Second, we show
that an existing method, viewmaker networks (Tamkin et al., 2021b), can identify and potentially neutralize
suppressing features in an interpretable way, resulting in better performance than expert augmentations.

Spurious correlations and shortcut features Outside the framing of feature suppression, several other
works explore how classifiers can learn or make use of unwanted features. Shortcut features (Geirhos et al.,
2020) describe often-simple features (e.g. the average color of an input) which are learned by networks at
the expense of more salient features (e.g. the object class). This notion is connected to spurious correlations
(Simon, 1954) in deep learning which have been explored extensively (Sagawa et al., 2019; 2020; Srivastava
et al., 2020; Tu et al., 2020; Xiao et al., 2021), including in the context of self-supervised learning (Minderer
et al., 2020). Other works have also performed theoretical analysis of how related dynamics affect learning in
the supervised setting (Li et al., 2019; Shah et al., 2020). Our work suggests that viewmaker networks may be
a useful tool as well here—both as an interpretability tool to visualize the different features a network relies
on, and as a way to reduce reliance on particular features without completely destroying the information.

6    D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
We have presented several different arguments against the commonly-articulated belief that the main role
of augmentations is to specify invariances for a contrastive learning model. First, common augmentations
such as brightness shifts would result in useless representations if networks became truly invariant to them.
Second, viewmaker networks succeed at contrastive learning despite learning label-destroying perturbations
which drop out different features in the input. Finally, we present an analysis of a linear contrastive setting
where we prove that label-destroying views actually have a positive effect on contrastive learning if the goal
is to avoid learning one feature at the expense of others.
Our work has limitations. For example, our empirical analysis is limited to four synthetic datasets spanning
vision and audio, whereas self-supervised learning may be applied to naturalistic data spanning a much wider
range of modalities (Tamkin et al., 2021a; 2022). In addition, our theoretical analysis considers a linear
contrastive setting, whereas current neural networks are highly nonlinear. Improving upon both of these fronts
is an exciting area for future work.
On the other hand, understanding augmentations as dropping out easy features suggests possible ways of
improving the performance of self-supervised learning. For instance, viewmaker networks cap the extent to
which views can differ from the underlying image. Our analysis here suggests the role of this cap indirectly
sets the dropout rate of different features in the input; some way of directly encoding this objective may yield
more flexible and performant viewmaker approaches.
The challenge of learning a broad range of useful features lies at heart of self-supervised learning. We hope
our work sheds light on this challenge in contrastive learning, especially as these objectives continue to
develop and are applied more broadly and at larger scale.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ethics Statement Our work is centered on conceptual understanding, making it challenging to confidently
predict societal impacts. Better conceptual understanding of existing methods may help us understand the
failure modes and successes of current models better, which may have positive impacts. However, if this
understanding enables the development of more powerful methods, the work may indirectly accentuate
whatever social impacts (positive or negative) those applications have.

Reproducibility Statement We include hyperparameters and experimental settings for our experiments
in Section 3, complete statements of our theoretical results in Appendix E, and will release our codebase to
reproduce our results.

R EFERENCES
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc,
  Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda
  Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andy Brock,
  Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew
  Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot learning. ArXiv,
  abs/2204.14198, 2022.
Philip Bachman, R. Devon Hjelm, and William Buchwalter. Learning representations by maximizing mutual
  information across views. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Soren Becker, Marcel Ackermann, Sebastian Lapuschkin, Klaus-Robert Müller, and Wojciech Samek.
  Interpreting and explaining deep neural networks for classification of audio signals. ArXiv, abs/1807.03418,
  2018.
Suzanna Becker and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Self-organizing neural network that discovers surfaces in random-dot
  stereograms. Nature, 355:161–163, 1992.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx, Michael S.
  Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson, Shyamal Buch, Dallas
  Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri S. Chatterji, Annie S. Chen, Kathleen Creel, Jared Davis, Dora Demszky,
  Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh,
  Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren E. Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah D. Goodman, Shelby
  Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong,
  Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas F. Icard, Saahil Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti,
  Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar Khattab, Pang Wei Koh, Mark S. Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith
  Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa
  Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir P. Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell,
  Zanele Munyikwa, Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Benjamin Newman, Allen Nie,
  Juan Carlos Niebles, Hamed Nilforoshan, J. F. Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou,
  Joon Sung Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Robert Reich, Hongyu
  Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf H. Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher R’e, Dorsa Sadigh, Shiori
  Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishna Parasuram Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori,
  Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai Wu,
  Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei A. Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi Zhang,
  Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the opportunities and risks
  of foundation models. ArXiv, abs/2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
  Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin. Unsupervised
 learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 33:9912–9924, 2020.
Shuxiao Chen, E. Dobriban, and Jane Lee. A group-theoretic framework for data augmentation. arXiv:
  Machine Learning, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. ArXiv, abs/2002.05709, 2020b.
Ting Chen, Calvin Luo, and Lala Li. Intriguing properties of contrastive losses. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
  Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi,
  Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Baindoor Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam M. Shazeer,
  Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Benton C. Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob
  Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
  Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcı́a, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
  Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi,
  David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai,
  Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Oliveira Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine
  Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei,
  Kathleen S. Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling
  language modeling with pathways. ArXiv, abs/2204.02311, 2022.
Elijah Cole, Xuan S. Yang, Kimberly Wilber, Oisin Mac Aodha, and Serge J. Belongie. When does contrastive
  visual representation learning work? ArXiv, abs/2105.05837, 2021.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional
  transformers for language understanding. ArXiv, abs/1810.04805, 2019.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Martin A. Riedmiller, and Thomas Brox. Discriminative
  unsupervised feature learning with convolutional neural networks. In NIPS, 2014.
Linus Ericsson, Henry Gouk, and Timothy M. Hospedales. How well do self-supervised models transfer?
  2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5410–5419, 2021a.
Linus Ericsson, Henry Gouk, and Timothy M. Hospedales. Why do self-supervised models transfer?
  investigating the impact of invariance on downstream tasks. ArXiv, abs/2111.11398, 2021b.
Kunihiko Fukushima and Sei Miyake. Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism
  of visual pattern recognition. In Competition and cooperation in neural nets, pp. 267–285. Springer, 1982.
Robert Geirhos, Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen, Claudio Michaelis, Richard S. Zemel, Wieland Brendel, Matthias
  Bethge, and Felix Wichmann. Shortcut learning in deep neural networks. ArXiv, abs/2004.07780, 2020.
Gabriel Goh, Nick Cammarata, Chelsea Voss, Shan Carter, Michael Petrov, Ludwig Schubert, Alec Radford,
  and Christopher Olah. Multimodal neurons in artificial neural networks. 2021.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena Buchatskaya,
  Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, et al. Bootstrap your own
  latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  21271–21284, 2020.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Raia Hadsell, Sumit Chopra, and Yann LeCun. Dimensionality reduction by learning an invariant mapping.
  2006 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR’06), 2:
  1735–1742, 2006.
Jeff Z. HaoChen, Colin Wei, Adrien Gaidon, and Tengyu Ma. Provable guarantees for self-supervised deep
   learning with spectral contrastive loss. In NeurIPS, 2021.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross B. Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised
  visual representation learning. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
  (CVPR), pp. 9726–9735, 2020.
Katherine L. Hermann and Andrew Kyle Lampinen. What shapes feature representations? exploring datasets,
  architectures, and training. ArXiv, abs/2006.12433, 2020.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford,
  Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland,
  Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan,
  Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol Vinyals, and L. Sifre. Training compute-optimal large language models.
  ArXiv, abs/2203.15556, 2022.
A. Tarun Karthik, Mike Wu, Noah D. Goodman, and Alex Tamkin. Tradeoffs between contrastive and
  supervised learning: An empirical study. ArXiv, abs/2112.05340, 2021.
Eugene Kharitonov, Morgane Rivière, Gabriel Synnaeve, Lior Wolf, Pierre-Emmanuel Mazaré, Matthijs
  Douze, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Data augmenting contrastive learning of speech representations in the
  time domain. In 2021 IEEE Spoken Language Technology Workshop (SLT), pp. 215–222. IEEE, 2021.
Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, 2009.
Tianhong Li, Lijie Fan, Yuan Yuan, Hao He, Yonglong Tian, Rogério Schmidt Feris, Piotr Indyk, and Dina
  Katabi. Addressing feature suppression in unsupervised visual representations. 2020.
Yuanzhi Li, Colin Wei, and Tengyu Ma. Towards explaining the regularization effect of initial large learning
  rate in training neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1907.04595, 2019.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis, Luke
  Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. ArXiv,
  abs/1907.11692, 2019.
Matthias Minderer, Olivier Bachem, Neil Houlsby, and Michael Tschannen. Automatic shortcut removal for
 self-supervised representation learning. In ICML, 2020.
Ishan Misra and Laurens van der Maaten. Self-supervised learning of pretext-invariant representations. 2020
   IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6706–6716, 2020.
Daniel S Park, William Chan, Yu Zhang, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Barret Zoph, Ekin D Cubuk, and Quoc V
  Le. Specaugment: A simple data augmentation method for automatic speech recognition. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.08779, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
  Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural
  language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. ArXiv, abs/2102.12092, 2021.

                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel Barth-
  Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali
  Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Manfred Otto Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar
  Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent. ArXiv, abs/2205.06175, 2022.
Joshua Robinson, Li Sun, Ke Yu, K. Batmanghelich, Stefanie Jegelka, and Suvrit Sra. Can contrastive
  learning avoid shortcut solutions? Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:4974–4986,
  2021.
Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust neural
  networks for group shifts: On the importance of regularization for worst-case generalization. ArXiv,
  abs/1911.08731, 2019.
Shiori Sagawa, Aditi Raghunathan, Pang Wei Koh, and Percy Liang. An investigation of why overparameteri-
  zation exacerbates spurious correlations. ArXiv, abs/2005.04345, 2020.
Fatemeh Saki and Nasser Kehtarnavaz. Automatic switching between noise classification and speech en-
  hancement for hearing aid devices. In 2016 38th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
  in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 736–739, 2016. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2016.7590807.
Fatemeh Saki, Abhishek Sehgal, Issa Panahi, and Nasser Kehtarnavaz. Smartphone-based real-time clas-
  sification of noise signals using subband features and random forest classifier. In 2016 IEEE Interna-
  tional Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 2204–2208, 2016. doi:
  10.1109/ICASSP.2016.7472068.
Harshay Shah, Kaustav Tamuly, Aditi Raghunathan, Prateek Jain, and Praneeth Netrapalli. The pitfalls of
  simplicity bias in neural networks. ArXiv, abs/2006.07710, 2020.
Herbert A Simon. Spurious correlation: A causal interpretation. Journal of the American statistical
 Association, 49(267):467–479, 1954.
Megha Srivastava, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Robustness to spurious correlations via human
 annotations. In ICML, 2020.
Alex Tamkin, Vincent Liu, Rongfei Lu, Daniel E Fein, Colin Schultz, and Noah D. Goodman. Dabs: A
  domain-agnostic benchmark for self-supervised learning. ArXiv, abs/2111.12062, 2021a.
Alex Tamkin, Mike Wu, and Noah D. Goodman. Viewmaker networks: Learning views for unsupervised
  representation learning. ArXiv, abs/2010.07432, 2021b.
Alex Tamkin, Gaurab Banerjee, Mohamed Owda, Vincent Liu, Shashank Rammoorthy, and Noah Goodman.
  Dabs 2.0: Improved datasets and algorithms for universal self-supervision. 2022.
Yonglong Tian, Chen Sun, Ben Poole, Dilip Krishnan, Cordelia Schmid, and Phillip Isola. What makes for
  good views for contrastive learning. ArXiv, abs/2005.10243, 2020.
Lifu Tu, Garima Lalwani, Spandana Gella, and He He. An empirical study on robustness to spurious
  correlations using pre-trained language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 8:621–633, 2020.
Yifei Wang, Qi Zhang, Yisen Wang, Jiansheng Yang, and Zhouchen Lin. Chaos is a ladder: A new theoretical
  understanding of contrastive learning via augmentation overlap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13457, 2022.
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X. Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-parametric
  instance discrimination. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
  3733–3742, 2018.

                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kai Y. Xiao, Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. Noise or signal: The role of image
  backgrounds in object recognition. ArXiv, abs/2006.09994, 2021.

Xingyi Yang, Xuehai He, Yuxiao Liang, Yue Yang, Shanghang Zhang, and Pengtao Xie. Transfer learning or
  self-supervised learning? a tale of two pretraining paradigms. ArXiv, abs/2007.04234, 2020.

Nanxuan Zhao, Zhirong Wu, Rynson W. H. Lau, and Stephen Lin. What makes instance discrimination good
  for transfer learning? ArXiv, abs/2006.06606, 2021.


A     C ODE RELEASE

We are preparing our code and will release it on a public GitHub repo.


B     F ORMALIZATION OF OBSERVATION IN S ECTION 2

Definition B.1 (Invariance). A function f : Rm → Rn is invariant to a set of transformations G if and only if
f ◦ g(x) = f (x) for all x ∈ Rm and for all g ∈ G.
Definition B.2 (Augmentation collision). An augmentation collision occurs if, for two inputs xa , xb and
                                        (1)         (n ) (1)            (n )
set of transformations G, there exist ga , . . . , ga a , gb , . . . , gb b ∈ G for some na , nb ∈ N such that
 (1)          (na )      (1)          (nb )
ga ◦ . . . ◦ ga (xa ) = gb ◦ . . . ◦ ga (xb ).
Observation B.3. If there exists an augmentation collision for inputs xa , xb and transformation set G, and f
is invariant to G, then f (xa ) = f (xb ).

                                                         (1)         (n )          (1)         (n )
Proof. By the definition of an augmentation collision, ga ◦ . . . ◦ ga a (xa ) = gb ◦ . . . ◦ ga b (xb ). By the
                                       (1)          (n )             (1)          (n )
definition of a function, we have f ◦ ga ◦ . . . ◦ ga a (xa ) = f ◦ gb ◦ . . . ◦ ga b (xb ). Applying invariance,
we obtain f (xa ) = f (xb ).

Applying this observation, we observe that if the downstream labeling function f is invariant to a class of
augmentations, then there cannot be an augmentation collision for inputs with different labels. However,
common augmentations such as brightness shifts can reduce any image to a black or white image, resulting in
an augmentation collapse between any two inputs.


C     A DDITIONAL FEATURE DROPOUT EXPERIMENTS

C.1   Q UANTIFYING THE IMPORTANCE OF FEATURE DROPOUT

To assess the importance of label-destroying augmentations to the success of the viewmaker, we experiment
with a setup where the viewmaker cannot destroy the information in the object class. To do this, we compute a
mask around the object and zero out any perturbation from the viewmaker within that mask. We then perform
pretraining and transfer as usual.
As we report in Table 3, the accuracy of the CIFAR-10 class label drops precipitously, as expected. At the
same time, the accuracy of two of the other objects remains mostly constant (shape and digits), while the
accuracy for letters declines modestly (perhaps because the color of the letter is now able to suppress the
learning of the letter class.

                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Viewmaker (C-10)   Mask-Viewmaker (C-10)     Viewmaker (Object)    Mask-Viewmaker (Object)
    C+Shape          79.8                   26.0                   100.0                    95.8
    C+Digit          69.3                   50.7                   94.3                     95.0
    C+Letter         71.9                   23.2                   96.9                     71.8

Table 3: Experiments with a masked viewmaker which is unable to destroy the object class. Transfer
accuracy on CIFAR-10 (C-10) and the object task (Shape, Digit, or Letter). The Mask-Viewmaker has its
perturbation masked such that it cannot destroy the label of the object. This results in the features in the
object suppressing the CIFAR-10 accuracy, while leaving the object accuracy relatively unscathed.


                   Figure 3: Non-label destroying Viewmaker perturbation examples.


C.2    Q UANTIFYING THE DEGREE OF FEATURE DROPOUT

We perform an exploratory analysis to testing how well different views drop out the features in an input. We
augment a 1,200 examples (CIFAR-10 image plus an overlaid object) using a given augmentation policy
(either the expert or viewmaker augmentations). We then encode the model with a classifier trained off of the
other augmentation policy (i.e. expert for viewmaker augmentations or the reverse) in order to test how well
the augmentations drop out the features. We use a different encoder to see the effects of the augmentations
prior to the encoder having a chance to adapt to them.
We observe a bimodal behavior for the viewmaker views, shown in Figure 4, suggesting that the model is
adapting to the semantics of the input and has learned to stochastically drop out the simple feature some
fraction of the time. By contrast, the expert views display no such structure. Using the corresponding encoder
and views leads to models performing uniformly well, as shown in Figure 5.


D     E ND - TO - END S IMULATIONS OF L INEAR S ETTING

We empirically test the performance of the full trajectory of gradient descent when we add noise to the data.
We study a setting with one weak feature with correlations coefficient α1 ≤ 0.5, and 50 dominant features
with αk = 1 for k = 2, · · · , 51. We compare two approaches run on the same data: in the first approach, we
run 150 iterations of GD without adding noise. In the second, we run 50 iterations of GD without noise, and
then add noise to the dominant features for the remaining 100 iterations.
In Figure 6(top), we compare the alignment of Feature 1 (the weak feature) and Feature 2 (one of the dominant
features) to the ground truth in the two approaches. We observe that adding noise consistently accelerates the

                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       (a) Viewmaker / Shapes               (b) Viewmaker / Letters               (c) Viewmaker / Digits


         (d) Expert / Shapes                  (e) Expert / Letters                  (f) Expert / Digits

Figure 4: Viewmaker augmentations stochastically drop out simple features added to the input. Prob-
ability of the correct answer for different augmentations (Viewmaker or Expert) and different examples
from different datasets (Shapes, Letters, Digits). Each histogram shows a single example from each dataset
randomly augmented 1200 times, and the corresponding probabilities of the correct answer. The viewmaker
augmentations display a bimodal structure, indicating that the simple feature is selectively either destroyed or
preserved. The expert augmentations by contrast lack such structure, reflecting their lack of adaptation to the
structure of each input.


                                                  16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Viewmaker / Shapes              (b) Viewmaker / Letters             (c) Viewmaker / Digits


        (d) Expert / Shapes                 (e) Expert / Letters                (f) Expert / Digits

Figure 5: Evaluating views with their respective encoder does not reveal bimodal structure for view-
maker or expert views. Details are the same as in Figure 4, with the exception that views are evaluated on
their corresponding encoder.


                                               17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Alignment of features with verses without added noise. From left to right: α1 =
0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5. The top plots show the alignment of Features 1 (weak) and 2 (dominant) to the
ground truth; the bottom plots shows the probability of predicting the correct augmentation pair from the
batch. Standard deviation bars are shown for the mean alignment over 200 runs. We used dimension d = 5,
and a batch size of m = 25.


learning of the weak feature (blue), with little cost to the dominant features (red). The affect is consistent
among many choices for α1 , the correlation coefficient of the weak feature. We also plot in Figure 6(bottom)
the probability of predicting the correct class (pair) of the view under both approaches. We observe that this
probability drops sharply when we add noise, which we believe is the mechanism for faster learning with
noise.
We remark that we chose to add noise to all the dominant features (instead of a single k ′ a in our theorem)
to accentuate the effect of adding noise. We observed a similar effect, but smaller, when we added noise to
fewer features, or when there were fewer than 50 dominant features.


E    F ULL PROOFS OF PROPOSITIONS AND THEOREMS

We begin by stating and proving Lemma E.1 on the downstream classification accuracy.
Lemma E.1 (Downstream classification accuracy). Suppose we draw labeled data points (u, y) ∈ RK×d ×
{+1, 1}, where as before, uk ∼ N (0, Id ) for k ∈ [K], and the label is given by sign(uTk µk ). Then  the best
                                                                                                              |µT

                                                                                                                k θk |
linear classifier a ∈ RK on the representations fΘ (u) ∈ RK achieves an test error of π1 arccos                ∥θk ∥2    .
That is
                                                                                       |µT

                                                                                         k θk |
                                                                              arccos    ∥θk ∥2
                                           T
                         min Pr[sign(a         fΘ (u)) ̸= sign(µTk uk )] =                        .                 (1)
                         a∈RK u                                                        π
Thus if θk and µk are orthogonal, then the test error is 50%. If the angle between θk and the ±µk is zero,
then we achieve perfect classification accuracy.

Proof. It is easy to see that the best linear classifier a will (up to scaling) be equal to the vector sign(µTk θk )ek .
Such a classifier predicts the correct sign whenever          sign(aT fΘ (u)) = sign(µTk θk ) sign(θkT uk ) equals
                                                        |µT

                                               arccos     k θk |
                                                         ∥θk ∥2
sign(µTk uk ), which occurs exactly a 1 −               π          fraction of the time.

In the  rest of  this section, we prove our main theoretical result, Theorem 4.1, which shows that
         |µT θ |
arccos ∥θkk ∥k2 decreases faster in expectation during gradient descent if we add noise to the k ′ feature.


                                                        18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.1     N OTATION .

We let δij denote the δ-function which equals 1 if i = j and 0 otherwise. For a parameter Θ = {θk }k∈[K] ,
         ∥                                                                             ∥
we let θk := µk µTk θk be the projection of θk in the µk direction. We let θk⊥ = θk − θk be the projection of θk
orthogonal to the feature µk .
Throughout this section, we consider the ground truth directions to be fixed, and we fix some initial correlation
vector α. We let Pα denote the distribution from which the pair (u, v) is drawn from the Gaussian distribution
described in Section 4 with correlation coefficients α. When unspecified, the variables U, V are drawn from
the distribution Pm
                  α . Since we study what happens when we vary αk′ , for x ∈ [0, 1], we use the shorthand Px
to denote the distribution Pm
                            α(x) , where α(x)k = x, and α(x)k = αk for all other k.
                                               ′


We denote Li (Θ; U, V ) = CE({pij }j∈[m] , ei ) = − log(pii ), which we abbreviate by Li . When it is clear
that we are considering Li for some fixed i, we omit the superscripts on the ith data point or its pair. That is,
                   (i)            (i)
we denote uk := uk and vk := vk .

E.2     P RELIMINARIES

The following facts about of the derivative of the cross entropy loss are easy derived.
Lemma E.2.
                       ∂Li     X                ∂zij     XX            ∂zij    ∂zii
                             =     (pij − δij )       =         pij         −         ,                       (2)
                       ∂Θ        j
                                                 ∂Θ       i
                                                                       ∂Θ      ∂Θ
                                                              j̸=i

where
                                      ∂zij     (i) (j) T    (j) (i) T
                                           = (uk vk      + vk uk )θk .                                        (3)
                                      ∂θk
We will also need the following facts on Gaussian random variables. The first, Stein’s Lemma, is well known.
Lemma E.3 (Stein’s Lemma).
                               EX∼N (0,σ2 ) [Xf (X)] = σ 2 EX∼N (0,σ2 ) [f ′ (X)].                            (4)

The next two lemmas are proved in Section E.4.
Lemma E.4. There exists some constant C such that following holds. If σ ≤ C1 , and 0 ≤ t ≤ σ1 , then for
any c ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, and X ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) we have
                                 EX |X|c exp(t|X|) exp(tX 2 ) ≤ Cσ c .

                                                                                                     (5)
If additionally d ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, ρ ≤ C1 and Y ∼ N (0, ρ2 ), then

                               EX |X|c |Y |d exp(t|X|) exp(|XY |) ≤ Cσ c ρd .

                                                                                                              (6)
Lemma E.5. For some universal constant C, for any σ ∈ [0, 1], t ≥ 0, c ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}, we have
                                EX∼N (0,σ2 ) [(exp(t|X|) − 1) |X|c ] ≤ Ctσ c .

E.3     A PPROACH AND L EMMAS

Intuition for proof of Theorem 4.1. Our proof involves comparing the gradient of the loss in the θk
direction, ∇k := ∂θ∂k L in the setting with noise to the setting without noise. Loosely, our goal is to show that
for any k, the projection of the this gradient onto the ground truth direction, µTk ∇k sign(µTk θk ), increases

                                                  19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


when when increase the noise. The main intuition comes from an expansion      of this gradient in Lemma E.7,
which shows that EµTk ∇k sign(µTk θk ) approximately scales with i (1 − pii ). Now observe that pii , the
                                                                     P
probability of correctly matching the ith view to its pair, decreases when we add noise to feature k ′ . Thus
adding noise will increase µTk ∇k sign(µTk θk ), thereby improving the alignment.
In the remainder of this section, we outline our proof of Theorem 4.1 in this section. We prove all the lemmas
below in Section E.4.
                                       (t+1)

                                  |µT
                                    k θk     |
To understand EU,V arccos            (t+1)        for a small enough step size, we first claim that it suffices to
                                  ∥θk     ∥2
understand the expected projection of the gradient with respect to θk in the µk direction and in the θk direction.
We use the notation ∇k = ∂L(Θ;U,V
                              ∂θk
                                    )
                                      .
Lemma E.6. Let θk+ = θk − η(∇k + λθk ). Then
                       T +                    T
                                                                                                θkT ∇k (µTk θk )2

    1                  |µk θk |               |µk θk |                       T       T
lim     EU,V arccos                − arccos                 = N EU,V −(µk θk )(µk ∇k ) +                            ,
η→0 η                   ∥θk+ ∥2                ∥θk ∥2                                                 ∥θk ∥22
                                                                                                              (7)
where N is some negative value that depends only on θk .
                                                             (t+1)
                                                                                                (t+1)

                                                        |µT
                                                          k θk     |                      |µT
                                                                                            k θ̃k     |
Now, since we care about the quantity EU,V arccos          (t+1)        − EU,Ṽ  arccos      (t+1)         being
                                                             ∥θk   ∥2                                ∥θ̃k        ∥2
positive, it suffices to show that derivative
                                                              θkT ∇k (µTk θk )2

                               d              T      T
                                 EU,V ∼Px −(µk θk )(µk ∇k ) +                     ,
                              dx                                   ∥θk ∥22
is negative for all x ∈ [α̃k′ , αk′ ]. Indeed, from Lemma E.6, we have that
                                                   T +                                 T
                     1                            |µk θk |                            |µk θk |
                lim      EU,V ∼Pα ′ arccos                  − E U,V ∼Pα̃ ′  arccos                                               (8)
               η→0 η                 k             ∥θk+ ∥2              k              ∥θk ∥2
                              Z αk ′
                                                                        θk ∇k (µk θk )2
                                                                          T       T

                                        d                 T   T
                       =N                 EU,V ∼Px −(µk θk )(µk ∇k ) +                    dx,                                    (9)
                                α̃k′ dx                                      ∥θk ∥22
so if the derivative is negative for the full range, then the difference in arccosines is positive.
In the following lemma we compute the derivative of E[∇k ] with respect to x.
Lemma E.7.

  d                     d             ∂Li
    EU,V ∼Px [∇k ] = m EU,V ∼Px
 dx                    dx             ∂θk
                                                                                           ∂(z − z )
                      −m T          X
                                                            T
                                                                       T (i)     T (i)        ij   ii
                   =       θ   µ
                              ′ k ′    E U,V ∼Px  p   p
                                                    ij ii θ   u
                                                            k′ k ′    µ  u
                                                                       k′ k′ − xµ  v
                                                                                 k′ k′                  .
                     1 − x2 k                                                                  ∂θk
                                        j̸=i


We will analyze this quantity by explicitly taking the expectation with respect to some set of random variables.
                                                                 (i)  (i)        (i) (i)
Let S = {Uk , Vk , Uk′ , Vk′ } consist of the random variables uk′ , uk , and vk′ , vk  for all i ∈ [m]. Define

                                                                                            P             T  (i)T       (j)
                                                                                      exp     k̸̃=k,k′ θk̃ uk̃ θk̃ vk̃
qij to be the logits when all variables in S are set to 0 (Thus explicitly, qij = P           P                           ′
                                                                                                            T (i) θ T v (j )
                                                                                                                               ).
                                                                                      j ′ exp     k̸̃=k,k′ θ u
                                                                                                            k̃    k̃   k̃   k̃
We will use the notation j ∼ q to denote the distribution on [m] with mass qij on j.

                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Let
                                                         T (i)           (i)
                                                                                        ∂(zij − zii )
                              h(S) :=     θkT′ uk′      µk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′                                 ,                     (10)
                                                                                            ∂θk
and
                                                                     (i)                      ∥
                           h1 (S) = θkT′ uk′          (1 − x2 )µTk′ uk′        2αk (µTk uk )(θk uk )µTk ,                         (11)
which are the terms that appear in the right hand side of Lemma E.7 after pii pij . Observe that
                                           ES [h(S) − h1 (S)] = 0.
                                             d                    d

The following four lemmas serve to bound dx    ES µTk ∇k and dx     ES θkT ∇k . We call the terms of the form
Epii pij (h(S) − h1 (S)) “junk” terms, and our goal will be to show that these terms are small. We will control
more closely the terms of the form Epii pij (h1 (S)).
Lemma E.8 (Junk Terms for µk term.). If ∥θk ∥ ≤ 1 and ∥θk′ ∥ ≤ 1, then for some universal constant C

                                                                        ∥                         ∥
       ES pii pij µTk (h(S) − h1 (S)) ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥3 + ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥3 + αk ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥ .


Lemma E.9 (Good Term for µk term.). If ∥θk ∥ ≤ 1 and ∥θk′ ∥ ≤ 1, then for some universal constant C

                                                        ∥     ∥
         ES pii pij µTk h1 (S) ≥ 2αk (1 − x2 )qii qij ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥ 1 − C(∥θk′ ∥2 + ∥θk ∥2 ) .



Plugging these two lemmas into Lemma E.7 yields the following corollary.
                                                                                                                    1−α2k′
Corollary E.9.1 (Total µk term.). If for a sufficiently large constant C, |θkT µk | ≤                                               3
                                                                                                                      C ∥θk ∥, ∥θk ∥ ≤
                                                                                                                                  ′

                           αk (1−α2k′ )
|θkT′ µk |, and ∥θk ∥2 ≤        C       , then
                                                                                      
                                 d           m         X                  ∥       ∥
                       (µTk θk ) EPx µTk ∇k ≥ EU,V \S      qii qij 2αk ∥θk′ ∥2 ∥θk ∥2  .

                                dx           2          i,j

Lemma E.10 (Junk Terms for θk term.). If ∥θk ∥ ≤ 1 and ∥θk′ ∥ ≤ 1, then for some universal constant C

                                                             ∥                              ∥       ∥            ∥
ES pii pij θkT (h(S) − h1 (S)) ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥4 + ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥4 + αk ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥∥θk ∥ + ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥3 ∥θk ∥ .


Lemma E.11 (Good Term for θk term.). If ∥θk ∥ ≤ 1 and ∥θk′ ∥ ≤ 1, then for some universal constant C

                                                       ∥     ∥
        ES pii pij θkT h1 (S) ≤ (1 − x2 )2αk qii qij ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥2 1 + C(∥θk′ ∥2 + ∥θk ∥2 ) .



Plugging these two lemmas into Lemma E.7 yields the following corollary.
                                                                                               ∥                2                  ∥
Corollary E.11.1 (Total θk term.). If for a sufficiently large constant C, ∥θk ∥ ≤ 1−x            3
                                                                                    C ∥θk ∥, ∥θk ∥ ≤ ∥θk′ ∥,
                                                                                                ′
                  2
∥θk ∥2 ≤ αk (1−x
             C
                 )
                   , then
                                                                                        
                      (µTk θk )2    d           m         X                 ∥       ∥
                                      EP θT ∇k ≤ EU,V \S      qii qij αk ∥θk′ ∥2 ∥θk ∥2  .

                       ∥θk ∥2      dx x k       2          i,j


Combining Corollaries E.9.1 and E.11.1, we obtain the following lemma.
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                    ∥              2           αk (1−x )        ∥
Lemma E.12. If for a sufficiently large constant C, ∥θk ∥ ≤ 1−x                 3           2
                                                              C ∥θk ∥, ∥θk ∥ ≤ ∥θk′ ∥, ∥θk ∥ ≤
                                                                              ′
                                                                                                   C     ,
then
                                                           θT ∇k (µTk θk )2

                          EU,V ∼Px −(µTk θk )(µTk ∇k ) + k                     < 0.                  (12)
                                                               ∥θk ∥22
Theorem 4.1 now follows.

                                                             21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.4   P ROOFS OF L EMMAS

To prove the Lemmas E.4 and E.5, we will use the following well-known formula for the moment generating
function (MGF) of the half-normal distribution.
Lemma E.13 (MGF of half-normal distribution). The MGF of the half-normal distribution is
                                                                    2
                                   EX∼N (0,1)|X>0 [et|X| ] = 2et /2 Φ(t),
where Φ(t) is the cumulative distribution of a normal random variable.

Proof of Lemma E.4.
                                                Z ∞
                                                                                         x2

                                           1
  EX |X|c exp(t|X|) exp(tX 2 ) =                       |x|c exp(t|x|) exp(tx2 ) exp − 2 dx

                                         √
                                        σ 2π −∞                                         2σ
                                                                                                      
                                           √                 Z ∞                                2
                                             1 − 2σ t 2                                       x
                                    =                             |x|c exp(t|x|) exp −              2  dx
                                                      √                                               
                                              σ
                                          √
                                            1−2σ 2 t
                                                         2π −∞                                 σ
                                                                                         2 √1−2σ2 t
                                       p
                                    = 1 − 2σ 2 tEZ∼N (0,r)|Z≥0 [Z c exp(tZ)],
              σ
where r = √1−2σ2 t . To evaluate this, we use the MGF of the half-normal distribution in Lemma E.13. Thus
for some constant C, for all c ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4},
                                                                                c
                                         h
                                                c t|X|
                                                        i                       d t|X|
                      EX∼N (0,1)|X>0 c!|X| e              ≤ EX∼N (0,1)|X>0          e
                                                                                dtc
                                                                        2
                                                       ≤ C (1 + tc ) et /2 .
So for some constant C (whose value changes throughout this equation), so long as σ ≤ C1 ,
          p                                           p
            1 − 2σ 2 tEZ∼N (0,r)|Z≥0 [Z c exp(tZ)] = 1 − 2σ 2 tEX∼N (0,1)|Z≥0 [rc Z c exp(rtZ)]
                                                                                       2
                                                      p
                                                    ≤ 1 − 2σ 2 tCrc (1 + (tr)c ) e(tr) /2
                                                    ≤ Cσ c .
This proves the first statement in the lemma. To prove the second, we first take the expectation over X, and
using the half-Gaussian MGF as before, we obtain
                                                             h                                 2
                                                                                                  i
          EX EY |X|c |Y |d exp(t|X|) exp(|XY |) ≤ CEY |Y |d σ c (1 + (t + |Y |)c )e(t+|Y |) /2


Now applying the first statement to take the expectation over Y , we obtain
                                 h                               2
                                                                    i
                             EY |Y |d (1 + (t + |Y |)c )e(t+|Y |) /2 ≤ Cσ c ρd .



Proof of Lemma E.5. We prove the lemma by induction on c. Suppose c = 0. Then by plugging in the MGF
for the half-normal distribution from Lemma E.13, for some constant C, we have
                                                                2
                           EX∼N (0,1)|X>0 [(et|X| − 1)] = 2et /2 Φ(t) − 1                              (13)

                                                             2     1+t
                                                        ≤ 2et /2          −1                           (14)
                                                                     2
                                                            2              2
                                                        ≤ et /2 − 1 + tet /2                           (15)
                                                         ≤ Ct,                                         (16)


                                                 22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


thus
                     EX∼N (0,σ2 ) [(et|X| − 1)] = EX∼N (0,σ2 )|X>0 [(eσt|X| − 1)] ≤ Ctσ.


Now for c ≥ 1, by Stein’s Lemma, we have (for a new constant C),

   EX∼N (0,σ2 ) [|X|c (et|X| − 1)] = EX∼N (0,σ2 ) [X|X|c−1 sign(X)(et|X| − 1)]                      (17)

                                                         d
                                   = σ 2 EX∼N (0,σ2 )        |X|c−1 sign(X)(et|X| − 1)              (18)
                                                        dX
                                                      h                                             i
                                   = σ 2 EX∼N (0,σ2 ) (c − 2) |X|c−2 (et|X| − 1) + |X|c−1 (tet|X| )
                                                                                                              (19)
                                            c+1
                                   ≤ Ctσ          .                                                           (20)
where in the last step we used the inductive hypothesis and Lemma E.4.

Proof of Lemma E.6. First observe that
                                  T +                      T
              1                   |µk θk |                  |µk θk |
          lim     EU,V arccos                  −  arccos
          η→0 η                    ∥θk+ ∥2                   ∥θk ∥2
                                             T                                        T
                       1                     |µk (θk (1 − ηλ) − η∇k )|                 |µk θk |
                = lim       EU,V arccos                                    − arccos
                   η→0 η                       ∥θk (1 − ηλ) − η∇k ∥2                    ∥θk ∥2
                                                           η
                                 "              T
                                                                     !#                     !
                                              |µk (θk − 1−ηλ ∇k )|
                                                                                   T
                       1                                                          |µk θk |
                = lim       EU,V arccos                 η               − arccos
                   η→0 η                       ∥θk − 1−ηλ    ∇k ∥2                 ∥θk ∥2
                                       T
                           d            |µk (θk − η∇k )|
                = EU,V       arccos                          (0) ,
                          dη             ∥θk − η∇k ∥2
               η
since limη→0 1−ηλ  = 0. Now
              T                                    T
                                                   |µk θk | d |µTk (θk − η∇k )|

   d          |µk (θk − η∇k )|                 ′
     arccos                      (0) = arccos                                             (0)
  dη           ∥θk − η∇k ∥2                         ∥θk ∥2 dη        ∥θk − η∇k ∥2
                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                                 
                                                                          T       T                T       θk ∇k
                                                                − sign(µ    θ   )µ  ∇   ∥θ   ∥ + |µ  θ   |
                                                   T
                                                   |µ  θ
                                                     k k  |               k   k   k   k    k       k   k    ∥θk ∥
                                     = arccos′                                                                   
                                                    ∥θk ∥2                           ∥θk ∥22
                                                                           T

                                                 T     T          T    2 θ k ∇k
                                     = N −µk θk µk ∇k + (µk θk )                    ,
                                                                         ∥θk ∥2
                       T
                      |µ θ |
where N = arccos′ ∥θkk ∥k2 ∥θk ∥|µ 1
                                     T θ | . The lemma follows by taking the expectation over U, V , and
                                        k
                                        k
observing derivative of arccos(x) is negative whenever x is positive.

Proof of Lemma E.7. First observe that by symmetry, we have

                                   d                    d          ∂Li
                                     EU,V ∼Px [∇k ] = m EU,V ∼Px         .
                                  dx                   dx          ∂θk

                                                      23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To make this expectation easier to analyze, we express the random variable (U (x), V (x)) ∼ Px as an
                                                       (i)
interpolation of Gaussians in the coordinate µTk′ vk′ . Let ξ ∼ N (0, 1), and define (U, V ) ∼ P1 , such that
      (i)        (i)
µTk′ vk′ = µTk′ uk′ . For x ∈ [0, 1), define (U (x), V (x)) to have
                                             (i)             (i)
                                                                  p
                                       µTk′ vk′ (x) = xµTk′ uk′ + 1 − x2 ξ,                              (21)
and otherwise be the same as (U, V ). It is easy to check that (U (x), V (x)) ∼ Px .
Now
                   d            ∂Li (Θ; U, V )                    d ∂Li (Θ; U (x), V (x))
                     EU,V ∼Px                    = EU,V ∼P1 ,ξ                              .
                  dx                 ∂θk                         dx         ∂θk

Taking the derivative of the cross-entropy loss, we have
                                                                  

       d ∂Li (Θ; U (x), V (x))       d X           ∂(zij − zii ) 
                                 =            pij
      dx           ∂θk              dx                  ∂θk
                                              j̸=i
                                                               (i)
                                         X      dpij       dµTk′ vk′ (x) ∂(zij − zii )
                                     =            (i)
                                              T                 dx           ∂θk
                                       j̸=i dµk′ vk′ (x)

                                       X                 dzii          T (i)          x        ∂(zij − zii )
                                     =      −pij pii        (i)
                                                                      µ  ′
                                                                       k k′u  −  √        ξ
                                                     dµTk′ vk′ (x)                 1 − x2          ∂θk
                                       j̸=i

where the variables zij and pij are the similarity scores and the softmaxes from the data (U (x), V (x)). Here
                                                                               ∂z
the first line is by Lemma E.2, and the second line holds by chain rule since ∂θijk − ∂z
                                                                                      ∂θk does not depend on
                                                                                         ii

 (i)
vk′ . The third line uses the proof of Claim E.14 to take the derivative of pij , and Equation 21 to take the
                    (i)
derivative of µTk′ vk′ (x).
                               (i) x
Now we reparameterize µTk′ uk′ − √1−x 2
                                        ξ as follows:

                    T (i)        x                1            (i)    x        (i)
                   µk′ uk′ − √         ξ=            2
                                                         µTk′ uk′ −        µT v (x).
                                                                          2 k′ k′
                                1−x  2         1 −  x               1 − x
                                                dzii
Plugging in this reparameterization and           (i)  = θkT′ µk′ θkT′ uk′ , we obtain
                                             dµT v (x)
                                               k′ k′


                                                                                                ∂(z − z )
 d            ∂Li (Θ; U, V )       −1 X                   T       T
                                                                            T (i)    T (i)         ij   ii
   EU,V ∼Px                    =        EU,V ∼Px pij pii θk′ µk′ θk′ uk′ µk′ uk′ − xµk′ vk′                  .
dx                 ∂θk           1 − x2                                                             ∂θk
                                              j̸=i


We now prove Lemmas E.8, E.9, E.10, and E.11.

                                                                                         (i)            (i)
Notation. Since i is fixed throughout, we drop the (i) superscripts and let uk = uk and vk = vk . We will
introduce the following random variables, which are all independent, to simplify the exposition:
                    (j)
       • ξj := θkT vk for j ̸= i. Thus ξj ∼ N (0, ∥θk ∥2 ).
                     (j)
       • ξj′ := θkT′ vk′ for j ̸= i. Thus ξj′ ∼ N (0, ∥θk′ ∥2 ).


                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       ∥                                                                            ∥
         • ξi := (θk⊥ )T vk + (θk )T (vk − αk uk ). Thus ξi ∼ N (0, ∥θk⊥ ∥2 + (1 − αk2 )∥θk ∥2 ).
                                                                              ∥
         • ξi′ := (θk⊥′ )T vk′ . Thus ξi′ ∼ N (0, ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥2 ).
                          ∥                                                                  ∥
         • ζi′ := (θk′ )T (vk′ − αk′ uk′ ). Thus ζi′ ∼ N (0, (1 − αk2 ′ )∥θk′ ∥2 ).
                      ∥                                  ∥
         • y = (θk )T uk . Thus y ∼ N (0, ∥θk ∥2 ).
                      ∥                                          ∥
         • y ′ = (θk′ )T uk′ . Thus y ′ ∼ N (0, ∥θk′ ∥2 ).
         • ηi := (θk⊥ )T uk . Thus ηi ∼ N (0, ∥θk⊥ ∥2 ).
         • ηi′ := (θk⊥′ )T uk′ . Thus ηi′ ∼ N (0, ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ).
                                            2
For any such random variable X, we use σX       to denote its variance. Observe that

                                                                            T      T (j)               T        T (j)
                                                                    exp   θ   u  θ  v        exp     θ     u  ′θ ′v ′
                     T    T
                                         T       T

pii pij        exp θk uk θk vk exp θk′ uk′ θk′ vk′                          k  k  k k                  k ′  k   k k
        =                                                                                                                     .
qii qij               T    T  (j ′ )          T      T  (j ′ )                 T     T   (j ′ )                       (j ′ )
          E ′ exp θ u θ v
               j ∼q           k     k kexp θ ′ u ′ θ ′ v ′
                                           k                 k   E ′ exp θ u θ v
                                                                     k    k       k   j ∼q        exp θ ′ u ′ θT′ v ′
                                                                                                  k    k k
                                                                                                            T
                                                                                                              k               k    k   k    k


We will use the following two claims in the proofs of all four lemmas.
                                                                                                   (j ′ )             (j ′ )

Claim E.14. For β ∈ {ξj , ξj′ , ξi , ξi′ , ζi′ , ηi , ηi′ , x, x′ }, let β̄j ′ := ∂β
                                                                                   ∂
                                                                                       θkT uk θkT vk + θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ . Then

                                           ∂pii pij
                                                    ≤ pii pij |β̄j | + |β̄i | + 2Ej ′ ∼q |β̄j ′ | .
                                             ∂β
If additionally γ ∈ {ξj , ξj′ , ξi , ξi′ , ζi′ , ηi , ηi′ } and γ ⊥ {β̄j ′ }j ′ ∈[m] , then
 ∂ ∂pii pij
            ≤ pii pij             |β̄j | + |β̄i | + 2Ej ′ ∼q |β̄j ′ | (|γ̄j | + |γ̄i | + 2Ej ′ ∼q |γ̄j ′ |) + 2Ej ′ ∼q |β̄j ′ γ̄j ′ | + 2(Ej ′ ∼q |β̄j ′ |)(Ej ′ ∼q |γ̄j ′ |) .
 ∂γ ∂β

                                                                                 ij                p
Proof. By a straightforward quotient-rule computation of the derivative of qij      , recalling that qij is independent
of S, we obtain
                                      ∂pij
                                           = pij β̄j − Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ pij ′ .
                                       ∂β
By applying product to the expression above, we obtain
                               ∂pii pij
                                        = pii pij β̄j + β̄i − 2Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ pij ′ .
                                 ∂β
Taking absolute values and using the fact that pij ′ ≤ 1, we obtain the first result.
                                                                                                                                       ∂p
Next we take the derivative of pij with respect to both β and γ. Using the expression above for ∂βij , we
obtain
 ∂ ∂pij
         = pij β̄j − Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ pij ′ (γ̄j − Ej ′ ∼q γ̄j ′ pij ′ ) − Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ γ̄j ′ pij ′ + (Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ pij ′ )(Ej ′ ∼q γ̄j ′ pij ′ ) ,
∂γ ∂β
and
 ∂ ∂pii pij
            = pii pij β̄j + β̄i − 2Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ pij ′ (γ̄j + γ̄i − 2Ej ′ ∼q γ̄j ′ pij ′ ) − 2Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ γ̄j ′ pij ′ + 2(Ej ′ ∼q β̄j ′ pij ′ )(Ej ′ ∼q γ̄j ′ pij ′ )
∂γ ∂β
The second result follows by taking absolute values and the fact that pij ′ ≤ 1.


                                                                         25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Claim E.15.
 pij
                        (j)

                                                (j)
                                                            h
                                                                              (j ′ )

                                                                                                      (j ′ )
                                                                                                              i
     ≤ exp |θkT uk θkT vk | exp |θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ | Ej ′ ∼q exp |θkT uk θkT vk | exp |θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ | .
 qij

Proof. This follows directly from using Jenson’s inequality on the distribution j ′ ∼ q to show that
                           1                                           h
                                                                                 T      T (j )
                                                                                               ′

                                                                                                            T         T (j )
                                                                                                                              ′
                                                                                                                                 i
       h                                                    i ≤ Ej ′ ∼q exp   −θk  uk θ  v
                                                                                        k k        exp   −θ k ′ u k ′θ ′v ′
                                                                                                                      k k
                        (j ′ )                      (j ′ )
Ej ′ ∼q exp θkT uk θkT vk        exp θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′
                                                                                         (j ′ )                        (j ′ )
                                                                       h                                                        i
                                                              ≤ Ej ′ ∼q exp |θkT uk θkT vk | exp |θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ | .



Claim E.16.
                                                 pij
                                                    1− ≤ Zj − 1,
                                                 qij
                                                                                   (j ′ )                  (j ′ )
                                                                 h                                                 i
                             (j)                     (j)
where Zj := exp |θkT uk θkT vk | exp |θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ | Ej ′ ∼q exp |θkT uk θkT vk | exp |θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ | .

                                                                                     pij
Proof. Note that for any x ≥ 0, we have |1 − x| ≤ max x − 1, x1 − 1 . By Claim E.15, qij

                                                                                         − 1 is at most
the desired value given in this claim.
Now
                                      ′                           ′
               h                                                     i
           ′ ∼q exp
                        T       T (j )             T        T (j )
 qij   E j            θ k u k θ  v
                                k k        exp   θ k ′ uk ′θ ′v ′
                                                            k k
     =
 pij                T       T   (j)           T
              exp θk uk θk vk exp θk′ uk′ θk′ vk′       T   (j)


                                                                              (j ′ )                  (j ′ )
                                                                     h                                        i
                          (j)                           (j)
     ≤ exp |θkT uk θkT vk | exp |θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ | Ej ′ ∼q exp |θkT uk θkT vk | exp |θkT′ uk′ θkT′ vk′ | .

This yields the claim.

Proof of Lemma E.8. Expanding h(S) − h1 (S), we see that we need to control the following terms:

       1. (a) ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′     µk uk ξj , (b) ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                     T                                                        T
                                                                                                                 µk uk ξj

       2. (a) ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′     µk uk ξi , (b) ES pii pij (y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                     T                                                         T
                                                                                                                 µk uk ξi

       3. (a) αk ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′      µk uk y , (b) αk ES pii pij (y ′ (−xξi′ )) µTk uk y
                                                        T

                 h                                                        i
                                                                  (j)
       4. (a) ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′      ξi (vk − vk )T µk
                  h                                                        i
                                                                   (j)
          (b) ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′       ξi (vk − vk )T µk
                    h                                                      i
                                                                  (j)
       5. (a) αk ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′      y(vk − vk )T µk
                  h                                                             i
                                                                        (j)
          (b) ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′      y(vk − αk uk − vk )T µk


                                                         26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We begin by bounding the terms where the expression after pii pij has two independent mean-0 terms, mainly
(1a), (2a), (4a). The first step is to apply Stein’s Lemma (Lemma E.3) twice to these two terms, which we
will call β and γ. Let βγg(S \ {β, γ}) be the terms after pii pij . Then we have

                                                                ∂ ∂pii pij
                  |ES [pii pij βγg(S \ {β, γ})]| ≤ σβ2 σγ2 ES              |g(S \ {β, γ})| .
                                                                ∂γ ∂β

                                                                                   ∂ ∂pii pij
Next we apply the final result in Claim E.14 to bound the absolute value of        ∂γ  ∂β            . Once we do this, we
achieve
                                                                                                                   
                                                                                     X
         |ES [pii pij βγg(S \ {β, γ})]| ≤ σβ2 σγ2 qii qij ES Z|g(S \ {β, γ})|                  cj ′ ,ℓ |β¯j ′ ||γ¯ℓ | ,
                                                                                   j ′ ,ℓ∈[m]
       P                                                              pii pij
where j ′ ,ℓ∈[m] cj ′ ,ℓ ≤ C for some constant C, and Z :=            qii qij . Finally, we use the bound on Z from
Claim E.15, and then Lemma E.4 to take the expectation over S, iteratively applying Lemma E.4 to each
variable in S. Thus we have, for some (different) constant C,

      1. ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                T
                                                  µk uk ξj          ≤    Cqii qij ση2′ σξ2j ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥  =
                                                                                     i
                     ⊥ 2             3                  3     3
          Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥ ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥ ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥ ∥θk ∥ .

      2. ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                T
                                                  µk uk ξi          ≤    Cqii qij ση2′ σξ2i ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥  ≤
                                                                                     i
                     ⊥ 2             3                  3     3
          Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥ ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥ ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥ ∥θk ∥ .
              h                                                       i
                                                              (j)
      3. ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′       ξi (vk − vk )T µk    ≤ Cqii qij ση2′ σξ2i ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥ ≤
                                                                                                       i

         Cqii qij ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥3 ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥3 .

Now we consider the remaining 7 terms. Here we decompose the expression inside the expectation as
pii pij βg(S \ β), where β ∈ S. We proceed as before, but we only apply Stein’s Lemma once, to β. Applying
                            ∂pii pij
Steins, the expression for ∂β        given in the first result of Claim E.14, we obtain
                                                                                                           

                                         ∂p ii p ij
                                                                                             X
   |ES [pii pij βg(S \ β)]| ≤ σβ2 ES                |g(S \ β)| ≤ σβ2 qii qij ES Z|g(S \ β)|   cj ′ |β¯j ′ | ,
                                            ∂β                                               ′             j ∈[m]
                                                                                                       (22)
       P                                                   p pij
where j ′ ∈[m] cj ′ ≤ C for some constant C, and Z := qii   ii qij
                                                                   . Finally, we plug in a bound   for Z in
Claim E.15, an use Lemma E.4 to take the expectation over S, again iteratively over each variable.
Thus we have, for some (different) constant C,

                                                                                   ∥                        ∥
      1. ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                T
                                                µk uk ξj    ≤ Cqii qij σξ2j ∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥ = Cqii qij ∥θk ∥3 ∥θk′ ∥.
                                                                                   ∥                        ∥
      2. ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                T
                                                µk uk ξi    ≤ Cqii qij σξ2i ∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥ ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk ∥3 ∥θk′ ∥.
                                                                                                                      ∥
      3. αk ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                   T
                                                   µk uk y                ≤       Cαk qii qij ση2′ ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥              =
                                                                                                       i
                                      ∥                           ∥
         Cαk qii qij ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥ ≤ Cαk qii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥.
                                                                             ∥                   ∥             ∥
      4. αk ES pii pij (y ′ (−xζi′ )) µTk uk y

                                                  ≤ Cαk qii qij σζ2′ ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥ = Cαk qii qij ∥θk′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥.
                                                                      i



                                                      27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



           h                                                        i
                                                           (j)                                                  ∥
      5. ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′     ξi (vk − vk )T µk               ≤      Cqii qij σξ2i ∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥       ≤
                            ∥
          Cqii qij ∥θk ∥3 ∥θk′ ∥.
              h                                                       i
                                                             (j)                                                    ∥
      6. αk ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′      x(vk − vk )T µk             ≤     Cαk qii qij ση2′ ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥     =
                                                                                                      i
                                       ∥                           ∥
          Cαk qii qij ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥ ≤ Cαk qii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥.
           h                                                               i
                                                                  (j)                                               ∥
      7. ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′      x(vk − αk uk − vk )T µk              ≤ Cqii qij σx2 ∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥ =
                     ∥              ∥
          Cqii qij ∥θk ∥2 ∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥.

Combining the bounds on these 10 terms proves the lemma:

                                                                  ∥                         ∥
     ES pii pij µTk (h(S) − h1 (S)) ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥3 + ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥3 + αk ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥ .


Proof of Lemma E.10. The proof of Lemma E.10 is nearly identical, besides some differences in the terms
we need to bound. We list them below:

      1. (a) ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′                   (b) ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                     T                                                        T
                                                     θk uk ξj                                                  θk uk ξj

      2. (a) ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′                   (b) ES pii pij (y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                     T                                                         T
                                                     θk uk ξi                                                   θk uk ξi

      3. (a) αk ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′                  (b) αk ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′ (ηi y)
                                                       T
                                                        θk uk y

      4. αk ES pii pij (y ′ (−xζi′ )) θkT uk y



We use the same approach as before. For the terms (1a) and (2a) we apply Stein’s Lemma to (ηi′ , ξj ) and
(ηi′ , ξi ) respectively. For (1b), (2b), (3a) and (3b) and (4), we apply Stein’s Lemma to ξj , ξi , ηi′ , ηi , and ξi′
respectively. Using Claim E.15 and then Lemma E.4 as before, we obtain the following result:

      1. ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                  T
                                                    θk uk ξj              ≤   Cqii qij ση2′ σξ2j ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥∥θk ∥       =
                                                                                         i
         Cqii qij ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥4 ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥4 .

      2. ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                  T
                                                    θk uk ξi              ≤   Cqii qij ση2′ σξ2i ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥∥θk ∥       ≤
                                                                                         i
         Cqii qij ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥4 ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥4 .
                                                                                                            ∥
      3. ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                  T
                                                    θk uk ξj              ≤     Cqii qij σξ2j ∥θk ∥∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥          =
                         4 ∥
          Cqii qij ∥θk ∥ ∥θk′ ∥
                                                                                                           ∥
      4. ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                T
                                                θk uk ξi                  ≤     Cqii qij σξ2i ∥θk ∥∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥          ≤
                         4 ∥
          Cqii qij ∥θk ∥ ∥θk′ ∥
                                                                                                                ∥
      5. αk ES pii pij ηi′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′
                                                   T
                                                   θk uk y                ≤    Cαk qii qij ση2′ ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥∥θk ∥        =
                                                                                              i
                                            ∥
          Cαk qii qij ∥θk⊥′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥∥θk ∥


                                                      28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                         ∥       ∥
      6. αk ES pii pij y ′ µTk′ uk′ − xµTk′ vk′ (ηi y)

                                                                       ≤        Cαk qii qij ση2i ∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥        =
                                     ∥     ∥
          Cαk qii qij ∥θk⊥ ∥2 ∥θk ∥∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥.
                                                                                                             ∥
      7. αk ES pii pij (y ′ (−xζi′ )) θkT uk y

                                                                ≤            Cαk qii qij σζ2′ ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥∥θk ∥           ≤
                                                                                           i
                        ∥                  ∥
          Cαk qii qij ∥θk′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥∥θk ∥.

Combining the bounds on these 7 terms, proves the lemma:

                                                              ∥                              ∥       ∥            ∥
 ES pii pij θkT (h(S) − h1 (S)) ≤ Cqii qij ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥4 + ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥4 + αk ∥θk′ ∥3 ∥θk ∥∥θk ∥ + ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥3 ∥θk ∥ .


We now prove the lemmas on the non-junk terms.

Proof of Lemma E.9.
   h                                                      i
               ∥                                  ∥
ES pii pij (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ 2µTk uk αk (θk )T uk
          h                                                     i     h                                                        i
                       ∥                                 ∥                                   ∥                        ∥
   = ES qii qij (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ 2µTk uk αk (θk )T uk + ES (pii pij − qii qij ) (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ 2µTk uk αk (θk )T uk

                                                     pii pij       ∥

                                                                                               ∥
   = 2αk qii qij θkT′ µk′ θkT µk + 2αk qii qij ES            − 1 (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ µTk uk (θk )T uk .
                                                     qii qij
                                      p p
Now by Claim E.16, we have qii         ij
                                   ii qij
                                          − 1 ≤ Zi Zj − 1 (where the variable’s Zi , Zj are defined in the
Claim E.16) so

        pii pij          ∥ T      T

                                             T     ∥ T
                                                                   h
                                                                                   ∥                        ∥
                                                                                                                    i
 ES              − 1 (θk′ ) uk′ uk′ µk′ µk uk (θk ) uk       ≤ ES (Zi Zj − 1) (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ µTk uk (θk )T uk
         qii qij
                                                                                     ∥      ∥
                                                             ≤ C ∥θk ∥2 + ∥θk′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥∥θk ∥.
Here the second inequality follows from applying Lemma E.5 first, and then Lemma E.4 repeatedly for the
remainder of the variables in S. This proves the lemma. Note that we need to apply Lemma E.5 several times
to a single variable X ∈ S. Indeed we can write
                   ∥                           ∥
 (Zi Zj − 1) (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ µTk uk (θk )T uk = (Eℓ exp(|tℓ X|)Sℓ − 1) B|X|c
                                                = (Eℓ Sℓ (exp(|tℓ X|) − 1)) B|X|c + (Eℓ Sℓ − 1)) B|X|c
for some distribution on ℓ, and for some terms Sℓ , tℓ , and B that are independent of X, and c ∈ {0, 1, 2}.
Then to take the expectation of this term over X, we first apply Lemma E.5 to on X to the first term, and
iteratively apply Lemma E.5 to the random variables appearing in the next terms.

Proof of Lemma E.11.
   1                  T
                                     h
                                                     ∥ T          T

                                                                                ∥ T             ∥ T
                                                                                                        i
       E S  pii pij θ k h1 (S)  = ES   pii pij    (θ k ′ ) u k ′ u ′ µk ′
                                                                  k         2(θ k )  u k αk  (θ k ) uk
1 − x2
                                     h                                                            i
                                                    ∥ T                              ∥
                                = ES qii qij (θk′ ) uk′ uTk′ µk′ 2αk ((θk )T uk )2
                                            h                                                                   i
                                                                          ∥                             ∥
                                    + ES (pii pij − qii qij ) (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ 2αk ((θk )T uk )2
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                           ∥                            pii pij           ∥

                                                                                                                             ∥
                                = 2αk qii qij θkT′ µk′ ∥θk ∥2 + 2αk qii qij ES                    − 1 (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ (θk )T uk      .
                                                                                        qii qij

                                                       29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               p p
                              ii ij
Now by Claim E.16, we have qii  qij − 1 ≤ Zi Zj − 1, so
                                                  2                                                    2
      pii pij        ∥

                                         ∥                                ∥

                                                                                              ∥
ES            − 1 (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ (θk )T uk      ≤ ES (Zi Zj − 1) (θk′ )T uk′ uTk′ µk′ (θk )T uk
      qii qij
                                                                            ∥ ∥
                                                      ≤ C ∥θk ∥2 + ∥θk′ ∥2 ∥θk′ ∥θk ∥2 ,
Again the second inequality follows from applying Lemma E.5 first (several times as described in the previous
lemma), and then Lemma E.4 repeatedly for the remainder of the variables in S. Taking absolute values
proves the lemma.


                                                 30
