Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G REEDY ACTOR -C RITIC : A N EW C ONDITIONAL
C ROSS -E NTROPY M ETHOD FOR P OLICY I MPROVEMENT
 Samuel Neumann, Sungsu Lim, Ajin Joseph, Yangchen Pan, Adam White, Martha White
 Department of Computing Science
 University of Alberta
 Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
 {sfneuman,amw8,whitem}@ualberta.ca



                                             A BSTRACT

         Many policy gradient methods are variants of Actor-Critic (AC), where a value
         function (critic) is learned to facilitate updating the parameterized policy (actor).
         The update to the actor involves a log-likelihood update weighted by the action-
         values, with the addition of entropy regularization for soft variants. In this work,
         we explore an alternative update for the actor, based on an extension of the cross
         entropy method (CEM) to condition on inputs (states). The idea is to start with a
         broader policy and slowly concentrate around maximally valued actions, using a
         maximum likelihood update towards actions in the top percentile per state. The
         speed of this concentration is controlled by a proposal policy, that concentrates
         at a slower rate than the actor. We first provide a policy improvement result in
         an idealized setting, and then prove that our conditional CEM (CCEM) strategy
         tracks a CEM update per state, even with changing action-values. We empirically
         show that our GreedyAC algorithm, that uses CCEM for the actor update, performs
         better than Soft Actor-Critic and is much less sensitive to entropy-regularization.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Many policy optimization strategies update the policy towards the Boltzmann policy. This strategy
became popularized by Soft Q-Learning (Haarnoja et al., 2017) and Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja
et al., 2018a), but has a long history in reinforcement learning (Kober & Peters, 2008; Neumann,
2011). In fact, recent work (Vieillard et al., 2020a; Chan et al., 2021) has highlighted that an even
broader variety of policy optimization methods can be seen as optimizing either a forward or reverse
KL divergence to the Boltzmann policy, as in SAC. In fact, even the original Actor-Critic (AC) update
(Sutton, 1984) can be seen as optimizing a reverse KL divergence, with zero-entropy.
The use of the Boltzmann policy underlies many methods for good reason: it guarantees policy
improvement (Haarnoja et al., 2018a). More specifically, this is the case when learning entropy-
regularized action-values QПҖП„ for a policy ПҖ with regularization parameter П„ > 0. The Boltzmann
policy for a state is proportional to exp(QПҖП„ (s, a)П„ вҲ’1 ). The level of emphasis on high-valued actions
is controlled by П„ : the higher the magnitude of the entropy level (larger П„ ), the less the probabilities
in the Boltzmann policy are peaked around maximally valued actions.
This choice, however, has several limitations. The policy improvement guarantee is for the entropy-
regularized MDP, rather than the original MDP. Entropy regularization is used to encourage explo-
ration (Ziebart et al., 2008; Mei et al., 2019) and improve the optimization surface (Ahmed et al., 2019;
Shani et al., 2020), resulting in a trade-off between improving the learning process and converging
to the optimal policy. Additionally, SAC and other methods are well-known to be sensitive to the
entropy regularization parameter (Pourchot & Sigaud, 2019). Prior work has explored optimizing
entropy during learning (Haarnoja et al., 2018b), however, this optimization introduces yet another
hyperparameter to tune, and this approach may be less performant than a simple grid search (see
Appendix D). It is reasonable to investigate alternative policy improvement approaches that could
potentially improve our actor-critic algorithms.

    Code available at https://github.com/samuelfneumann/GreedyAC.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this work we propose a new greedification strategy towards this goal. The basic idea is to iteratively
take the top percentile of actions, ranked according to the learned action-values. The procedure slowly
concentrates on the maximal action(s), across states, for the given action-values. The update itself
is simple: N вҲҲ N actions are sampled according to a proposal policy, the actions are sorted based
on the magnitude of the action-values, and the policy is updated to increase the probability of the
вҢҲПҒN вҢү maximally valued actions for ПҒ вҲҲ (0, 1). We call this algorithm for the actor Conditional CEM
(CCEM), because it is an extension of the well-known Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) (Rubinstein,
1999) to condition on inputs1 . We leverage theory for CEM to validate that our algorithm concentrates
on maximally valued actions across states over time. We introduce GreedyAC, a new AC algorithm
that uses CCEM for the actor.
GreedyAC has several advantages over using Boltzmann greedification. First, we show that our new
greedification operator ensures a policy improvement for the original MDP, rather than a different
entropy-regularized MDP. Second, we can still leverage entropy to prevent policy collapse, but only
incorporate it into the proposal policy. This ensures the agent considers potentially optimal actions
for longer, but does not skew the actor. In fact, it is possible to decouple the role of entropy for
exploration and policy collapse within GreedyAC: the actor could have a small amount of entropy
to encourage exploration, and the proposal policy a higher level of entropy to avoid policy collapse.
Potentially because of this decoupling, we find that GreedyAC is much less sensitive to the choice
of entropy regularizer, as compared to SAC. This design of the algorithm may help it avoid getting
stuck in a locally optimal action, and empirical evidence for CEM suggests it can be quite effective
for this purpose (Rubinstein & Kroese, 2004). In addition to our theoretical support for CCEM, we
provide an empirical investigation comparing GreedyAC, SAC, and a vanilla AC, highlighting that
GreedyAC performs consistently well, even in problems like the Mujoco environment Swimmer and
pixel-based control where SAC performs poorly.

2       BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
The interaction between the agent and environment is formalized by a Markov decision process
(S, A, P, R, Оі), where S is the state space, A is the action space, P : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ [0, вҲһ) is the
one-step state transition dynamics, R : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ R is the reward function, and Оі вҲҲ [0, 1] is the
discount rate. We assume an episodic problem setting, where the start state S0 вҲј d0 for start state
distribution d0 : S вҶ’ [0, вҲһ) and the length of the episode T is random, depending on when the agent
reaches termination. At each discrete timestep t = 1, 2, . . . , T , the agent finds itself in some state
St and selects an action At drawn from its stochastic policy ПҖ : S Г— A вҶ’ [0, вҲһ). The agent then
                                                                                .
transitions to state St+1 according to P and observes a scalar reward Rt+1 = R(St , At , St+1 ).
For a parameterized policy ПҖw with parameters w, the agent attempts to maximize the objective
              PT
J(w) = EПҖw [ t=0 Оі t Rt+1 ], where the expectation is according to start state distribution d0 , tran-
sition dynamics P, and policy ПҖw . Policy gradient methods, like REINFORCE (Williams, 1992),
attempt to obtain (unbiased) estimates of the gradient of this objective to directly update the policy.
The difficulty is that the policy gradient is expensive to sample, because it requires sampling return
trajectories from states sampled from the visitation distribution under ПҖw , as per the policy gradient
theorem (Sutton et al., 1999). Theory papers analyze such an idealized algorithm (Kakade & Langford,
2002; Agarwal et al., 2021), but in practice this strategy is rarely used. Instead, it is much more
common to (a) ignore bias in the state distribution (Thomas, 2014; Imani et al., 2018; Nota & Thomas,
2020) and (b) use biased estimates of the return, in the form of a value function critic. The action-value
                    .      PT вҲ’t
function QПҖ (s, a) = EПҖ [ k=1 Оі t Rt+k |St = s, At = a] is the expected return from a given state and
action, when following policy ПҖ. Many PG methodsвҖ”specifically variants of Actor-CriticвҖ”estimate
these action-values with parameterized QОё (s, a), to use the update QОё (s, a)вҲҮ ln ПҖw (a|s) or one with
a baseline [QОё (s, a) вҲ’ V (s)]вҲҮ ln ПҖw (a|s) where the value function V (s) is also typically learned.
The state s is sampled from a replay buffer, and a вҲј ПҖw (В·|s), for the update.
    1
    CEM has been used for policy optimization, but for two very different purposes. It has been used to directly
optimize the policy gradient objective (Mannor et al., 2003; Szita & LoМҲrincz, 2006). CEM has also been used to
solve for the maximal actionвҖ”running CEM each time we want to find maxвҖІa Q(S вҖІ , aвҖІ )вҖ”for an algorithm called
QT-Opt (Kalashnikov et al., 2018). A follow-up algorithm adds an explicit deterministic policy to minimize a
squared error to this maximal action (Simmons-Edler et al., 2019) and another updates the actor with this action
rather than the on-policy action (Shao et al., 2022). We do not directly use CEM, but rather extend the idea
underlying CEM to provide a new policy update.


                                                       2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


There has been a flurry of work, and success, pursuing this path, including methods such as OffPAC
(Degris et al., 2012b), SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018a), SQL (Haarnoja et al., 2017), TRPO (Schulman
et al., 2015) and many other variants of related ideas (Peters et al., 2010; Silver et al., 2014; Schulman
et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2017; Gu et al., 2017; Schulman et al., 2017;
Abdolmaleki et al., 2018; Mei et al., 2019; Vieillard et al., 2020b). Following close behind are
unification results that make sense of this flurry of work (Tomar et al., 2020; Vieillard et al., 2020a;
Chan et al., 2021; LazicМҒ et al., 2021). They highlight that many methods include a mirror descent
componentвҖ”to minimize KL to the most recent policyвҖ”and an entropy-regularization component
(Vieillard et al., 2020a). In particular, these methods are better thought of as (approximate) policy
iteration approaches that update towards the Boltzmann policy, in some cases using a mirror descent
update. The Boltzmann policy BП„ Q(s, a) for a given Q is

                                                  exp(Q(s, a)П„ вҲ’1 )
                                 BП„ Q(s, a) = R                                                        (1)
                                                 A
                                                   exp(Q(s, b)П„ вҲ’1 )db

for entropy parameter П„ . As П„ вҶ’ 0, this policy puts all weight on greedy actions. As П„ вҶ’ вҲһ, all
actions are weighted uniformly. This policy could be directly used as the new greedy policy. However,
because it is expensive to sample from BП„ Q(s, a), typically a parameterized policy ПҖw is learned
to approximate BП„ Q(s, a), by minimizing a KL divergence. As the entropy goes to zero, we get an
unregularized update that corresponds to the vanilla AC update (Chan et al., 2021).

3    C ONDITIONAL CEM
Though using the Boltzmann policy has been successful, it does have some limitations. The primary
limitation is that it is sensitive to the choice of entropy (Pourchot & Sigaud, 2019; Chan et al., 2021).
A natural question is what other strategies we can use for this greedification step in these approximate
policy iteration algorithms, and how they compare to this common approach. We propose and
motivate a new approach in this section, and then focus the paper on providing insight into its benefits
and limitations, in contrast to using the Boltzmann policy.
Let us motivate our approach, by describing the well-known global optimization algorithm called the
Cross Entropy Method (CEM) (Rubinstein, 1999). Global optimization strategies are designed to find
the global optimum of a general function f (ОІ) for some parameters ОІ. For example, for parameters ОІ
of a neural network, f may be the loss function on a sample of data. An advantage of these methods
is that they do not rely on gradient-based strategies, which are prone to getting stuck in local optima.
Instead, they use randomized search strategies, that have optimality guarantees in some settings (Hu
et al., 2012) and have been shown to be effective in practice (Peters & Schaal, 2007; Hansen et al.,
2003; Szita & LoМҲrincz, 2006; Salimans et al., 2017).
CEM maintains a distribution p(ОІ) over parameters ОІ, iteratively narrowing the range of plausible
solutions. The algorithm maintain a current threshold ft , that slowly increases over time as it narrows
on the maximal ОІ. On iteration t, N parameter vectors ОІ1 , . . . , ОІN are sample from pt ; the algorithm
only keeps ОІ1вҲ— , . . . , ОІhвҲ— where f (ОІiвҲ— ) вүҘ ft and discards the rest. The KL divergence is reduced
between pt and this empirical distribution IЛҶ = {ОІ1вҲ— , . . . , ОІhвҲ— }, for h вүӨ N . This step corresponds to
increasing the likelihood of the ОІ in the set I.ЛҶ Iteratively, the distribution over parameters pt narrows
around ОІ with higher values under f . To make it more likely to find the global optimum, the initial
distribution p0 is a wide distribution, such as a Gaussian distribution with mean zero Вө0 = 0 and a
diagonal covariance ОЈ0 of large magnitude.
CEM attempts to find the single-best set of optimal parame-
ters for a single optimization problem. The straightforward Algorithm 1 Percentile Empirical
use in reinforcement learning is to learn the single-best set Distribution(N, ПҒ)
of policy parameters w (Szita & LoМҲrincz, 2006; Mannor          Evaluate and sort in descending order:
et al., 2003). Our goal, however, is to (repeatedly) find       QОё (St , ai1 ) вүҘ . . . вүҘ QОё (St , aiN )
maximally valued actions aвҲ— conditioned on each state           return I(SЛҶ t ) = {ai , . . . , ai }
                                                                                        1         h
for Q(s, В·). The global optimization strategy could be run      (where h = вҢҲПҒN вҢү )
on each step to find the exact best action for each current
state, as in QT-Opt (Kalashnikov et al., 2018) and follows-ups (Simmons-Edler et al., 2019; Shao
et al., 2022), but this is expensive and throws away prior information about the function surface
obtained when previous optimizations were executed.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We extend CEM to be (a) conditioned on state and (b) learned iteratively over time. The key
modification when extending CEM to Conditional CEM (CCEM), to handle these two key differences,
is to introduce another proposal policy that concentrates more slowly. This proposal policy is entropy-
regularized to ensure that we keep a broader set of potential actions when sampling, in case changing
action-values are very different since the previous update to that state. The main policy (the actor)
does not use entropy regularization, allowing it to more quickly start acting according to currently
greedy actions, without collapsing. We visualize this in Figure 1.
                                                P
                                     вҲҮПҖ(s) =вҲҮ        ln(e
                                                        ПҖ (a|s))
                                                IвҲ—
                                      e
Q(s, В·)                                           +вҲҮH(e
                                                      ПҖ (В·|s))
               ПҖ
               e Proposal Policy


          IвҲ—                         IвҲ—                                 IвҲ—
                                                      P
Q(s, В·)                                   вҲҮПҖ(s) = вҲҮ        ln(ПҖ(a|s))


                                                                                       Time
                                                      IвҲ—
                    ПҖ Actor Policy


          Actions                     Actions                            Actions                ПҖ
                                                                                                e           ПҖ


Figure 1: In the left figure we see multiple updates for both policies of the CCEM in a single state.
We use uniform policies, for interpretability. In the rightmost figure, we show an actual progression
of CCEM with Gaussian policies, when executed on the action-values depicted in the leftmost figure.
The Actor policy (in black) concentrates more quickly than the Proposal policy (in red).
The CCEM algorithm is presented in Algorithm 2. On each step, the proposal policy, ПҖМғwtвҖІ (В·|St ), is
sampled to provide a set of actions a1 , . . . , aN from which we construct the empirical distribution
ЛҶ t ) = {aвҲ— , . . . , aвҲ— } of maximally valued actions. The actor parameters wt are updated using
I(S           1         h
a gradient ascent step on the log-likelihood of the actions I(S     ЛҶ t ). The proposal parameters wtвҖІ
are updated using a similar update, but with an entropy regularizer. To obtain I(S        ЛҶ t ), we select
  вҲ—                                   вҲ—
ai вҠӮ {a1 , . . . , aN } where Q(St , ai ) are in the top (1 вҲ’ ПҒ) quantile values. For example, for ПҒ = 0.2,
approximately the top 20% of actions are chosen, with h = вҢҲПҒN вҢү. Implicitly, ft is QОё (St , aвҲ—h ) for aвҲ—h
the action with the lowest value in this top percentile. This procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Greedy Actor-Critic, in Algorithm 3, puts this all together. We use experience replay, and the CCEM
                                                                        ЛҶ
algorithm on a mini-batch. The updates
                                   1
                                              P obtaining the sets I(S) for every S in the mini-batch
                                      P involve
B and updating with the gradient |B|     SвҲҲB        ЛҶ
                                                  aвҲҲI(S) вҲҮ  w ln  ПҖ w (a|S). The Sarsa update to the critic
involves (1) sampling an on-policy P action from the actor A вҲј ПҖw (В·|S вҖІ ) for each tuple in the mini-
                                                                вҖІ
                                 1                                        вҖІ  вҖІ
batch and (2) using the update |B|     (S,A,S вҖІ ,R,AвҖІ )вҲҲB (R + ОіQОё (S , A ) вҲ’ QОё (S, A))вҲҮОё QОё (S, A).
Other critic updates are possible; we discuss alternatives and connections to related algorithms in
Appendix A.
Algorithm 2 Conditional CEM for the Actor
                                                                Algorithm 3 Greedy Actor-Critic
  Input: St and QОё , N вҲҲ N, ПҒ вҲҲ (0, 1)
  if actions discrete and |A| вүӨ 1/ПҒ then                           Initialize parameters Оё, w, wвҖІ , replay buffer B
      ЛҶ t ) = arg maxaвҲҲA QОё (St , a)
     I(S                                                           Obtain initial state S
  else                                                             while agent interacting with the environment
     Sample N actions ai вҲј ПҖМғwвҖІ (В·|St )                            do
             ЛҶ t ) using Algorithm 1
     Obtain I(S                                                       Take action A вҲј ПҖw (В·|S), observe R, S вҖІ
                                                                      Add (S, A, S вҖІ , R) to the buffer B
  end if           P                                                  Grab a random mini-batch B from buffer B
  w вҶҗ w + Оұp,t aвҲҲI(S    ЛҶ t ) вҲҮw ln ПҖw (a|St )
                                                                      Update Оё using Sarsa for policy ПҖw on B
                                                                      Update w, wвҖІ using Algorithm 2 on B.
  wвҖІ вҶҗ wвҖІ+Оұp,t [ aвҲҲI(S
                 P
                       ЛҶ t )вҲҮwвҖІ ln ПҖМғwвҖІ(a|St )+
                                                                   end while
  П„ вҲҮwвҖІ H(ПҖМғwвҖІ(В·|St ))]

CCEM for Discrete Actions. Although we can use the same algorithm for discrete actions, we can
make it simpler when we have a small number of discrete actions. Our algorithm is designed around


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the fact that it is difficult to solve for the maximal action for QОё (St , a) for continuous actions; we
slowly identify this maximal action across states. For a small set of discrete actions, it is easy to get
this maximizing action. If |A| < 1/ПҒ, then the top percentile consists of the one top action (or the
                                                    ЛҶ t ) = arg maxaвҲҲA QОё (St , a) and do not need to
top actions if there are ties); we can directly set I(S
maintain a proposal policy. For this reason, we focus our theory on the continuous-action setting,
which is the main motivation for using CEM for the actor update.

4     T HEORETICAL G UARANTEES
In this section, we motivate that the target policy underlying CCEM guarantees policy improvement,
and characterize the ODE underlying CCEM. We show it tracks a CEM update in expectation across
states and slowly concentrates around maximally valued actions even while the action-values are
changing.

4.1 P OLICY I MPROVEMENT UNDER AN I DEALIZED S ETTING
We first consider the setting where we have access to QПҖ , as is typically done for characterizing
the policy improvement properties of an operator (Haarnoja et al., 2018a; Ghosh et al., 2020; Chan
et al., 2021) as well as for the original policy improvement theorem (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Our
update moves our policy towards a percentile-greedy policy that redistributes probability solely to the
                                                                              ПҒ
(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)-quantile according to magnitudes under Q(s, a). More formally, let fQ   (ПҖ; s) be the threshold
           R
such that {aвҲҲA|Q(s,a)вүҘf ПҒ (ПҖ;s)} ПҖ(a|s)da = ПҒ, namely that gives the set of actions in the top 1 вҲ’ ПҒ
                            Q
quantile, according to magnitudes under Q(s, В·). Then we can define the percentile-greedy policy as
                                       (
                                                                      ПҒ
                                         ПҖ(a|s)/ПҒ Q(s, a) вүҘ threshfQ    (ПҖ; s)
                      ПҖПҒ (a|s, Q, ПҖ) =                                                          (2)
                                         0         else

where diving by ПҒ renormalizes the distribution. Computing this policy would be onerous; instead,
we only sample the KL divergence to this policy, using a sample percentile. Nonetheless, this
percentile-greedy policy represents the target policy that the actor updates towards (in the limit of
samples N for the percentile).
Intuitively, this target policy should give policy improvement, as it redistributes weight for low valued
actions proportionally to high-valued actions. We formalize this in the following theorem. We write
ПҖПҒ (a|s) instead of ПҖПҒ (a|s, QПҖ , ПҖ), when it is clear from context.
Theorem 4.1. For a given policy ПҖ, action-value QПҖ and ПҒ > 0, the percentile-greedy policy ПҖПҒ in ПҖ
and QПҖ is guaranteed to be at least as good as ПҖ in all states:
                    Z                                    Z
                        ПҖПҒ (a|s, QПҖ , ПҖ)QПҖПҒ (s, a)da вүҘ       ПҖ(a|s)QПҖ (s, a)da
                        A                                      A


Proof. The proof is a straightforward modification of the policy improvement theorem. Notice that
   Z                                       Z                             Z
                                                ПҖ(a|s) ПҖ
       ПҖПҒ (a|s)QПҖ (s, a)da       =                     Q (s, a)da вүҘ         ПҖ(a|s)QПҖ (s, a)da
    A                                             ПҒ
                                                 ПҒ
                                    {aвҲҲA|Q(s,a)вүҘfQ (ПҖ;s)}                           A


                                                                       ПҖ(a|s)QПҖ (s, a)da = EПҖ [QПҖ (s, A)],
                                                               R
by the definition of percentiles, for any state s. Rewriting       A

    V ПҖ (s) = EПҖ [QПҖ (s, A)] вүӨ EПҖПҒ [QПҖ (s, A)] = EПҖПҒ [Rt+1 + ОіEПҖ [QПҖ (St+1 , At+1 )|St = s]
           вүӨ EПҖПҒ [Rt+1 + ОіEПҖПҒ [QПҖ (St+1 , At+1 )]|St = s]
           вүӨ EПҖПҒ [Rt+1 + ОіRt+2 + Оі 2 EПҖ [QПҖ (St+2 , At+2 )]|St = s]
          ...
           вүӨ EПҖПҒ [Rt+1 + ОіRt+2 + Оі 2 Rt+3 + . . . Оі T вҲ’1 RT |St = s] = EПҖПҒ [QПҖПҒ (s, A)] = V ПҖПҒ (s)

This result is a sanity check to ensure the target policy is sensible in our update. Note that the
Boltzmann policy only guarantees improvement under the entropy-regularized action-values.

                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2 CCEM T RACKS THE G REEDY ACTION
Beyond the idealized setting, we would like to understand the properties of the stochastic algorithm.
CCEM is not a gradient descent approach, so we need to reason about its dynamicsвҖ”namely the
underlying ODE. We expect CCEM to behave like CEM per state, but with some qualifiers. First,
CCEM uses a parameterized policy conditioned on state, meaning that there is aliasing between the
action distributions per state. CEM, on the other hand, does not account for such aliasing. We identify
conditions on the parameterized policy and use an ODE that takes expectations over states.
Second, the function we are attempting to maximize is also changing with time, because the action-
values are updating. We address this issue using a two-timescale stochastic approximation approach,
where the action-values QОё change more slowly than the policy, allowing the policy to track the
maximally valued actions. The policy itself has two timescales, to account for its own parameters
changing at different timescales. Actions for the maximum likelihood step are selected according to
older (slower) parameters wвҖІ , so that it is as if the primary (faster) parameters w are updated using
samples from a fixed distribution. These two policies correspond to our proposal policy (slow) and
actor (fast).
We show that the ODE for the CCEM parameters wt is based on the gradient
                                        h                                       i
                  вҲҮw(t) ESвҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) I{QОё (S,A)вүҘfОёПҒ (wвҖІ ;S)} ln ПҖw(t) (A|S)
where Оё and wвҖІ are changing at slower timescales, and so effectively fixed from the perspective of the
faster changing wt . The term per-state is exactly the update underlying CEM, and so we can think of
this ODE as one for an expected CEM Optimizer, across states for parameterized policies. We say
that CCEM tracks this expected CEM Optimizer, because Оё and wвҖІ are changing with time.
We provide an informal theorem statement here for Theorem B.1, with a proof-sketch. The main
result, including all conditions, is given in Appendix B. We discuss some of the (limitations of the)
conditions after the proof sketch.
Informal Result: Let Оёt be the action-value parameters with stepsize Оұq,t , and wt be the policy
parameters with stepsize Оұa,t , with wtвҖІ a more slowly changing set of policy parameters set to
wtвҖІ = (1 вҲ’ Оұa,t
             вҖІ
                 )wtвҖІ + Оұa,t
                         вҖІ                    вҖІ
                             wt for stepsize Оұa,t вҲҲ (0, 1]. Assume: (1) States St are sampled from a
fixed marginal distribution. (2) вҲҮw ln ПҖw (В·|s) is locally Lipschitz w.r.t. w, вҲҖs вҲҲ S. (3) Parameters
wt and Оёt remain bounded almost surely. (4) Stepsizes are chosen for three different timescales: wt
evolves faster than wtвҖІ and wtвҖІ evolves faster than Оёt . Under these four conditions, the CCEM Actor
tracks the expected CEM Optimizer.
Proof Sketch: The stochastic update to the Actor is not a direct gradient-descent update. Each update
to the Actor is a CEM update, which requires a different analysis to ensure that the stochastic noise
remains bounded and is asymptotically negligible. Further, the classical results of CEM also do not
immediately apply, because such updates assume distribution parameters can be directly computed.
Here, distribution parameters are conditioned on state, as outputs from a parametrized function. We
identify conditions on the parametrized policy to ensure well-behaved CEM updates.
The multi-timescale analysis allows us to focus on the updates of the Actor wt , assuming the action-
value parameter Оё and action-sampling parameter wвҖІ are quasi-static. These parameters are allowed
to change with timeвҖ”as they will in practiceвҖ”but are moving at a sufficiently slower timescale
relative to wt and hence the analysis can be undertaken as if they are static.
The first step in the proof is to formulate the update to the weights as a projected stochastic recursionвҖ”
simply meaning a stochastic update where after each update the weights are projected to a compact,
convex set to keep them bounded. The stochastic recursion is reformulated into a summation involving
the mean vector field g Оё (wt ) (which depends on the action-value parameters Оё), martingale noise,
and a loss term в„“Оёt that is due to having approximate quantiles. The key steps are then to show
almost surely that the mean vector field g Оё is locally Lipschitz, the martingale noise is quadratically
bounded and that the loss term в„“Оёt decays to zero asymptotically. For the first and second, we identify
conditions on the policy parameterization that guarantee these. For the final case, we adapt the
proof for sampled quantiles approaching true quantiles for CEM, with modifications to account for
expectations over the conditioning variable, the state.                                                  в– 
This result has several limitations. First, it does not perfectly characterize the CCEM algorithm that
we actually use. We do not use the update wtвҖІ = (1 вҲ’ Оұa,t    вҖІ
                                                                )wtвҖІ + Оұa,t
                                                                         вҖІ
                                                                            wt , and instead use entropy


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


regularization to make wtвҖІ concentrate more slowly than wt . The principle is similar; empirically we
found entropy regularization to be an effective strategy to achieve this condition.
Second, the theory assumes the state distribution is fixed, and not influenced by ПҖw . It is standard
to analyze the properties of (off-policy) algorithms for fixed datasets as a first step, as was done for
Q-learning (Jaakkola et al., 1994). It allows us to separate concerns, and just ask: does our method
concentrate on maximal actions across states? An important next step is to characterize the full
Greedy Actor-Critic algorithm, beyond just understanding the properties of the CCEM component.

5       E MPIRICAL R ESULTS
We are primarily interested in investigating sensitivity to hyperparameters. This sensitivity reflects
how difficult it can be to get AC methods working on a new taskвҖ”relevant for both applied settings
and research. AC methods have been notoriously difficult to tune due to the interacting time scales
of the actor and critic (Degris et al., 2012a), further compounded by the sensitivity in the entropy
scale. The use of modern optimizers may reduce some of the sensitivity in stepsize selection; these
experiments help understand if that is the case. Further, a very well-tuned algorithm may not be
representative of performance across problems. We particularly examine the impacts of selecting a
single set of hyperparameters across environments, in contrast to tuning per environment.
We chose to conduct experiments in small, challenging domains appropriately sized for extensive
experiment repetition. Ensuring significance in results and carefully exploring hyperparameter
sensitivity required many experiments. Our final plots required вҲј30,000 runs across all environments,
algorithms, and hyperparameters. Further, contrary to popular belief, classic control domains are
a challenge for Deep RL agents (Ghiassian et al., 2020), and performance differences in these
environments have been shown to extend to larger environments (Obando-Ceron & Castro, 2021).
5.1 A LGORITHMS
We focus on comparing GreedyAC to Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) both since this allows us to compare
to a method that uses the Boltzmann target policy on action-values and because SAC continues to
have the most widely reported success2 . We additionally include VanillaAC as a baseline, a basic AC
variant which does not include any of the tricks SAC utilizes to improve performance, such as action
reparameterization to estimate the policy gradient or double Q functions to mitigate maximization
bias. For discrete actions, policies are parameterized using Softmax distributions. For continuous
actions, policies are parameterized using Gaussian distributions, except SAC which uses a squashed
Gaussian policy as per the original work. We tested SAC with a Gaussian policy, and it performed
worse. All algorithms use neural networks. Feedforward networks consist of two hidden layers of 64
units (classic control environments) or 256 units (Swimmer-v3 environment). Convolutional layers
consists of one convolutional layer with 3 kernels of size 16 followed by a fully connected layer of
size 128. All algorithms use the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014), experience replay, and target
networks for the value functions. See Appendix C.1 for a full discussion of hyperparameters.
5.2 E NVIRONMENTS
We use the classic versions of Mountain Car (Sutton & Barto, 2018), Pendulum (Degris et al., 2012a),
and Acrobot (Sutton & Barto, 2018). Each environment is run with both continuous and discrete
action spaces; states are continuous. Discrete actions consist of the two extreme continuous actions
and 0. All environments use a discount factor of Оі = 0.99, and episodes are cut off at 1,000 timesteps,
teleporting the agent back to the start state (but not causing termination). To demonstrate the potential
of GreedyAC at scale, we also include experiments on Freeway and Breakout from MinAtar (Young
& Tian, 2019) as well as on Swimmer-v3 from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). On MinAtar,
episodes are cutoff at 2,500 timesteps.
In Mountain Car, the goal is to drive an underpowered car up a hill. State consists of the position
in [вҲ’1.2, 0.6] and velocity in [вҲ’0.7, 0.7]. The agent starts in a random position in [вҲ’0.6, вҲ’0.4] and
velocity 0. The action is the force to apply to the car, in [вҲ’1, 1]. The reward is -1 per step.
In Pendulum, the goal is to hold a pendulum with a fixed base in a vertical position. State consists
of the angle (normalized in [вҲ’ПҖ, ПҖ)) and angular momentum (in [вҲ’1, 1]). The agent starts with the
pendulum facing downwards and 0 velocity. The action is the torque applied to the fixed base, in
[вҲ’2, 2]. The reward is the cosine of the angle of the pendulum from the positive y-axis.
    2
        See https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/bench.html


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In Acrobot, the agent controls a doubly-linked pendulum with a fixed base. The goal is to swing
the second link one linkвҖҷs length above the fixed base. State consists of the angle of each link (in
[вҲ’ПҖ, ПҖ)) and the angular velocity of each link (in [вҲ’4ПҖ, 4ПҖ] and [вҲ’9ПҖ, 9ПҖ] respectively). The agent
starts with random angles and angular velocities in [вҲ’0.1, 0.1]. The action is the torque applied to
the joint between the two links, in [вҲ’1, 1]. The reward is -1 per step.


5.3     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

We sweep hyperparameters for 40 runs, tuning over the first 10 runs and reporting results using the final
30 runs for the best hyperparameters. We sweep critic step size Оұ = 10x for x вҲҲ {вҲ’5, вҲ’4, . . . , вҲ’1}.
We set the actor step size to be Оә Г— Оұ and sweep Оә вҲҲ 10вҲ’3 , 10вҲ’2 , 10вҲ’1 , 1, 2, 10 . We sweep
entropy scales П„ = 10y for y вҲҲ {вҲ’3, вҲ’2, вҲ’1, 0, 1}. For the classic control experiments, we used
fixed batch sizes of 32 samples and a replay buffer capacity of 100,000 samples. For the MinAtar
experiments, we used fixed batch sizes of 32 samples and a buffer capacity of 1 million. For the
Swimmer experiments, we used fixed batch sizes of 100 samples and a buffer capacity of 1 million.
For CCEM, we fixed ПҒ = 0.1 and sample N = 30 actions.
To select hyperparameters across environment, we must normalize performance to provide an
aggregate score. We use near-optimal performance as the normalizer for each environment, with
a score of 1 meaning equal to this performance. We only use this normalization to average scores
across environments. We report learning curves using the original unnormalized returns. For more
details, see Appendix C.2.

5.4     R ESULTS
Per-environment Tuning: We first
                                          100
                                                      Acrobot              100
                                                                                    Mountain Car 1000                  Pendulum
examine how well the algorithms can


                                                                                                                                         Continuous
                                                        Average Return


perform when they are tuned per-          550                              550                              250
environment. In Figure 2, we see that
SAC performs well in Pendulum-CA         1000                             1000                              600
(continuous actions) and in Pendulum-     100                              100                             1000
                                                        Average Return


DA (discrete actions) but poorly in the


                                                                                                                                         Discrete
other settings. SAC learns slower than    550                              550                              250
                                                                                                                                   GreedyAC
GreedyAC and VanillaAC on Acrobot.                                                                                                 SAC
                                                                                                                                   VanillaAC
                                         1000                             1000                              600
GreedyAC performs worse than SAC              0       Timesteps         1      0       Timesteps         1      0       Timesteps            1
                                                (Hundreds of Thousands)          (Hundreds of Thousands)          (Hundreds of Thousands)
in Pendulum-CA, but still performs
acceptably, nearly reaching the same Figure 2: Learning curves when tuning hyperparameters per-
final performance. SAC performs environment, averaged over 30 runs with standard errors.
poorly on both versions of Mountain
Car. That AC methods struggle with Acrobot is common wisdom, but here we see that both GreedyAC
and VanillaAC do well on this problem. GreedyAC is the clear winner in Mountain Car.
Across-environment Tuning: We             100
                                                      Acrobot              100
                                                                                    Mountain Car 1000                  Pendulum
                                                                                                                                         Continuous
                                                        Average Return


next examine the performance of the
algorithms when they are forced to se-    550                              550                              250

lect one hyperparameter setting across
continuous- or discrete-action envi-     1000                             1000                              600
                                          100                              100                             1000
ronments separately, shown in Fig-
                                                        Average Return


                                                                                                                                         Discrete


ure 3. We expect algorithms that are
                                          550                              550                              250
less sensitive to their parameters to                                                                                              GreedyAC
                                                                                                                                   SAC
suffer less degradation. Under this      1000                             1000
                                                                                                                                   VanillaAC
                                                                                                            600
regime, GreedyAC has a clear advan-           0       Timesteps         1      0       Timesteps         1      0       Timesteps            1
                                                (Hundreds of Thousands)          (Hundreds of Thousands)          (Hundreds of Thousands)
tage over SAC. GreedyAC maintains
acceptable performance across all en- Figure 3: Learning curves when tuning hyperparameters
vironments, sometimes learning more across-environments, averaged over 30 runs with standard
slowly than under per-environment errors.
tuning, but having reasonable behavior. SAC performs poorly on two-thirds of the environments.
GreedyAC is less sensitive than VanillaAC under across-environment tuning and performs at least as
good as VanillaAC.


                                                                         8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hyperparameter Sensitivity: We examine the sensitivity of GreedyAC and SAC to their entropy
scales, focusing on the continuous action environments. We plot sensitivity curves, with one plotted
for each entropy scale, with the stepsize on the x-axis and average return across all steps and all 40
runs on the y-axis. Because there are two stepsizes, we have two sets of plots. When examining
the sensitivity to the critic stepsize, we select the best actor stepsize. We do the same for the actor
stepsize plots. We provide the plots with individual lines in Appendix C.3 and here focus on a more
summarized view.
Figure 4 depicts the range of perfor-        100
                                                           Acrobot             100
                                                                                       Mountain Car             1000         Pendulum


                                                         Average Return


                                                                                                                                                          GreedyAC
mance obtained across entropy scales.
                                             550                               550                                 0
The plot is generated by filling in the
region between the curves for each en-      1000                              1000                              1000
                                                 -5     -4    -3     -2    -1      -5     -4    -3     -2    -1      -5     -4    -3     -2    -1
tropy scale. If this sensitivity region is                                                                      1000
                                             100                               100


                                                         Average Return
broad, then the algorithm performed


                                                                                                                                                          SAC
very differently across different en-        550                               550                                 0
tropy scales and so is sensitive to the
                                            1000                              1000                              1000
entropy. SAC has much wider sensi-               -5     -4    -3     -2    -1      -5     -4    -3     -2    -1      -5     -4    -3     -2    -1
                                                    Critic Step-Size (10 )            Critic Step-Size (10 )            Critic Step-Size (10 )
tivity regions than GreedyAC. Those
of GreedyAC are generally narrow, in- Figure 4: A sensitivity region plot for entropy, for
dicating that the stepsize rather than GreedyAC (top row) and SAC (bottom row) in the continu-
entropy was the dominant factor. Fur- ous action problems.
ther, the bands of performance are
generally at the top of the plot. When SAC exhibits narrower regions than GreedyAC, those regions
are lower on the plot, indicating overall poor performance.

6       S CALING G REEDY-AC
                                                                                  150                Online                         Offline
                                                                                                GreedyAC
                                                                                                SAC
                                                                          Average Return


                                                                                       75


                                                                                           00                          3   0                          3
                                                                                                Timesteps (Millions)           Timesteps (Millions)

               (a) Pixel-based control on MinAtar                           (b) Learning curves on Swimmer over 10 runs, red
                                                                            line denotes SACвҖҷs final performance
            Figure 5: Comparing GreedyAC and SAC in more challenging environments
We ran GreedyAC on two pixel-based control problems, Breakout and Freeway, from the MinAtar
suite (Young & Tian, 2019). Recent work has shown that MinAtar results are indicative of those in
much larger scale problems (Obando-Ceron & Castro, 2021). We set the actor step-size scale to 1.0
and a critic step-size of 10вҲ’3 for both GreedyAC and SACвҖ”the defaults of SAC. We set the entropy
scale of SAC to 10вҲ’3 based on a grid search. Figure 5a above clearly indicates GreedyAC can learn a
good policy from high-dimensional inputs; comparable performance to DQN Rainbow.
Finally, we ran GreedyAC on Swimmer-v3 from OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016). We tuned
over one run and then ran the tuned hyperparameters for an additional 9 runs to generate Figure 5b.
We report online and offline performance. Offline evaluation is performed every 10,000 steps, for
10 episodes, where only the mean action is selected and learning is disabled. We report SACвҖҷs final
performance on Swimmer from the SpinningUp benchmark3 . GreedyAC is clearly not state-of-the-art
hereвҖ”most methods are notвҖ”however, GreedyAC steadily improves throughout the experiment.
7       C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduced a new Actor-Critic (AC) algorithm called GreedyAC, that uses a new
update to the Actor based on an extension of the cross-entropy method (CEM). The idea is to (a) define
a percentile-greedy target policy and (b) update the actor towards this target policy, by reducing a KL
divergence to it. This percentile-greedy policy guarantees policy improvement, and we prove that our
Conditional CEM algorithm tracks the actions of maximal value under changing action-values. We
conclude with an in-depth empirical study, showing that GreedyAC has significantly lower sensitivity
to its hyperparameters than SAC does.
    3
        See https://spinningup.openai.com/en/latest/spinningup/bench.html


                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Remi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and Martin
  Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2018.
Alekh Agarwal, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, and Gaurav Mahajan. On the theory of policy
  gradient methods: Optimality, approximation, and distribution shift. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 22(98):1вҖ“76, 2021.
Zafarali Ahmed, Nicolas Le Roux, Mohammad Norouzi, and Dale Schuurmans. Understanding
  the impact of entropy on policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2019.
Vivek S Borkar. Stochastic approximation with two time scales. Systems & Control Letters, 29(5),
  1997.
Vivek S. Borkar. Stochastic Approximation: A Dynamical Systems Viewpoint. Cambridge University
  Press, 2008.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
Alan Chan, Hugo Silva, Sungsu Lim, Tadashi Kozuno, A. Rupam Mahmood, and Martha White.
  Greedification operators for policy optimization: Investigating forward and reverse kl divergences.
  In arXiv:2107.08285v1, 2021.
Thomas Degris, Patrick M Pilarski, and Richard S Sutton. Model-free reinforcement learning with
  continuous action in practice. In American Control Conference, 2012a.
Thomas Degris, Martha White, and Richard S. Sutton. Off-policy actor-critic. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2012b.
Richard Durrett. Probability: Theory and Examples (Wadsworth and Brooks/Cole Statis-
  tics/Probability Series). Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole Advanced Books & Software, 1991.
Amir-massoud Farahmand, Doina Precup, AndreМҒ MS Barreto, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh.
 Classification-based approximate policy iteration. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 2015.
Sina Ghiassian, Banafsheh Rafiee, Yat Long Lo, and Adam White. Improving performance in
  reinforcement learning by breaking generalization in neural networks. International Conference
  on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2020.
Dibya Ghosh, Marlos C. Machado, and Nicolas Le Roux. An operator view of policy gradient
  methods. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Shixiang Gu, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Zoubin Ghahramani, Richard E. Turner, and Sergey Levine.
  Q-prop: Sample-efficient policy gradient with an off-policy critic. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 2018a.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algorithms
  and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018b.
Nikolaus Hansen, Sibylle D. MuМҲller, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Reducing the time complexity of
  the derandomized evolution strategy with covariance matrix adaptation (cma-es). Evolutionary
  Computation, 11(1), 2003.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wassily Hoeffding. Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables. Journal of the
 American Statistical Association, 58(301), 1963.
Tito Homem-de Mello. A study on the cross-entropy method for rare-event probability estimation.
  INFORMS Journal on Computing, 19(3), 2007.
Jiaqiao Hu, Michael C Fu, and Steven I Marcus. A model reference adaptive search method for
   global optimization. Operations Research, 55(3), 2007.
Jiaqiao Hu, Ping Hu, and Hyeong Soo Chang. A stochastic approximation framework for a class of
   randomized optimization algorithms. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 57(1), 2012.
Ehsan Imani, Eric Graves, and Martha White. An off-policy policy gradient theorem using emphatic
  weightings. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Tommi Jaakkola, Michael I Jordan, and Satinder P Singh. On the convergence of stochastic iterative
  dynamic programming algorithms. Neural computation, 6(6):1185вҖ“1201, 1994.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2002.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Sergey Levine. Qt-opt:
 Scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on
 Robot Learning, 2018.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2014.
Jens Kober and Jan R Peters. Policy search for motor primitives in robotics. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2008.
Harold J. Kushner and Dean S. Clark. Stochastic Approximation Methods for Constrained and
  Unconstrained Systems. Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
Michail G Lagoudakis and Ronald Parr. Reinforcement learning as classification: Leveraging modern
 classifiers. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2003.
Alessandro Lazaric, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and ReМҒmi Munos. Analysis of a classification-based
  policy iteration algorithm. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2010.
Nevena LazicМҒ, Botao Hao, Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, Dale Schuurmans, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Opti-
  mization issues in kl-constrained approximate policy iteration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.06234,
  2021.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Shie Mannor, Reuven Rubinstein, and Yohai Gat. The cross entropy method for fast policy search. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2003.
Jincheng Mei, Chenjun Xiao, Ruitong Huang, Dale Schuurmans, and Martin MuМҲller. On princi-
   pled entropy exploration in policy optimization. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence, 2019.
Carl N Morris. Natural exponential families with quadratic variance functions. The Annals of
  Statistics, 1982.
Gerhard Neumann. Variational inference for policy search in changing situations. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
Chris Nota and Philip S. Thomas. Is the policy gradient a gradient? In International Conference on
  Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2020.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Johan S Obando-Ceron and Pablo Samuel Castro. Revisiting rainbow: Promoting more insightful and
  inclusive deep reinforcement learning research. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021.
Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and
 transfer reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Reinforcement learning by reward-weighted regression for operational
  space control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2007.
Jan Peters, Katharina MuМҲlling, and Yasemin AltuМҲn. Relative entropy policy search. In AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2010.
AloДұМҲs Pourchot and Olivier Sigaud. Cem-rl: Combining evolutionary and gradient-based methods for
  policy search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. In Herbert Robbins Selected
  Papers. Springer, 1985.
Reuven Rubinstein. The cross-entropy method for combinatorial and continuous optimization.
  Methodology And Computing In Applied Probability, 1(2), 1999.
Reuven Y Rubinstein and Dirk P Kroese. The cross-entropy method: a unified approach to com-
  binatorial optimization, Monte-Carlo simulation, and machine learning, volume 133. Springer,
  2004.
Reuven Y Rubinstein and Alexander Shapiro. Discrete Event Systems: Sensitivity Analysis and
  Stochastic Optimization by the Score Function Method, volume 1. Wiley New York, 1993.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a scalable alternative
  to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-dimensional
  continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Pranab K Sen and Julio M Singer. Large Sample Methods in Statistics (1994): An Introduction with
  Applications. CRC Press, 2017.
Lior Shani, Yonathan Efroni, and Shie Mannor. Adaptive trust region policy optimization: Global
  convergence and faster rates for regularized mdps. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  2020.
Lin Shao, Yifan You, Mengyuan Yan, Shenli Yuan, Qingyun Sun, and Jeannette Bohg. Grac:
  Self-guided and self-regularized actor-critic. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014.
Riley Simmons-Edler, Ben Eisner, Eric Mitchell, Sebastian Seung, and Daniel Lee. Q-learning
  for continuous actions with cross-entropy guided policies. In RL4RealLife Workshop at the
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Denis Steckelmacher, HeМҒleМҖne Plisnier, Diederik M Roijers, and Ann NoweМҒ. Sample-efficient model-
  free reinforcement learning with off-policy critics. In Joint European Conference on Machine
  Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, 2019.
Wen Sun, Geoffrey J Gordon, Byron Boots, and J Bagnell. Dual policy iteration. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Richard S. Sutton. Temporal Credit Assignment in Reinforcement Learning. PhD thesis, University
  of Massachusetts Amherst, 1984.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Richard S. Sutton, David A. McAllester, Satinder P. Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradi-
  ent methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 1999.
IstvaМҒn Szita and AndraМҒs LoМҲrincz. Learning tetris using the noisy cross-entropy method. Neural
   Computation, 18(12), 2006.
Philip Thomas. Bias in natural actor-critic algorithms. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2014.
Manan Tomar, Lior Shani, Yonathan Efroni, and Mohammad Ghavamzadeh. Mirror descent policy
 optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09814, 2020.
Nino Vieillard, Tadashi Kozuno, Bruno Scherrer, Olivier Pietquin, Remi Munos, and Matthieu Geist.
  Leverage the average: an analysis of kl regularization in reinforcement learning. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020a.
Nino Vieillard, Olivier Pietquin, and Matthieu Geist. Deep conservative policy iteration. In AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020b.
Ziyu Wang, Victor Bapst, Nicolas Heess, Volodymyr Mnih, Remi Munos, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and
  Nando de Freitas. Sample efficient actor-critic with experience replay. International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2017.
Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 8(3-4), 1992.
Kenny Young and Tian Tian. Minatar: An atari-inspired testbed for thorough and reproducible
  reinforcement learning experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03176, 2019.
Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K Dey. Maximum entropy inverse
  reinforcement learning. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2008.


A    R ELATED P OLICY O PTIMIZATION A LGORITHMS
As mentioned in the main text, there are many policy optimization algorithms that can be seen as
approximate policy iteration (API) rather than performing gradient descent on a policy objective.
An overview and survey are given by Vieillard et al. (2020a) and Chan et al. (2021). There, many
methods are shown to either minimize a forward or reverse KL-divergence to the Boltzmann policy.
Our approach similarly updates the actor using a KL-divergence to a target policy, but here that
target policy is the percentile-greedy policy. By doing a maximum likelihood update with actions
sampled under the percentile-greedy policy, we are reducing the forward KL-divergence to the
percentile-greedy policy in Equation 2.
Our CCEM update for the actor is new, but there are several approaches that resemble the idea,
particularly those that try to match an expert. This includes dual policy iteration methods (DPI)
(Parisotto et al., 2016; Sun et al., 2018; Steckelmacher et al., 2019) and RL as classification methods
(Lagoudakis & Parr, 2003; Lazaric et al., 2010; Farahmand et al., 2015). DPI has two policies, one
which is guiding the other. For example, one policy might be an expensive tree search and another
a learned neural network, trained to mimic the first (expert or guide) policy. CCEM, on the other
hand, uses two policies differently. Our actor does not imitate our proposal policy. Rather, the
proposal policy is used to improve the search over the nonconcave surface of Q. It samples actions
more broadly, to make it more likely to find a maximizing action. Further, the actor increases the
likelihood of only the top actions and does not imitate the proposal policy. In contrast, Bootstrap DPI
(Steckelmacher et al., 2019, Equation 5) uses an update based on Actor-Mimic (Parisotto et al., 2016),
where the policy increases likelihood of actions for the softmax policies it is trying to mimic. The


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


resemblance arises from the fact that (Steckelmacher et al., 2019, Equation 5) can be seen as a sum
over forward KL divergences to softmax policies (for discrete actions), just like we have a forward
KL divergence but to the percentile-greedy policy (for discrete or continuous actions).
The other class of algorithms, RL as classification, also look similar due to using a forward KL
divergence. They reduce the problem to identifying вҖңpositiveвҖқ actions in a state (producing maximal
returns) and вҖңnegativeвҖқ actions in a state (producing non-maximal returns). If a cross-entropy loss is
used, then this corresponds to maximizing the likelihood of the positive actions and minimizing the
likelihood of the negative ones. More generally, other classification algorithms can be used that do
not involve maximizing likelihood (like SVMs). The RL as classifications algorithms primarily focus
on how to obtain these positive and negative actions, and otherwise look quite different from Greedy
AC, in addition to being restricted to a discrete set of actions.
Finally, we can also consider the connection to Conservative Policy Iteration (CPI) (Kakade &
Langford, 2002) and a generalization called Deep CPI (Vieillard et al., 2020b). CPI updates the policy
to be an interpolation between the greedy policy G(Q) and the current policy ПҖ, to get the new policy
ПҖ вҖІ = (1 вҲ’ Оұ)ПҖ + ОұG(Q) for Оұ вҲҲ [0, 1]. Deep CPI extends this idea to parameterized policies, instead
minimizing a forward KL to this interpolation policy. Greedy AC could be seen as another way to
obtain a conservative update, because it does not move the actor all the way to the greedy policy.
Instead, it moves towards the percentile-greedy policy (in Equation 2), which shifts probability to
the upper percentile of actions. Similarly to the interpolation policy, this percentile-greedy policy
depends on the previous policy and on increasing probability for maximally valued actions. As yet,
Deep CPI has not been shown to enjoy the same theoretical guarantees as CPI: minimizing a forward
KL to the interpolation policy does not provide the same guarantees. It remains an open question
how to implement this conservative update in deep RL, and it would be interesting to understand if
the CCEM update could provide an alternative route to obtaining such guarantees.

B     C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS OF THE ACTOR
We provided an informal proof statement and proof sketch in Section 4.2, to provide intuition for
the result. Here, we provide the formal proof in the following subsections. We first provide some
definitions, particularly for the quantile function which is central to the analysis. We then lay out the
assumptions, and discuss some policy parameterizations to satisfy those assumptions. We finally state
the theorem, with proof, and provide one lemma needed to prove the theorem in the final subsection.

B.1   N OTATION AND D EFINITIONS

Notation: For a set A, let AМҠ represent the interior of A, while вҲӮA is the boundary of A. The
abbreviation a.s. stands for almost surely and i.o. stands for infinitely often. Let N represent the set
{0, 1, 2, . . . }. For a set A, we let IA to be the indicator function/characteristic function of A and is
defined as IA (x) = 1 if x вҲҲ A and 0 otherwise. Let Eg [В·], Vg [В·] and Pg (В·) denote the expectation,
variance and probability measure w.r.t. g. For a Пғ-field F, let E [В·|F] represent the conditional
expectation w.r.t. F. A function f : X вҶ’ Y is called Lipschitz continuous if вҲғL вҲҲ (0, вҲһ) s.t.
вҲҘf (x1 ) вҲ’ f (x2 )вҲҘ вүӨ LвҲҘx1 вҲ’ x2 вҲҘ, вҲҖx1 , x2 вҲҲ X. A function f is called locally Lipschitz continuous
if for every x вҲҲ X, there exists a neighbourhood U of X such that f|U is Lipschitz continuous. Let
C(X, Y ) represent the space of continuous functions from X to Y . Also, let Br (x) represent an
                                                                                 .
open ball of radius r with centered at x. For a positive integer M , let [M ] = {1, 2 . . . M }.

Definition 1. A function О“ : U вҠҶ IRd1 вҶ’ V вҠҶ IRd2 is Frechet differentiable at x вҲҲ U if there exists
a bounded linear operator О“b x : IRd1 вҶ’ IRd2 such that the limit
                                                О“(x + Пөy) вҲ’ x
                                          lim                                                         (3)
                                          ПөвҶ“0         Пө
exists and is equal to О“
                       b x (y). We say О“ is Frechet differentiable if Frechet derivative of О“ exists at
every point in its domain.

Definition 2. Given a bounded real-valued continuous function H : IRd вҶ’ IR with H(a) вҲҲ [Hl , Hu ]
and a scalar ПҒ вҲҲ [0, 1], we define the (1вҲ’ПҒ)-quantile of H(A) w.r.t. the PDF g (denoted as f ПҒ (H, g))


                                                   14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


as follows:
                                       .
                            f ПҒ (H, g) =

                                               sup        {Pg H(A) вүҘ в„“ вүҘ ПҒ},                          (4)
                                            в„“вҲҲ[Hl ,Hu ]
                                                                                           .
where
R      Pg is the probability measure induced by the PDF g, i.e., for a Borel set A, Pg (A) =
  A
    g(a)da.

This quantile operator will be used to succinctly write the quantile for QОё (S, В·), with actions selected
according to ПҖw , i.e.,
                      .
          fОёПҒ (w; s) = f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), ПҖw (В·|s)) = sup {PПҖw (В·|s) QОё (s, A) вүҘ в„“ вүҘ ПҒ}.

                                                                                                      (5)
                                                      в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]


B.2   A SSUMPTIONS

Assumption 1. Given a realization of the transition dynamics of the MDP in the form of a sequence
                           .
of transition tuples O = {(St , At , Rt , StвҖІ )}tвҲҲN , where the state St вҲҲ S is drawn using a latent
sampling distribution ОҪ, while At вҲҲ A is the action chosen at state St , the transitioned state
                                                    .
S вҲӢ StвҖІ вҲј P (St , At , В·) and the reward IR вҲӢ Rt = R(St , At , StвҖІ ). We further assume that the reward
is uniformly bounded, i.e., |R(В·, В·, В·)| < Rmax < вҲһ.

We analyze the long run behaviour of the conditional cross-entropy recursion (actor) which is defined
as follows:
                          (                                                          )
                   . W                 1 X
            wt+1 = О“       wt + Оұa,t            I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) ,             (6)
                                       Nt           t          t+1
                                               AвҲҲОһt
                                                .                                iid
                                       where Оһt = {At,1 , At,2 , . . . , At,Nt } вҲј ПҖwtвҖІ (В·|St ).

               вҖІ   .
              wt+1 = wtвҖІ + Оұa,t
                            вҖІ
                                (wt+1 вҲ’ wtвҖІ ) .                                                       (7)
Here, О“W {В·} is the projection operator onto the compact (closed and bounded) and convex set
W вҠӮ IRm with a smooth boundary вҲӮW . Therefore, О“W maps vectors in IRm to the nearest vectors
in W w.r.t. the Euclidean distance (or equivalent metric). Convexity and compactness ensure that the
projection is unique and belongs to W .
                                                                                       вҖІ
Assumption 2. The pre-determined, deterministic, step-size sequences {Оұa,t }tвҲҲN , {Оұa,t   }tвҲҲN and
{Оұq,t }tвҲҲN are positive scalars which satisfy the following:
                                X           X           X
                                                   вҖІ
                                    Оұa,t =       Оұa,t =      Оұq,t = вҲһ
                                 tвҲҲN            tвҲҲN              tвҲҲN
                                 X           2

                                    2
                                   Оұa,t + ОұвҖІ a,t + Оұq,t
                                                    2
                                                          <вҲһ
                                 tвҲҲN
                                      вҖІ
                                     Оұa,t                        Оұq,t
                                 lim      = 0,             lim          = 0.
                                 tвҶ’вҲһ Оұa,t                 tвҶ’вҲһ Оұa,t


The first conditions in Assumption 2 are the classical Robbins-Monro conditions (Robbins & Monro,
1985) required for stochastic approximation algorithms. The last two conditions enable the different
stochastic recursions to have separate timescales. Indeed, it ensures the wt recursion is faster
compared to the recursions of Оёt and wtвҖІ . This timescale divide is needed to obtain the desired
asymptotic behaviour, as we describe in the next section.
Assumption 3. The pre-determined, deterministic, sample length schedule {Nt вҲҲ N}tвҲҲN is positive
and strictly monotonically increases to вҲһ and inf tвҲҲN NNt+1
                                                          t
                                                             > 1.

Assumption 3 states that the number of samples increases to infinity and is primarily required to
ensure that the estimation error arising due to the estimation of sample quantiles eventually decays to
0. Practically, one can indeed consider a fixed, finite, positive integer for Nt which is large enough to
accommodate the acceptable error.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Assumption 4. The sequence {Оёt }tвҲҲN satisfies Оёt вҲҲ Оҳ, where Оҳ вҠӮ IRn is a convex, compact set.
Also, for Оё вҲҲ Оҳ, let QОё (s, a) вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ], вҲҖs вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A.

Assumption 4 assumes stability of the Expert, and minimally only requires that the values remain in a
bounded range. We make no additional assumptions on the convergence properties of the Expert, as
we simply need stability to prove the Actor tracks the update.
Assumption 5. For Оё вҲҲ Оҳ and s вҲҲ S, let PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вүҘ в„“) > 0, вҲҖв„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ] and
вҲҖwвҖІ вҲҲ W .

Assumption 5 implies that there always exists a strictly positive probability mass beyond every
threshold в„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ]. This assumption is easily satisfied when QОё (s, a) is continuous in a and
ПҖw (В·|s) is a continuous probability density function.
Assumption 6.
                                      h
         sup           EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|S)  I{QОё (S,A)вүҘв„“} вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|S)вҲ’
     w,wвҖІ вҲҲW,                                                                     2 i
   ОёвҲҲОҳ,в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]                EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) I{QОё (S,A)вүҘв„“} вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|S) S     S < вҲһ a.s.,
                                                                                  2

                                                                   2
         sup           EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) I{QОё (S,A)вүҘв„“} вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|S) S < вҲһ a.s.
     w,wвҖІ вҲҲW,                                                             2
   ОёвҲҲОҳ,в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]

Assumption 7. For s вҲҲ S, вҲҮw ln ПҖw (В·|s) is locally Lipschitz continuous w.r.t. w.

Assumptions 6 and 7 are technical requirements that can be more easily characterized when we
consider ПҖw to belong to the natural exponential family (NEF) of distributions.
Definition 3. Natural exponential family of distributions (NEF)(Morris, 1982): These probability
distributions over IRm are represented by
                                       .       вҠӨ
                               {ПҖО· (x) = h(x)eО· T (x)вҲ’K(О·) | О· вҲҲ Оӣ вҠӮ IRd },                                     (8)

where О· is the natural parameter, h : IRm вҲ’вҶ’ IR, while T : IRm вҲ’вҶ’ IRd (called the sufficient
                    .            вҠӨ
statistic) and K(О·) = ln h(x)eО· T (x) dx (called the cumulant function of the family). The space Оӣ
                        R
                 .
is defined as Оӣ = {О· вҲҲ IRd | |K(О·)| < вҲһ}. Also, the above representation is assumed minimal.4
A few popular distributions which belong to the NEF family include Binomial, Poisson, Bernoulli,
Gaussian, Geometric and Exponential distributions.

We parametrize the policy ПҖw (В·|S) using a neural network, which implies that when we consider
NEF for the stochastic policy, the natural parameter О· of the NEF is being parametrized by w. To
be more specific, we have {ПҲw : S вҶ’ Оӣ|w вҲҲ IRm } to be the function space induced by the neural
network of the actor, i.e., for a given state s вҲҲ S, ПҲw (s) represents the natural parameter of the NEF
policy ПҖw (В·|s). Further,

                        вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|S) = ln (h(A)) + ПҲw (St )вҠӨ T (A) вҲ’ K(ПҲw (S))
                                       = вҲҮw ПҲw (S) (T (A) вҲ’ вҲҮО· K(ПҲw (S))) .

                                       = вҲҮw ПҲw (S) T (A) вҲ’ EAвҲјПҖw (В·|S) [T (A)] .                                (9)
Therefore Assumption 7 can be directly satisfied by assuming that ПҲw is twice continuously differen-
tiable w.r.t. w.
Assumption 8. For every Оё вҲҲ Оҳ, s вҲҲ S and w вҲҲ W , fОёПҒ (w; s) (from Eq. equation 5) exists and is
unique.

The above assumption ensures that the true (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)-quantile is unique and the assumption is usually
satisfied for most distributions and a well-behaved QОё .
    4
      For a distribution in NEF, there may exist multiple representations of the form (8). However, for the
distribution, there definitely exists a representation where the components of the sufficient statistic are linearly
independent and such a representation is referred to as minimal.


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.3     M AIN T HEOREM

To analyze the algorithm, we employ here the ODE-based analysis as proposed in (Borkar, 2008;
Kushner & Clark, 2012). The actor recursions (Eqs. (6-7)) represent a classical two timescale
stochastic approximation recursion, where there exists a bilateral coupling between the individual
                                                                                   вҖІ
stochastic recursions (6) and (7). Since the step-size schedules {Оұa,t }tвҲҲN and {Оұa,t }tвҲҲN satisfy
ОұвҖІa,t                   вҖІ
Оұa,t  вҶ’ 0, we have Оұa,t     вҶ’ 0 relatively faster than Оұa,t вҶ’ 0. This disparity induces a pseudo-
heterogeneous rate of convergence (or timescales) between the individual stochastic recursions
which further amounts to the asymptotic emergence of a stable coherent behaviour which is quasi-
asynchronous. This pseudo-behaviour can be interpreted using multiple viewpoints. When viewed
from the faster timescale recursionвҖ” controlled by Оұa,t вҖ”the slower timescale recursionвҖ”controlled
     вҖІ
by Оұa,t вҖ”appears quasi-static, i.e., almost a constant. Likewise, when observed from the slower
timescale, the faster timescale recursion seems equilibrated.
The existence of this stable long run behaviour under certain standard assumptions of stochastic
approximation algorithms is rigorously established in (Borkar, 1997) and also in Chapter 6 of
(Borkar, 2008). For our stochastic approximation setting (Eqs. (6-7)), we can directly apply this
appealing characterization of the long run behaviour of the two timescale stochastic approximation
algorithmsвҖ”after ensuring the compliance of our setting to the pre-requisites demanded by the
characterizationвҖ”by considering the slow timescale stochastic recursion (7) to be quasi-stationary
(i.e., wвҖІ t вүЎ wвҖІ , a.s., вҲҖt вҲҲ N), while analyzing the limiting behaviour of the faster timescale recursion
(6). Similarly, we let Оёt to be quasi-stationary too (i.e., Оёt вүЎ Оё, a.s., вҲҖt вҲҲ N). The asymptotic
behaviour of the slower timescale recursion is further analyzed by considering the faster timescale
temporal variable wt with the limit point so obtained during quasi-stationary analysis.
Define the filtration {Ft }tвҲҲN , a family of increasing natural Пғ-fields, where
                             .
                          Ft = Пғ ({wi , wiвҖІ , (Si , Ai , Ri , SiвҖІ ), Оһi ; 0 вүӨ i вүӨ t}) .
Theorem B.1. Let wtвҖІ вүЎ wвҖІ , Оёt вүЎ Оё, вҲҖt вҲҲ N a.s. Let Assumptions 1-8 hold. Then the stochastic
sequence {wt }tвҲҲN generated by the stochastic recursion (6) asymptotically tracks the ODE:
   d         bW
                                                h                                          i
      w(t) = О“ w(t)   вҲҮ w(t) E SвҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖ wвҖІ (В·|S)   I{QОё (S,A)вүҘf ПҒ
                                                                 (w вҖІ ;S)} ln ПҖ w(t) (A|S)    , t вүҘ 0. (10)
   dt                                                         Оё


In other words, limtвҶ’вҲһ wt вҲҲ K a.s., where K is set of stable equilibria of the ODE (10) contained
inside W .

Proof. Firstly, we rewrite the stochastic recursion (6) under the hypothesis that Оёt and wtвҖІ are
quasi-stationary, i.e., Оёt вүЎ Оё and wtвҖІ вүЎ wвҖІ as follows:
                           a.s.          a.s.
                                (                                                   )
                        . W                  1 X
               wt+1 = О“           wt + Оұa,t      I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|St )        (11)
                                            Nt                  t+1
                                                    AвҲҲОһt
                   .                                    .
where fОёПҒ (wвҖІ ; S) = f ПҒ (QОё (S, В·), ПҖwвҖІ (В·|S)) and вҲҮwt = вҲҮw=wt , i.e., the gradient w.r.t. w at wt .
Define
        .
                              h                                            i
g Оё (w) = ESt вҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|St ) I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfОёПҒ (wвҖІ ;St )} вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|St ) .                         (12)

     . 1 X
Mt+1 =         I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St )вҲ’
       Nt                     t+1
          AвҲҲОһt
            "                                                #
              1 X
          E           I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) Ft .                                       (13)
              Nt                     t+1
                         AвҲҲОһt


    .         1 X
в„“Оёt = E               I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) Ft вҲ’
              Nt                     t+1
                 AвҲҲОһt
                                  h                                             i
              ESt вҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|St ) I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfОёПҒ (wвҖІ ;St )} вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St )                      (14)


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then we can rewrite
                       (
                                                     h                                             i
                   W
 equation 11 = О“       wt + Оұa,t ESt вҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|St ) I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfОёПҒ (wвҖІ ;St )} вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) вҲ’
                                               h                                             i
                           ESt вҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|St ) I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfОёПҒ (wвҖІ ;St )} вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) +

                                   1 X
                               E            I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) Ft вҲ’
                                   Nt                       t+1
                                       AвҲҲОһt

                                        1 X
                                   E             I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) Ft +
                                       Nt                       t+1
                                          AвҲҲОһt
                                                                                         !)
                                         1 X
                                                  I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St )       .
                                       Nt                        t+1
                                          AвҲҲОһt


                   n                      o
               = О“W g Оё (wt ) + Mt+1 + в„“Оёt ,                                                       (15)


A few observations are in order:

    B1. {Mt+1 }tвҲҲN is a martingale difference noise sequence w.r.t. the filtration {Ft }tвҲҲN , i.e., Mt+1
        is Ft+1 -measurable and integrable, вҲҖt вҲҲ N and E [Mt+1 |Ft ] = 0 a.s., вҲҖt вҲҲ N.
    B2. g Оё is locally Lipschitz continuous. This follows from Assumption 7.
    B3. в„“Оёt вҶ’ 0 a.s. as t вҶ’ вҲһ. (By Lemma 2 below).
    B4. The iterates {wt }tвҲҲN is bounded almost surely, i.e.,
                                               sup вҲҘwt вҲҘ < вҲһ       a.s.
                                               tвҲҲN

        This is ensured by the explicit application of the projection operator О“W {В·} over the iterates
        {wt }tвҲҲN at every iteration onto the bounded set W .

    B5. вҲғL вҲҲ (0, вҲһ) s.t. E вҲҘMt+1 вҲҘ2 |Ft вүӨ L 1 + вҲҘwt вҲҘ2 a.s.

         This follows from Assumption 6 (ii).


Now, we rewrite the stochastic recursion (15) as follows:

                  .             О“W wt + Оҫt g Оё (wt ) + Mt+1 + в„“Оёt вҲ’ wt
           wt+1 = wt + Оұa,t
                                                     Оұa,t

                                  bW    Оё         bW            bW Оё

                  = wt + Оұa,t О“    wt (g (wt )) + О“wt (Mt+1 ) + О“wt в„“t + o(Оұa,t ) ,                (16)

      b W is the Frechet derivative (Definition 3).
where О“
The above stochastic recursion is also a stochastic approximation  recursion with the vector field
bW
О“      Оё                       bW                         bW Оё
  wt (g (wt )), the noise term О“wt (Mt+1 ), the bias term О“wt в„“t with an additional error term
o(Оұa,t ) which is asymptotically inconsequential.
Also, note that О“W is single-valued map since the set W is assumed convex and also the limit exists
since the boundary вҲӮW is considered smooth. Further, for w вҲҲ WМҠ , we have
            .
    b W (u) =     О“W {w + Пөu} вҲ’ w       w + Пөu вҲ’ w
    О“ w       lim                 = lim            = u (for sufficiently small Пө),                 (17)
              ПөвҶ’0        Пө          ПөвҶ’0      Пө


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      bW
i.e., О“ w (В·) is an identity map for w вҲҲ WМҠ .

Now by appealing to Theorem 2, Chapter 2 of (Borkar, 2008) along with the observations B1-B5, we
conclude that the stochastic recursion (6) asymptotically tracks the following ODE almost surely:
           d         b W (g Оё (w(t))), t вүҘ 0
              w(t) = О“ w(t)
           dt                                    h                                           i
                   =О“bW       ESвҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖ     (В·|S)  I {Q  (S,A)вүҘf ПҒ
                                                                  (w вҖІ ;S)} вҲҮw(t) ln ПҖw (A|S)
                       w(t)            w вҖІ            Оё        Оё
                                                        h                                    i
                       W
                   =О“  w(t) вҲҮw(t) ESвҲјОҪ,AвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) I{QОё (S,A)вүҘfОё (wвҖІ ;S)} ln ПҖw (A|S)           .   (18)
                     b                                                   ПҒ



The interchange of expectation and the gradient in the last equality follows from dominated conver-
gence theorem and Assumption 7 (Rubinstein & Shapiro, 1993). The above ODE is a gradient flow
with dynamics restricted inside W . This further implies that the stochastic recursion (6) converges to
a (possibly sample path dependent) asymptotically stable equilibrium point of the above ODE inside
W.

B.4   P ROOF OF L EMMA 2 TO SATISFY C ONDITION 3

In this section, we show that в„“Оёt вҶ’ 0 a.s. as t вҶ’ вҲһ, in Lemma 2. To do so, we first need to prove
several supporting lemmas. Lemma 1 shows that, for a given Actor and Expert, the sample quantile
converges to the true quantile. Using this lemma, we can then prove Lemma 2. In the following
subsection, we provide three supporting lemmas about convexity and Lipschitz properties of the
sample quantiles, required for the proof Lemma 1.
For this section, we require the following characterization of f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), wвҖІ ). Please refer Lemma 1
of (Homem-de Mello, 2007) for more details.
                     f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), wвҖІ ) = arg min EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) [ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“)],                 (19)
                                           в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]
              .
where ОЁ(y, в„“) = (y вҲ’ в„“)(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)I{yвүҘв„“} + (в„“ вҲ’ y)ПҒI{в„“вүҘy} .

                                                                        . (вҢҲ(1вҲ’ПҒ)N вҢү)            (i)
Similarly, the sample estimate of the true (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)-quantile, i.e., fbПҒ = QОё,s          , (where QОё,s is
                                                                        .          iid
the i-th order statistic of the random sample {QОё (s, A)}AвҲҲОһ with Оһ = {Ai }N  i=1 вҲј ПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)) can be
characterized as the unique solution of the stochastic counterpart of the above optimization problem,
i.e.,
                                                    1 X
                                 fbПҒ = arg min          ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“).                          (20)
                                       в„“вҲҲ[QОё ,QОёu ] N
                                          l            AвҲҲОһ
                                                      |Оһ|=N

Lemma 1. Assume Оёt вүЎ Оё, wtвҖІ вүЎ wвҖІ , вҲҖt вҲҲ N. Also, let Assumptions 3-5 hold. Then, for a given
state s вҲҲ S,
                                    lim fbtПҒ = f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), wвҖІ ) a.s.,
                                   tвҶ’вҲһ
            .    (вҢҲ(1вҲ’ПҒ)Nt вҢү)             (i)
where fbtПҒ = QОё,s             , (where QОё,s is the i-th order statistic of the random sample
                         .            iid
{QОё (s, A)}AвҲҲОһt with Оһt = {Ai }N  i=1 вҲј ПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)).
                                    t


Proof. The proof is similar to arguments in Lemma 7 of (Hu et al., 2007). Since state s and expert
parameter Оё are considered fixed, we assume the following notation in the proof. Let
                               ПҒ     .                .
                             fbt|s,Оё = fbtПҒ and f|s,Оё
                                                 ПҒ
                                                      = f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), wвҖІ ),                 (21)

where fbtПҒ and f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), wвҖІ ) are defined in Equations equation 19 and equation 20.

Consider the open cover {Br (в„“), в„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ]} of [QОёl , QОёu ]. Since [QОёl , QОёu ] is compact,
there exists a finite sub-cover, i.e., вҲғ{в„“1 , в„“2 , . . . , в„“M } s.t. вҲӘM                Оё    Оё
                                                                      i=1 Br (в„“i ) = [Ql , Qu ]. Let


                                                      19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     .                                            .
П‘(в„“) = EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) [ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“)] and П‘bt (в„“) = N1t
                                                                      P
                                                                                ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“).
                                                            AвҲҲОһt ,|Оһt |=Nt ,
                                                                iid
                                                             Оһt вҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)

Now, by triangle inequality, we have for в„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ],

               |П‘(в„“) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“)| вүӨ |П‘(в„“) вҲ’ П‘(в„“j )| + |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| + |П‘bt (в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“)|
                                вүӨ LПҒ |в„“ вҲ’ в„“j | + |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| + L
                                                                        b ПҒ |в„“j вҲ’ в„“|

                                вүӨ LПҒ + L  b ПҒ r + |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )|,                                  (22)

where LПҒ and L
             b ПҒ are the Lipschitz constants of П‘(В·) and П‘bt (В·) respectively.

For Оҙ > 0, take r = Оҙ(LПҒ + L    b ПҒ )/2. Also, by KolmogorovвҖҷs strong law of large numbers (Theorem
2.3.10 of (Sen & Singer, 2017)), we have П‘bt (в„“) вҶ’ П‘(в„“) a.s. This implies that there exists T вҲҲ N s.t.
|П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| < Оҙ/2, вҲҖt вүҘ T , вҲҖj вҲҲ [M ]. Then from Eq. (22), we have

                         |П‘(в„“) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“)| вүӨ Оҙ/2 + Оҙ/2 = Оҙ,             вҲҖв„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ].

This implies П‘bt converges uniformly to П‘. By Lemmas 3 and 4, П‘bt and П‘ are strictly convex and
Lipschitz continuous, and so because П‘bt converges uniformly to П‘, this means that the sequence
of minimizers of П‘bt converge to the minimizer of П‘ (see Lemma 5, Appendix B.6 for an explicit
justification). These minimizers correspond to fbtПҒ and f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), wвҖІ ) respectively, and so
limNt вҶ’вҲһ fbtПҒ = f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), wвҖІ ) a.s.

                     .
Now, for Оҙ > 0 and r = Оҙ(LПҒ + L
                              b ПҒ )/2, we obtain the following from Eq. (22):

|П‘(в„“) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“)| вүӨ Оҙ/2 + |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )|
 вҮ” {|П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| вүӨ Оҙ/2, вҲҖj вҲҲ [M ]} вҮ’ {|П‘(в„“) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“)| вүӨ Оҙ, вҲҖв„“ вҲҲ [QОё , QОё ]}   l    u


 вҮ’ PПҖwвҖІ |П‘(в„“) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“)| вүӨ Оҙ, вҲҖв„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ] вүҘ PПҖwвҖІ |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| вүӨ Оҙ/2, вҲҖj вҲҲ [M ]

                                                 = 1 вҲ’ PПҖwвҖІ |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| > Оҙ/2, вҲғj вҲҲ [M ]
                                                             M
                                                             X
                                                     вүҘ1вҲ’              PПҖwвҖІ |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| > Оҙ/2
                                                             j=1

                                                     вүҘ 1 вҲ’ M max PПҖwвҖІ |П‘(в„“j ) вҲ’ П‘bt (в„“j )| > Оҙ/2
                                                             jвҲҲ[M ]

                                                                       вҲ’2Nt Оҙ 2

                                                     вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 2M exp                    ,           (23)
                                                                     4(QОёu вҲ’ QОёl )2
            .
where PПҖwвҖІ = PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s). And the h last inequality
                                            i        follows from HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality (Hoeffding,
1963) along with the fact that EПҖ вҖІ П‘t (в„“j ) = П‘(в„“j ) and sup |П‘(в„“)| вүӨ QОё вҲ’ QОё .
                                   w
                                    b
                                                                                            u      l
                                                                в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]


Now, the sub-differential of П‘(в„“) is given by

       вҲӮв„“ П‘(в„“) = ПҒ вҲ’ PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вүҘ в„“) , ПҒ вҲ’ 1 + PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вүӨ в„“) .               (24)
By the definition of sub-gradient we obtain
                             ПҒ        ПҒ             ПҒ            ПҒ
                         c|fbt|s,Оё вҲ’ f|s,Оё | вүӨ |П‘(fbt|s,Оё ) вҲ’ П‘(f|s,Оё )|, c вҲҲ вҲӮв„“ П‘(в„“)
                               ПҒ        ПҒ             ПҒ            ПҒ
                         вҮ’ C|fbt|s,Оё вҲ’ f|s,Оё | вүӨ |П‘(fbt|s,Оё ) вҲ’ П‘(f|s,Оё )|,                              (25)


                                                      20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         .
             n                                                                               o
                                            ПҒ                                          ПҒ
where C = max ПҒ вҲ’ PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) QОё (s, A) вүҘ f|s,Оё   , ПҒ вҲ’ 1 + PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) QОё (s, A) вүӨ f|s,Оё    .
Further,
            C|fbПҒ вҲ’ f ПҒ | вүӨ |П‘(fbПҒ ) вҲ’ П‘(f ПҒ )|
                     t|s,Оё     |s,Оё           t|s,Оё             |s,Оё
                                             ПҒ                ПҒ                  ПҒ            ПҒ
                                      вүӨ |П‘(fbt|s,Оё ) вҲ’ П‘bt (fbt|s,Оё )| + |П‘bt (fbt|s,Оё ) вҲ’ П‘(f|s,Оё )|
                                             ПҒ                ПҒ
                                      вүӨ |П‘(fbt|s,Оё ) вҲ’ П‘bt (fbt|s,Оё )| +       sup         |П‘bt (в„“) вҲ’ П‘(в„“)|
                                                                           в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]

                                      вүӨ2      sup          |П‘bt (в„“) вҲ’ П‘(в„“)|.                                   (26)
                                           в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]

From Eqs. (23) and (26), we obtain for Пө > 0
                                                                                    !

            ПҒ        ПҒ
                                                                                  Пө
 PwвҖІ NtОұ |fbt|s,Оё вҲ’ f|s,Оё | вүҘ Пө вүӨ PwвҖІ NtОұ sup                  |П‘bt (в„“) вҲ’ П‘(в„“)| вүҘ
                                                 в„“вҲҲ[QОёl ,QОёu ]                    2
                                                         вҲ’2Nt Пө2                         вҲ’2Nt1вҲ’2Оұ Пө2

                                      вүӨ 2M exp                               = 2M exp                    .
                                                 16Nt2Оұ (QОёu вҲ’ QОёl )2                   16(QОёu вҲ’ QОёl )2
For Оұ вҲҲ (0, 1/2) and inf tвҲҲN NNt+1
                                t
                                   вүҘ П„ > 1 (by Assumption 3), then
          вҲһ                                   вҲһ
                          вҲ’2Nt1вҲ’2Оұ Пө2                     вҲ’2П„ (1вҲ’2Оұ)t N01вҲ’2Оұ Пө2
         X                                X
             2M exp                      вүӨ       2M exp                           < вҲһ.
         t=1
                        16(QОёu вҲ’ QОёl )2      t=1
                                                             16(QОёu вҲ’ QОёl )2
Therefore, by Borel-CantelliвҖҷs Lemma (Durrett, 1991), we have

                                         ПҒ        ПҒ
                              PwвҖІ NtОұ fbt|s,Оё вҲ’ f|s,Оё вүҘ Пө i.o = 0.

                     ПҒ        ПҒ
Thus we have NtОұ fbt|s,Оё вҲ’ f|s,Оё   вҶ’ 0 a.s. as Nt вҶ’ вҲһ.

Lemma 2. Almost surely,
                                              в„“Оёt вҶ’ 0 as Nt вҶ’ вҲһ.

Proof of Lemma 2: Consider

                1 X
            E           I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) Ft =
                Nt                     t+1
                   AвҲҲОһt
                 "                                                                 #
                         1 X
                E EОһt             I{QОё (St ,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|St ) St = s, wtвҖІ
                        Nt                       t+1
                                  AвҲҲОһt

Notice that, because of the conditions on ПҖwвҖІ (В·|s), we know that the sample average converges with
an exponential rate in the number of samples, for arbitrary wвҖІ вҲҲ W . Namely, for Пө > 0 and N вҲҲ N,
we have
                  1 X
  P iid                  I{QОё (s,A)вүҘf ПҒ (QОё (s,В·),ПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)} вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|s)вҲ’
    ОһвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)   N
                    AвҲҲОһ
                  h                                                   i
     EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) I{QОё (s,A)вүҘfbПҒ (QОё (s,В·),ПҖ вҖІ (В·|s)} вҲҮw ln ПҖw (A|s) вүҘ Пө вүӨ C1 exp (вҲ’c2 N c3 Пөc4 ),
                                                 w


                                                                  вҲҖОё вҲҲ Оҳ, w, wвҖІ вҲҲ W, s вҲҲ S,
where C1 , c2 , c3 , c4 > 0.
Therefore, for ОұвҖІ > 0, we have
    вҖІ 1 X                                                   h                           i
 P NtОұ             I{QОё (s,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|s) вҲ’ E I{QОё (s,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|s)                      вүҘПө
          Nt                    Оё,s                                         Оё,s
              AвҲҲОһt
                           c2 Ntc3 Пөc4

                                                             c3 вҲ’c4 ОұвҖІ c4
            вүӨ C1 exp вҲ’              вҖІ    = C 1 exp    вҲ’c 2 N t        Пө
                             Ntc4 Оұ
                                       вҖІ          вҖІ

            вүӨ C1 exp вҲ’c2 П„ (c3 вҲ’c4 Оұ )t N0c3 вҲ’c4 Оұ Пөc4 ,


                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           .
       ПҒ
where fОё,s = f ПҒ (QОё (s, В·), ПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)) and inf tвҲҲN NNt+1
                                                       t
                                                          вүҘ П„ > 1 (by Assumption 3).

For c3 вҲ’ c4 ОұвҖІ > 0 вҮ’ ОұвҖІ < c3 /c4 , we have
                        вҲһ
                        X                        вҖІ             вҖІ
                           C1 exp вҲ’c2 П„ (c3 вҲ’c4 Оұ )t N0c3 вҲ’c4 Оұ Пөc4 < вҲһ.
                            t=1
Therefore, by Borel-CantelliвҖҷs Lemma (Durrett, 1991), we have
   вҖІ 1 X                                              h                                i
P NtОұ            I{QОё (s,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|s) вҲ’ E I{QОё (s,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|s)         вүҘ Пө i.o.
         Nt                   Оё,s                                  Оё,s
                AвҲҲОһt
                    = 0.
This implies that
   вҖІ   1 X                                         h                                i
NtОұ            I{QОё (s,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|s) вҲ’ E I{QОё (s,A)вүҘfbПҒ } вҲҮwt ln ПҖw (A|s)       вҶ’0      a.s.
      Nt                    Оё,s                                  Оё,s
           AвҲҲОһt
                                                                                                  (27)
                                                                             вҖІ
The above result implies that the sample average converges at a rate O(NtОұ ), where 0 < ОұвҖІ < c3 /c4
independent of w, wвҖІ вҲҲ W . By Lemma 1, we have the sample quantiles fbtПҒ also converging to the
true quantile at a rate O(NtОұ ) independent of w, wвҖІ вҲҲ W . Now the claim follows directly from
Assumption 6 (ii) and bounded convergence theorem.                                               в– 

B.5     S UPPORTING L EMMAS FOR L EMMA 1

Lemma 3. Let Assumption 5 hold. For Оё вҲҲ Оҳ, wвҖІ вҲҲ W , s вҲҲ S and в„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ], we have

        1. EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) [ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“)] is Lipschitz continuous.
                                                   iid
        2. N1
                P
                  AвҲҲОһ ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“) (with Оһ      вҲј ПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)) is Lipschitz continuous with Lipschitz
                 |Оһ|=N
           constant independent of the sample length N .

Proof. Let в„“1 , в„“2 вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ], в„“2 вүҘ в„“1 . By Assumption 5 we have PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вүҘ в„“1 ) > 0
and PAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вүҘ в„“2 ) > 0. Now,


   EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) [ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“1 )] вҲ’ EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) [ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“2 )]

   = EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вҲ’ в„“1 )(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)I{QОё (s,A)вүҘв„“1 } + (в„“1 вҲ’ QОё (s, A))ПҒI{в„“1 вүҘQОё (s,A)}

     вҲ’ EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вҲ’ в„“2 )(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)I{QОё (s,A)вүҘв„“2 } + (в„“2 вҲ’ QОё (s, A))ПҒI{в„“2 вүҘQОё (s,A)}
                   h
   = EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (QОё (s, A) вҲ’ в„“1 )(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)I{QОё (s,A)вүҘв„“1 } + (в„“1 вҲ’ QОё (s, A))ПҒI{в„“1 вүҘQОё (s,A)}
                                                                                   i
     вҲ’ (QОё (s, A) вҲ’ в„“2 )(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)I{QОё (s,A)вүҘв„“2 } + (в„“2 вҲ’ QОё (s, A))ПҒI{в„“2 вүҘQОё (s,A)}
                   h
   = EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)(в„“2 вҲ’ в„“1 )I{QОё (s,A)вүҘв„“2 } + ПҒ(в„“1 вҲ’ в„“2 )I{QОё (s,A)вүӨв„“1 } +
                                                                                 i
     + (вҲ’(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)в„“1 вҲ’ ПҒв„“2 + ПҒQОё (s, A) + (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)QОё (s, A)) I{в„“1 вүӨQОё (s,A)вүӨв„“2 }
      вүӨ (1 вҲ’ ПҒ)|в„“2 вҲ’ в„“1 | + (2ПҒ + 1) |в„“2 вҲ’ в„“1 |
      = (ПҒ + 2)|в„“2 вҲ’ в„“1 |.
Similarly, we can prove the later claim also. This completes the proof of Lemma 3.
Lemma 4. Let Assumption 5 hold. Then, for Оё вҲҲ Оҳ, wвҖІ вҲҲ W , s вҲҲ S and в„“ вҲҲ [QОёl , QОёu ], we
                                                                         iid
have EAвҲјПҖwвҖІ (В·|s) [ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“)] and N1
                                           P
                                             AвҲҲОһ ОЁ(QОё (s, A), в„“) (with Оһ вҲј ПҖwвҖІ (В·|s)) are strictly
                                                  |Оһ|=N
convex.


                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. For О» вҲҲ [0, 1] and в„“1 , в„“2 вҲҲ [Ql , Qu ] with в„“1 вүӨ в„“2 , we have

         EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) ОЁ(QОё (S, A), О»в„“1 + (1 вҲ’ О»)в„“2 )                                                   (28)

          = EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) (1 вҲ’ ПҒ) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ О»в„“1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ О»)в„“2 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 }

                         + ПҒ О»в„“1 + (1 вҲ’ О»)в„“2 вҲ’ QОё (S, A) I{QОё (S,A)вүӨО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 } .
Notice that

          QОё (S, A) вҲ’ О»в„“1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ О»)в„“2 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 }

          = О»QОё (S, A) вҲ’ О»в„“1 + (1 вҲ’ О»)QОё (S, A) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ О»)в„“2 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 }
We consider how one of these components simplifies.

EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) О»QОё (S, A) вҲ’ О»в„“1 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 }

= О»EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“1 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘО»в„“1 } вҲ’ QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“1 IО»в„“1 вүӨ{QОё (S,A)вүӨО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 }

вүӨ О»EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“1 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘО»в„“1 }     в–· вҲ’ QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“1 вүӨ 0
                                                           for О»в„“1 вүӨ {QОё (S, A) вүӨ О»в„“1 + (1 вҲ’ О»)в„“2 }

вүӨ О»EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“1 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘв„“1 }           в–· QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“1 вүӨ 0 for IО»в„“1 вүӨ{QОё (S,A)вүӨв„“1 }
Similarly, we get

EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“2 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 } вүӨ EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“2 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘв„“2 }

EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) в„“1 вҲ’ QОё (S, A) I{QОё (S,A)вүӨО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 } вүӨ EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) в„“1 вҲ’ QОё (S, A) I{QОё (S,A)вүӨв„“1 }

EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) в„“2 вҲ’ QОё (S, A) I{QОё (S,A)вүӨО»в„“1 +(1вҲ’О»)в„“2 } вүӨ EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) в„“2 вҲ’ QОё (S, A) I{QОё (S,A)вүӨв„“2 }
Therefore, for Equation equation 28, we get

    equation 28 вүӨ О»(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“1 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘв„“1 }

                   + (1 вҲ’ О»)(1 вҲ’ ПҒ)EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) QОё (S, A) вҲ’ в„“2 I{QОё (S,A)вүҘв„“2 }

                   + О»ПҒEAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) в„“1 вҲ’ QОё (S, A) I{QОё (S,A)вүӨв„“1 }

                   + (1 вҲ’ О»)ПҒEAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) в„“2 вҲ’ QОё (S, A) I{QОё (S,A)вүӨв„“2 }
                     = О»EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) [ОЁ(QОё (S, A), в„“1 )] + (1 вҲ’ О»)EAвҲҲПҖwвҖІ (В·|S) [ОЁ(QОё (S, A), в„“2 )] .
We can prove the second claim similarly. This completes the proof of Lemma 4.

B.6   L EMMA 5

Lemma 5. Let {fn вҲҲ C(IR, IR)}nвҲҲN be a sequence of strictly convex, continuous functions converg-
ing uniformly to a strict convex function f . Let xвҲ—n = arg minx fn (x) and xвҲ— = arg minxвҲҲIR f (x).
Then lim xвҲ—n = xвҲ— .
      nвҶ’вҲһ


Proof. Let c = lim inf n xвҲ—n . We employ proof by contradiction here. For that, we assume xвҲ— > c.
Now, note that f (xвҲ— ) < f (c) and f (xвҲ— ) < f ((xвҲ— + c) /2) (by the definition of xвҲ— ). Also, by the
strict convexity of f , we have f ((xвҲ— + c)/2) < (f (xвҲ— ) + f (c)) /2 < f (c). Therefore, we have
                                    f (c) > f ((xвҲ— + c)/2) > f (xвҲ— ).                                  (29)
Let r1 вҲҲ IR be such that f (c) > r1 > f ((xвҲ— + c)/2). Now, since вҲҘfn вҲ’ f вҲ— вҲҘвҲһ вҶ’ 0 as n вҶ’ вҲһ,
there exists an positive integer N s.t. |fn (c) вҲ’ f (c)| < f (c) вҲ’ r1 , вҲҖn вүҘ N and Пө > 0. Therefore,
fn (c) вҲ’ f (c) > r1 вҲ’ f (c) вҮ’ fn (c) > r1 . Similarily, we can show that fn ((xвҲ— + c)/2) > r1 .
Therefore, we have fn (c) > fn ((xвҲ— + c)/2). Similarily, we can show that fn ((xвҲ— + c)/2) > fn (xвҲ— ).
Finally, we obtain
                            fn (c) > fn ((xвҲ— + c)/2) > fn (xвҲ— ),    вҲҖn вүҘ N.                            (30)
Now, by the extreme value theorem of the continuous functions, we obtain that for n вүҘ N , fn achieves
minimum (say at xp in the closed interval [c, (xвҲ— + c)/2]. Note that fn (xp ) вү® fn ((xвҲ— + c)/2) (if
so then fn (xp ) will be a local minimum of fn since fn (xвҲ— ) < fn ((xвҲ— + c)/2)). Also, fn (xp ) Мё=


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


fn ((xвҲ— + c)/2). Therefore, fn achieves it minimum in the closed interval [c, (xвҲ— + c)/2] at the point
(xвҲ— + c)/2. This further implies that xвҲ—n > (xвҲ— + c)/2. Therefore, lim inf n xвҲ—n вүҘ (xвҲ— + c)/2 вҮ’
c вүҘ (xвҲ— + c)/2 вҮ’ c вүҘ xвҲ— . This is a contradiction and implies

                                           lim inf xвҲ—n вүҘ xвҲ— .                                    (31)
                                              n

Now consider gn (x) = fn (вҲ’x). Note that gn is also continuous and strictly convex. Indeed, for
О» вҲҲ [0, 1], we have gn (О»x1 + (1 вҲ’ О»)x2 ) = fn (вҲ’О»x1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ О»)x2 ) < О»f (вҲ’x1 ) + (1 вҲ’ О»)f (вҲ’x2 ) =
О»g(x1 ) + (1 вҲ’ О»)g(x2 ). Applying the result from Eq. (31) to the sequence {gn }nвҲҲN , we obtain that
lim inf n (вҲ’xвҲ—n ) вүҘ вҲ’xвҲ— . This implies lim supn xвҲ—n вүӨ xвҲ— . Therefore,

                            lim inf xвҲ—n вүҘ xвҲ— вүҘ lim sup xвҲ—n вүҘ lim sup xвҲ—n .
                              n                      n                 n

Hence, lim inf n xвҲ—n = lim supn xвҲ—n = xвҲ—


C     E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS

C.1   H YPERPARAMETER D ETAILS

In this section, we outline the tuned hyperparameters for each algorithm on each environment in our
experiments. For each algorithm, hyperparameters were tuned over an initial 10 runs with different
random seeds. Each algorithm saw the same 10 initial random seeds. For a list of all hyperparameters
swept, see Section 5.3. In Table 1, we list the tuned hyperparameters for each algorithm when
tuning across continuous-action environments. In Table 2, we list the tuned hyperparameters for each
algorithm when tuning across discrete-action environments. In Tables 3, 4, and 5, we list the tuned
hyperparameters when tuning per-environment for GreedyAC, VanillaAC, and SAC respectively.
Finally, Table 6 outlines the hyperparamters used in the experiments on Swimmer.

                               Hyperparameter             Оә      Оұ          П„
                              Greedy Actor-Critic        1.0    1e-3       1e-3
                              Vanilla Actor-Critic       2.0    1e-3       1e-3
                               Soft Actor-Critic         1.0    1e-3       1e-3

Table 1: Hyperparameters tuned across continuous-action environments for GreedyAC, VanillaAC,
and SAC.



                              Hyperparameter              Оә      Оұ          П„
                             Greedy Actor-Critic         10.0   1e-3         -
                             Vanilla Actor-Critic        1e-1   1e-3       1e-2
                              Soft Actor-Critic           10    1e-5        10

Table 2: Hyperparameters tuned across discrete-action environments for GreedyAC, VanillaAC, and
SAC.



                              Hyperparameter           Оә         Оұ          П„
                                Acrobot-CA           1e-1       1e-3       1e-2
                                Acrobot-DA           1e-1       1e-2         -
                              Mountain Car-CA         1.0       1e-3       10.0
                              Mountain Car-DA         2.0       1e-3         -
                               Pendulum-CA           1e-1       1e-2       10.0
                               Pendulum-DA            1.0       1e-3         -

                 Table 3: Hyperparameters tuned per-environment for GreedyAC.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Hyperparameter         Оә        Оұ       П„
                                Acrobot-CA          2.0      1e-3   1e-3
                                Acrobot-DA         1e-1      1e-2   1e-2
                              Mountain Car-CA       2.0      1e-3   1e-3
                              Mountain Car-DA       1.0      1e-3   1e-2
                               Pendulum-CA         1e-2      1e-2   1e-2
                               Pendulum-DA          2.0      1e-3    1.0

                 Table 4: Hyperparameters tuned per-environment for VanillaAC.



                              Hyperparameter         Оә        Оұ       П„
                                Acrobot-CA         10.0      1e-5   10.0
                                Acrobot-DA          2.0      1e-5   10.0
                              Mountain Car-CA       1.0      1e-3   1e-3
                              Mountain Car-DA       1.0      1e-3   1e-2
                               Pendulum-CA         1e-1      1e-2   1e-1
                               Pendulum-DA          1.0      1e-3    1.0

                    Table 5: Hyperparameters tuned per-environment for SAC.



                              Hyperparameter           Оә      Оұ      П„
                             Greedy Actor-Critic      1e-2   1e-4   1e-1

                  Table 6: Hyperparameters Chosen for GreedyAC on Swimmer.


C.2   N ORMALIZATION A PPROACH

For each environment, we find the best return achieved by any agent, across all runs, as a simple
approximation to a near-optimal return. Table 7 lists these returns for each environment. Then, to
obtain a normalized score, we use 1 вҲ’ BestValueвҲ’AlgValue
                                              |BestValue| , where the numerator is guaranteed to be
nonnegative. If AlgValue = BestValue we get the highest value of 1. If AlgValue is half of BestValue,
we get 0.5BestValue
        |BestValue| = 0.5. If AlgValue is significantly worse than BestValue, the score is much lower.

The AlgValue that we normalize is the point depicted on the sensitivity plot. It corresponds to the
Average Return across timesteps and across runs for the algorithm, with that hyperparameter setting
in that environment.
For the experiments in Figure 3, where we tune across the complete set of discrete- or continuous-
action environments, we first compute the normalized scores just described. Then, we compute the
average normalized scores for each algorithm and hyperparameter setting across discrete-action and
continuous-action environments separately. We then choose the hyperparameter setting for each
algorithm for the discrete- and continuous-action environments based on the hyperparameter setting
which resulted in the highest normalized scores. The learning curves for these hyperparameters, for
each algorithm, are shown in Figure 3.

                              Environment      Continuous      Discrete
                                Acrobot           -56            -56
                              Mountain Car        -65            -83
                               Pendulum           930            932

Table 7: Approximate return achieved by an optimal policy. We approximate the return achievable by
a near-optimal policy on environment E by finding the highest return achieved over all runs of all
hyperparameters and all agents on environment E.


                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.3                  S ENSITIVITY P LOTS


We plot parameter sensitivity curves, which include a line for each entropy scale, with the stepsize on
the x-axis. Because there are two stepsizes, we have two sets of plots вҖ“ one for the critic stepsize
and one for the actor stepsize. When examining the sensitivity to the critic stepsize, we select the
corresponding best actor stepsize. This means that for each point (critic stepsize, entropy scale) =
(Оұ, П„ ) on the sensitivity plot for the critic stepsize, we find the best actor stepsize and report the
performance for that triplet averaged over all 40 runs. We do the same procedure when plotting the
actor stepsize on the x-axis, but maximizing over critic stepsize.


                             100
                                                   Acrobot                   100
                                                                                          Mountain Car               1000              Pendulum
            Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                    GreedyAC
                             550                                             550                                        0

                             1000                                           1000                                     1000
                                    -5        -4         -3       -2   -1          -5       -4        -3   -2   -1          -5         -4        -3        -2        -1
                             100                    entropy 0.001            100                                     1000
                                                    entropy 0.01
                                                    entropy 0.1


                                                                                                                                                                    SAC
                                                    entropy 1.0                                                         0
                             550                    entropy 10.0             550

                             1000                                           1000                                     1000
                                    -5        -4         -3       -2   -1          -5       -4        -3   -2   -1          -5         -4        -3        -2        -1
                                          Critic Step-Size                                 Critic Step-Size                           Critic Step-Size
                                                 (10 )                                            (10 )                                      (10 )
Figure 6: Sensitivity curves for the critic step-size hyperparameter Оұ for GreedyAC and SAC, with
one line for each entropy scale tested. The critic step-size is plotted on a logarithmic scale on the
x-axis.


                    100
                                              Acrobot                       100
                                                                                          Mountain Car                1000                  Pendulum
  Average Return


                                                                                                                                                                          GreedyAC



                    550                                                     550                                             0

                   1000                                                     1000                                      1000
                               -3        -2         -1        0        1           -3       -2        -1   0     1              -3          -2        -1        0          1
                    100                                                     100                                       1000
                                                                                          entropy 0.001
  Average Return


                                                                                          entropy 0.01
                                                                                          entropy 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                          SAC


                    550                                                     550           entropy 1.0                       0
                                                                                          entropy 10.0

                   1000                                                     1000                                      1000
                               -3        -2         -1        0        1           -3       -2        -1   0     1              -3          -2        -1        0          1
                                    Actor Step-Size Scale                               Actor Step-Size Scale                        Actor Step-Size Scale
                                             (10 )                                               (10 )                                        (10 )
Figure 7: Sensitivity curves for the actor stepsize scale hyperparameter Оә for both GreedyAC and
SAC, with one line for each entropy scale tested. The actor step-size scale is plotted on a logarithmic
scale on the x-axis.


                                                                                                 26
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  D                A BLATION S TUDY ON SAC
Average Return
                  300            Acrobot                  50         Mountain Car          1000        Pendulum

                  650                                    525                                850

                                                                                                            SAC (Auto Entropy)
                                                                                                            SAC
                 1000                                   1000
                        0         Timesteps         1          0         Timesteps         1 700 0       Timesteps         1
                            (Hundreds of Thousands)                (Hundreds of Thousands)         (Hundreds of Thousands)

  Figure 8: Learning curves over 40 runs for SAC and 10 runs for SAC (Auto Entropy) with shaded
  regions denoting standard error. The entropy scale for SAC as well as the entropy scale step-size for
  SAC (Auto Entropy) are tuned using a grid search.


  Modern variants of SAC utilize a trick to automatically adapt the entropy scale hyperparameter
  during training (Haarnoja et al., 2018b). In order to gauge which variant of SAC to use in this
  work, we performed an ablation study where we studied SAC with and without automatic entropy
  tuning. We ran SAC with automatic entropy tuning for 10 runs. Hyperparameters were swept in
  the same sets as listed in Section 5.3. Additionally, we swept entropy scale step-sizes ОІ = 10z for
  in z вҲҲ {вҲ’4, вҲ’3, вҲ’2} for automatic entropy tuning. Figure 8 shows the learning curves of SAC
  with automatic entropy tuning, over 10 runs, and SAC without automatic entropy tuning over the
  40 runs conducted for the experiments in the main text. As can be seen in the figure, performing a
  grid search over the entropy scale hyperparameter never degrades performance compared to using
  automatic entropy tuning, and in some cases results in better performance than when using automatic
  entropy tuning. Because of this, we decided to use manual entropy tuning through a grid search in our
  experiments, which also allows us to characterize the sensitivity of SACвҖҷs performance with respect
  to the entropy scale hyperparameter.


                                                                        27
