Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M IXED F EDERATED L EARNING : J OINT
D ECENTRALIZED AND C ENTRALIZED L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                     A BSTRACT

             Federated learning (FL) enables learning from decentralized privacy-sensitive data,
             with computations on raw data confined to take place at edge clients. This pa-
             per introduces mixed FL, which incorporates an additional loss term calculated
             at the coordinating server (while maintaining FL’s private data restrictions). For
             example, additional datacenter data can be leveraged to jointly learn from central-
             ized (datacenter) and decentralized (federated) training data and better match an
             expected inference data distribution. Mixed FL also enables offloading some inten-
             sive computations (e.g., embedding regularization) to the server, greatly reducing
             communication and client computation load. For these and other mixed FL use
             cases, we present three algorithms: PARALLEL T RAINING, 1- WAY G RADIENT
             T RANSFER, and 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER. We perform extensive experi-
             ments of the algorithms on three tasks, demonstrating that mixed FL can blend
             training data to achieve an oracle’s accuracy on an inference distribution, and can
             reduce communication and computation overhead by more than 90%. Finally, we
             state convergence bounds for all algorithms, and give intuition on the mixed FL
             problems best suited to each. The theory confirms our empirical observations of
             how the algorithms perform under different mixed FL problem settings.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017) is a machine learning setting where multiple ‘clients’
(e.g., mobile phones) collaborate to train a model under coordination of a central server. Clients’
raw data are never transferred. Instead, focused updates intended for immediate aggregation are
used to achieve the learning objective (Kairouz et al., 2019). FL typically delivers model quality
improvements because training examples gathered in situ by clients reflect actual inference serving
requests. For example, a mobile keyboard next-word prediction model can be trained from actual
SMS messages, yielding higher accuracy than a model trained on a proxy document corpus. Because
of the benefits, FL has been used to train production models for many applications (Hard et al., 2018;
Ramaswamy et al., 2019; Apple, 2019; Ramaswamy et al., 2020; Hartmann, 2021; Hard et al., 2022).
Building on FL, we can gain significant benefits from ‘mixed FL’: jointly1 training with an additional
centralized objective in conjunction with the decentralized objective of FL. Let x be model parameters
to be optimized. Let f denote a mixed loss, a sum2 of a federated loss ff and a centralized loss fc :

                                                f (x) = ff (x) + fc (x)                                             (1)

Mixed loss f might be a more useful training objective than ff for many reasons, including:

Mitigating Distribution Shift by Adding Centralized Data to FL While FL helps with reducing
train vs. inference distribution skew, it may not remove it completely. Examples include: training
device populations that are subsets of inference device populations (e.g., training on high-end phones,
for eventual use also on low-end phones), label-biased example retention on edge clients (e.g., only
retaining positive examples of a binary classification task), and infrequent safety-critical example
    1
        We use ‘joint’ to distinguish our work from sequential ‘central-then-FL’ use cases, e.g. transfer learning.
    2
        To simplify we subsume any relative weights into loss terms, i.e. this can be f (x) = (wf f̃f (x))+(wc f˜c (x)).


                                                            1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


events with outsized importance (e.g., automotive hard-braking events needed to train a self-driving
AI) (Anonymous, a). The benefits of FL can be achieved while overcoming remaining distribution
skew by incorporating data from an additional datacenter dataset, via mixed FL. This affords a
composite set of training data that better matches the inference distribution.

Reducing Client Computation and Communication In representation learning, negative exam-
ples are used to push dissimilar items apart in a latent embedding space while keeping positive
examples closer together (Oord et al., 2018). In federated settings, clients’ caches may have lim-
ited local negative examples, and recent work (Anonymous, b) showed this significantly degrades
performance compared to centralized learning. This work also showed that using an additional
loss (a regularization) to push representations apart, instead of negative examples, can resolve this
performance gap. However, if done naively this requires communicating and computing over a large
embedding table, introducing massive overhead for large-scale tasks. Applying mixed FL, where
federated loss ff is the primary ‘affinity’ loss and centralized loss fc is the ‘spreadout’ regularization,
avoids communicating the entire embedding table to clients and greatly reduces client computation.
Though mixed FL can clearly be useful, an actual process to minimize f is not trivial. FL requires
that clients’ data stay on device, as they contain private information that possibly reveals personal
identity. Moreover, centralized loss/data is expected to differ significantly3 from client loss/data.

Contributions
    • We motivate the mixed FL problem and present three algorithms for addressing it: PARALLEL
      T RAINING (PT), 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER (1- W GT), and 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER
      (2- W GT). These algorithms maintain the data privacy protections inherent in FL. [Section 2]
    • We experiment with facial attribute classification and language modeling, demonstrating that
      our algorithms overcome distribution shift. We match the accuracy of hypothetical ‘oracle’
      scenarios where the entire inference distribution was colocated for training. [Section 4]
    • We experiment with user-embedding based movie recommendation, reducing communication
      overhead by 93.9% and client computation by 99.9% with no degradation in quality. [Section 4]
    • We state convergence bounds for each algorithm (in strongly, general, and non-convex settings),
      providing theoretical explanations for convergence behaviors we observe in the experiments.
      This indicates how the algorithms will perform on new mixed FL tasks. [Section 5]

2       A LGORITHMS
In FL, the loss function ff is an average of client loss functions fi . The client loss fi is an expectation
over batches of data examples Bi on client i.

                                           N
                                       1 X
                            ff (x) =         fi (x),       fi (x) = EBi [fi (x; Bi )]                        (2)
                                       N i=1

F EDAVG (McMahan et al., 2017) is a ubiquitous, heuristic FL method designed to minimize Equation
2 w.r.t. model x in a manner that allows all client data (Bi ) to remain at respective clients i. Providing
strong privacy protection is a major motivation for FL. Storing raw data locally on clients rather than
replicating it on servers decreases the attack surface of the system. Also, using focused ephemeral
updates and early aggregation follows principles of data minimization (White House Report, 2013).4
While training with loss ff via F EDAVG can yield an effective model x, this paper shows there are
scenarios where ‘mixing’ in an additional ‘centralized’ loss fc proves beneficial to the training of x.
Such a loss term can make use of batches of centralized data examples Bc , from a datacenter dataset:

                                          fc (x) = EBc [fc (x; Bc )]                                         (3)
    3
      Were they not to differ, one could treat a centralized compute node as an additional client in standard FL,
and simply make use of an established FL algorithm like F EDAVG for training x.
    4
      Even stronger privacy properties are possible when FL is combined with technologies such as differential
privacy (DP) and secure multiparty computation (SMPC) (Wang et al., 2021).


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The centralized loss fc will differ from the federated loss ff (else it would not be useful). This can be
a difference in the distributions that Bc and Bi are drawn from, and/or in the functional forms of fc
and fi . We will present an expression that quantifies the difference between fc and ff in Section 5.
We now state our mixed FL algorithms (Algorithms 1 and 2). Appendix A has a few practical details.
    • PARALLEL T RAINING performs a round of F EDAVG (minimizing ff ) in parallel with steps of
      centralized training (minimizing fc ), merges (e.g., averages) the respective updates, and repeats.
      Green in Algorithm 1 indicates added steps beyond F EDAVG for PARALLEL T RAINING.
    • 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER starts a round by calculating a gradient of fc . It is sent to
      participating clients and summed with clients’ gradients of fi during client optimization. Blue
      in Algorithm 2 indicates added steps beyond F EDAVG for 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER.
    • 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER is PARALLEL T RAINING with gradient sharing. Two gradients
      are now used, one based on fc and sent to clients (like 1- W GT), one based on ff and applied
      centrally. Purple in Algorithm 1 is added steps beyond PT for 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER.

Algorithm 1: PARALLEL T RAINING and 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER
(F EDAVG with added steps for PARALLEL T RAINING and further steps for 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER)
Input: Initial model x(0) ; C LIENT O PTIMIZER, S ERVERO PTIMIZER, C ENTRAL O PTIMIZER, M ERGE O PTIMIZER with respective
                                                                                                                                      (0)
        learning rates η, ηs , ηc , ηm ; central loss function fc (3); initial augmenting centralized/federated gradients, g̃c(0) , g̃f (zeroed)
for t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T − 1} do
      Initialize central model x(t,0)
                                  c       = x(t)
      for central step k = 0, . . . , Kc − 1 do
            Sample centralized batch Bc(k) ; compute stochastic gradient gc (x(t,k) c    ; Bc(k) ) of fc (xc(t,k) )
                                                                                                                      (t)
           Perform central update x(t,k+1)
                                   c       = C ENTRAL O PTIMIZER(xc(t,k) , gc (xc(t,k) ; Bc(k) ) + g̃f                      , ηc , t)
     Compute central model delta ∆(t)
                                  c   = x(t,K
                                         c
                                             c ) − x(t)
                      (t)                        (t)
     Sample a subset S    of clients; for client i ∈ S   in parallel do
           (t)
         ∆i , pi = C LIENT U PDATE (x(t) , g̃c(t) , C LIENT O PTIMIZER, η, t)
                                                       (t) P
     Aggregate client changes ∆(t) =
                                        P
                                                    p ∆ / i∈S (t) pi
                                           i∈S (t) i i
                                    (t)
     Compute federated model xf           = S ERVERO PTIMIZER(x(t) , −∆(t) , ηs , t)
                                            (t)      (t)
     Compute federated model delta ∆f             = xf     − x(t)
                                                                                        (t)
     Aggregate central model and federated model deltas ∆(t) = ∆c(t) + ∆f
     Update global model x(t+1) = M ERGE O PTIMIZER(x(t) , −∆(t) , ηm , t)
                                                                                        (t)
     Update augmenting centralized gradient g̃c(t+1) = −∆(t)
                                                         c /(ηc Kc ) − g̃f
                                            (t+1)                (t)
                                                   = − i∈S (t) ∆i /(η i∈S (t) Ki ) − g̃c(t)
                                                       P                P
     Update augmenting federated gradient g̃f                                                                             (see Appendix A)

C LIENT U PDATE:               (t,0)
Input: Initial client model xi       ; (possible) augmenting gradient g̃c(t) ; C LIENT O PTIMIZER, learning rate η; round t; client loss fi (2)
Initialize client weight pi = 0
for client step k = 0, . . . , Ki − 1 do
                       (k)                                     (t,k)     (k)            (t,k)                                        (k)
      Sample batch Bi ; compute stochastic gradient gi (xi           ; Bi ) of fi (xi         ); update client weight pi = pi + |Bi |
                               (t,k+1)                               (t,k)          (t,k)      (k)
     Perform client update xi             = C LIENT O PTIMIZER(xi            , gi (xi       ; Bi     ) + g̃c(t) , η, t)
                                    (t)       (t,Ki )    (t,0)             (t)
Compute client model changes ∆i           = xi        − xi     and return ∆i , pi


Algorithm 2: 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER (F EDAVG (McMahan et al., 2017) with added steps)
Input: Initial model x(0) ; C LIENT O PTIMIZER, S ERVERO PTIMIZER with respective learning rates η, ηs ; central loss function fc (3)
for t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T − 1} do
      Sample batch Bc(t) ; compute stochastic gradient gc (x(t) ; Bc(t) ) of fc (x(t) ); set augmenting gradient g̃c(t) = gc (x(t) ; Bc(t) )
      Sample a subset S (t) of clients; for client i ∈ S (t) in parallel do
             (t)
           ∆i , pi = C LIENT U PDATE (x(t) , g̃c(t) , C LIENT O PTIMIZER, η) (C LIENT U PDATE function defined in Algorithm 1)
                                                          (t) P
      Aggregate client changes ∆(t) =
                                          P
                                                      p ∆ / i∈S (t) pi
                                             i∈S (t) i i
     Update global model x(t+1) = S ERVERO PTIMIZER(x(t) , −∆(t) , ηs , t)



3      R ELATED W ORK
There are parallels between G RADIENT T RANSFER and algorithms addressing inter-client data
heterogeneity in FL, like SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020b) or Mime (Karimireddy et al.,
2020a). Those algorithms calculate a gradient reflective of the entire federated population and transmit
it to clients to reduce update variance, improving optimization on non-IID client data. G RADIENT
T RANSFER calculates a gradient reflective of centralized data/loss, to augment client computations


                                                                          3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of decentralized data/loss (in 2- W GT, also the converse). However, SCAFFOLD requires keeping
state at the server (control variates) for each participating client, impractical in real large-scale FL
systems (Kairouz et al., 2019). 2- W GT only requires state (augmenting gradients) for two entities,
and so is easily implemented.
Another instance of a non-IID client approach (Zhao et al., 2018) influencing mixed FL is the
E XAMPLE T RANSFER algorithm (Anonymous, a). Here, centralized examples are sent to federated
clients, instead of gradients. This is typically precluded in real FL applications. The data volume
needed to transfer may be excessive, and in general E XAMPLE T RANSFER does not offer solutions
for one of the main motivations of this work, reducing client computation and communication.
‘Transfer learning’ also involves two different training datasets, but has a different purpose. Transfer
 learning pretrains a model on a distribution (e.g., centralized data in a datacenter), then fine-tunes
 it on the actual distribution of interest (e.g., decentralized data via FL). It is desirable as a way to
 quickly train on the latter distribution (e.g., as in Ro et al. (2022)). But its sequential approach results
 in catastrophic forgetting (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990; French, 1999); accuracy on
 pretraining data is lost as the model learns to fit fine-tuning data instead. In mixed FL, we desire good
 inference performance on all data distributions trained on. See Appendix B.4.5 for more.
In differentially private (DP) optimization, a line of work has aimed to improve privacy/utility
tradeoffs by utilizing additional non-private data. One way is to use non-private data to pretrain
(Abadi et al., 2016). Another avenue is to use non-private data to learn the gradient geometry (Zhou
et al., 2020; Amid et al., 2021; Asi et al., 2021; Kairouz et al., 2021a; Li et al., 2022), improving
accuracy by enabling tighter, non-isotropic gradient noise during DP optimization. Amid et al. (2021)
and Li et al. (2022) consider the FL use case5 . As in transfer learning, additional data is used only to
improve performance on a single distribution, and retaining accuracy on other distributions is a non-
goal (in contrast to mixed FL). Also, the non-private data used is generally matching (in distribution)
to the private data, whereas in mixed FL we typically explicitly leverage distinct distributions.
A few recent works (Yu et al., 2020; Elbir et al., 2021; Jeong et al., 2021) present instances of mixed
FL problems; they shift computations to the server that are intensive or impossible at the clients.
These works do not address distribution shift or present more general mixed FL algorithms.

4      E XPERIMENTS

We now present experiments on three tasks (Table 1), showing a range of problems for which mixed
FL is useful. They also show the comparative performance of each algorithm described in Section 2.

Table 1: Experiments summary. For training hyperparameters and further details, see Appendix B.

                             S MILE C LASSIFICATION        L ANGUAGE M ODELING M OVIE R ECOMMEND .
    M ODEL A RCH . T YPE     F ULLY-C ONNECTED             RNN                        D UAL E NCODER
    F EDERATED DATA            C ELEBA (S MILING )         S TACK OVERFLOW            M OVIE L ENS
    F ED . C LIENT L OSS (fi ) B INARY C.E.                C ATEGORICAL C.E.          H INGE
    F ED . W EIGHT (wf )       0.5                         0.75                       0.5
    C ENTRALIZED DATA        C ELEBA (N ON - SMILING ) W IKIPEDIA                     -
    C ENT. L OSS (fc )       B INARY C.E.              C ATEGORICAL C.E.              S PREADOUT (R EG .)
    C ENT. W EIGHT (wc )     0.5                       0.25                           0.5


4.1     A DDRESS L ABEL I MBALANCE IN T RAIN DATA (S MILE C LASSIFIER ; C ELEBA)

Earlier work (Anonymous, a) motivated mixed FL with the example problem of training a ‘smiling’-
vs.-‘unsmiling’ classifier via FL with mobile phones, with the challenge that the phones’ camera
application (by the nature of its usage) tends to only persist images of smiling faces. A solution
     5
       An interesting similarity between PDA-DPMD (Amid et al., 2021) and our work: in PDA-DPMD for FL, a
first order approximation of mirror descent is used, where the server model update is calculated as weighted sum
of private (federated) and public loss terms, just as in PARALLEL T RAINING or 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 (a) Smile Classifier: Eval. AUC (ROC) vs. Round.        (b) Language Model: Evaluation Accuracy vs. Round.

Figure 1: Mixed FL resolves distribution shift, enabling accuracy equal to if data were colocated and
centrally trained (‘oracle’). The smile classifier reaches an oracle’s evaluation AUC of ROC of over
0.95. The language model reaches an oracle’s evaluation accuracy of over 0.66. Evaluation is over all
data (i.e., smiling and non-smiling faces; Stack Overflow and Wikipedia). Plots show 95% conf.


       (a) Smile Classifier: Eval. Loss vs. Round.           (b) Language Model: Eval. Loss vs. Round.

Figure 2: Comparative convergence differs; (a) shows PT converging worse than 1- W GT or 2- W
GT, while (b) shows all algorithms converging the same. See Section 5.3 for theoretical explanation.

for this severe label imbalance is to apply mixed FL, utilizing an additional datacenter dataset of
unsmiling faces to train a capable classifier. To experiment, CelebA data6 (Liu et al., 2015; Caldas
et al., 2018) is split into a federated ‘smiling’ dataset and centralized ‘unsmiling’ dataset.
Figures 1a and 2a show the AUC and loss convergence of our three algorithms when applied to
this problem. Empirically, we observe G RADIENT T RANSFER converge faster than PARALLEL
T RAINING. Section 5 will provide a theoretical explanation for this behavior.

4.2    M ITIGATE B IAS IN T RAIN DATA (L ANGUAGE M ODEL ; S TACK OVERFLOW, W IKIPEDIA )

Consider the problem of learning a language model like a RNN-based next character prediction
model, used to make typing suggestions to a user in a mobile keyboard application. Because the
ultimate inference application is on mobile phones, it is natural to train this model via FL, leveraging
cached SMS text content highly reflective of inference time usage (at least for some users).
However, the mobile phones participating in the federated learning of the model might be only a
subset of the mobile phones for which we desire to deploy for inference. Higher-end mobile phones
can disproportionately participate in FL, as their larger memory and faster processors allow them to
complete client training faster. But to do well at inference, a model should make accurate predictions
for users of lower-end phones as well. A purely FL approach can do an inadequate job of learning
these users’ usage patterns. (See Kairouz et al. (2019) for more on aspects of fairness and bias in FL.)
Mixed FL overcomes this problem, by training a model jointly on federated data (representative of
users of higher-end phones) and a datacenter dataset (representative of users of lower-end phones).
We simulate this scenario using two large public datasets: the Stack Overflow dataset7 (Kaggle) for
federated data, and the Wikipedia dataset8 (Wikimedia Foundation) for datacenter data. Figure 1b
shows results. The ‘only FL’ scenario learns Stack Overflow (but not Wikipedia) patterns of character
usage, and so has reduced accuracy (∼ 0.60) when evaluated on examples from both datasets. The
   6
     CelebA federated data available via open source FL software (TFF CelebA documentation, 2022).
   7
     Stack Overflow federated data available via open source (TFF StackOverflow documentation, 2022).
   8
     Wikipedia data available via open source (TFDS Wikipedia (20201201.en) documentation, 2022).


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                             Table 2: Movie recommendation: computation
                                                             (C OMP.) and communication (C OMM .) overhead
                                                             per client. The baseline scenario computes every-
                                                             thing on clients. See Appendix B.3 for analysis.

                                                                           C OMP. (M FLOP )    C OMM . (KB)
                                                               BASELINE    125.16              494
Figure 3: Movie prediction, Eval. Loss vs. Round.              PT          0.025               20
We see that mixed FL results in similar loss as the            1- W GT     0.025               30
more expensive baseline scenario (see Table 2).                2- W GT     0.025               30



mixed FL algorithms demonstrate learning both: they all achieve an evaluation accuracy (∼ 0.66)
comparable to an imagined ‘oracle’ that could centrally train on the combination of datasets.
Unlike the smile classification experiment, here PARALLEL T RAINING converges about as fast as
G RADIENT T RANSFER. Section 5 will provide a theoretical explanation for this behavior.

4.3       R EGULARIZE E MBEDDINGS AT S ERVER (M OVIE R ECOMMENDATION ; M OVIE L ENS )

The third task we study, movie recommendation, is one with an embedding regularization term
as described in Section 1. As Table 1 shows, a key difference from the previous two mixed FL
experimental scenarios is that here we are mixing losses with different functional forms (instead of
mixing different datacenter and federated data distributions). We study this scenario by training a
dual encoder representation learning model (Covington et al., 2016) for next movie prediction on the
MovieLens dataset (Harper & Konstan, 2015; GroupLens).
As described in Section 1, limited negative examples can degrade representation learning performance.
Previous work (Anonymous, b) proposed using losses insensitive to local client negatives to improve
federated model performance. They observed significantly improved performance by using a two-part
loss: (1) a hinge loss to pull embeddings for similar movies together, and (2) a spreadout regularization
(Zhang et al., 2017) to push embeddings for unrelated movies apart. For clients to calculate (2),
the server must communicate all movie embeddings to each client, and clients must perform a
matrix multiplication over the entire embedding table. This introduces enormous computation and
communication overhead when the number of movies is large.
Mixed FL can alleviate this communication and computation overhead. Instead of computing both
loss terms on clients, clients calculate only the hinge loss and the server calculates the expensive
regularization, avoiding costly computation on each client. Also, computing the hinge loss only
requires the embeddings of movies in a client’s local dataset. Federated select (Charles et al., 2022)
enables only those embeddings to be sent to that client, saving communication and on-client memory.
Experiments show all mixed FL algorithms achieve model performance (around 0.1 for recall@10)
comparable to the baseline scenario where everything is computed on the clients. Moreover, mixed
FL eliminates more than 99.9% of client computation and more than 93.9% of communication (see
Table 2). For computation and communication analysis, see Appendix B. Note that real-world models
can be much larger than this movie recommendation model9 . Without mixed FL, communicating
such large models to clients and computing regularization would be impractical in large-scale settings.
PARALLEL T RAINING converges slightly slower than either G RADIENT T RANSFER algorithm
(Figure 3) but reaches the same evaluation loss at around 1500 rounds.

5       C ONVERGENCE

5.1       P RELIMINARIES

We now describe convergence properties for each mixed FL algorithm from Section 2. We assume
mixed loss f has a finite minimizer (i.e., ∃ x∗ s.t. f (x) ≥ f (x∗ ) ∀ x). We assume client losses fi
    9
        E.g., for a next URL prediction task with millions of URLs the embedding table size can reach gigabytes.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and centralized loss fc are β-smooth. If fi are β-smooth, federated loss ff is also10 . For some results,
we assume fi and fc are µ-convex (possibly strongly convex, µ > 0). If fi are µ-convex, ff is also11 .
For a parameter vector x, we use ∇fi (x) to denote the full gradient of fi (i.e., over all data on client
i). Similarly, ∇ff (x) and ∇fc (x) denote full gradients12 of ff and fc at x. We use gi (x) to denote
an unbiased stochastic gradient of fi , calculated on a random batch Bi of examples on client i.
We focus on the impact to convergence when differences exist between the federated and centralized
losses/data. As such, we make the following homogeneity assumption about the federated data, which
simplifies the analysis and brings out the key differences. Our analysis can be easily extended to
heterogeneous clients by assuming a bound on variance of the client gradients.
Assumption 5.1. The federated clients have homogeneous data distributions (i.e., with examples
that are drawn IID from a common data distribution), and their stochastic gradients have bounded
variance. Specifically, for some σ > 0, we have for all clients i and parameter vectors x:
                                                                                 2
                              E [gi (x)] = ∇ff (x),    E kgi (x) − ∇ff (x)k ≤ σ 2 .                         (4)

Under such conditions, F EDAVG convergence can match SGD (Table 2, Karimireddy et al. (2020b)).

Let gf denote an unbiased stochastic gradient of federated loss ff , formed by randomly sampling
a cohort of S (out of N total) clients, randomly sampling a batch Bi of client data examples, and
averaging the respective client stochastic gradients. Given Assumption 5.1 we bound variance of gf :

                                                                                              2
                1X                                           21X                                      1 2
       gf (x) =    gi (x),           E kgf (x) − ∇ff (x)k = E    gi (x) − ∇ff (x)                 ≤     σ   (5)
                S                                             S                                       S
                   i∈S                                                     i∈S

Let gc (x) denote a stochastic gradient of the centralized loss fc at x, calculated on a randomly
sampled batch Bc of centralized examples (from a datacenter dataset), with variance bounded by σc2 :
                                                                     2
                                          E kgc (x) − ∇fc (x)k ≤ σc2 .                                      (6)

Summarizing Equations 4-6, a client’s stochastic gradient gi (x) has variance bounded by σ 2 , the
                                                                         2
federated cohort’s stochastic gradient gf (x) has variance bounded by σ /S , and the centralized
                                                       2
stochastic gradient gc (x) has variance bounded by σc . Increasing client batch size |Bi | reduces
variance of gi (x) and gf (x), increasing cohort size S reduces variance of gf (x), and increasing
central batch size |Bc | reduces variance of gc (x).
             2
Note that σ /S only bounds variance within the federated data distribution, and σc2 only bounds
variance within the central data distribution. To say something about variance across the two data
distributions, we adapt the notion of ‘bounded gradient dissimilarity’ (or ‘BGD‘) introduced in
Karimireddy et al. (2020b) (Definition A1), and apply it to the mixed FL scenario here.
Definition 5.2 (mixed FL (G, B)-BGD). There exist constants G ≥ 0 and B ≥ 1 such that ∀x:
                                          2                      2
                                ∇ff (x)              ∇fc (x)                           2
                         wf                   + wc                   ≤ G2 + B 2 k∇f (x)k
                                 wf                   wc
In the definition, wf and wc are proportions of influence (wf +wc = 1) of the federated and centralized
objectives on the overall mixed optimization. (The simplest setting is wf = wc = 1/2.)

5.2    B OUNDS

We can now state upper bounds on convergence (to an error in mixed loss smaller than  ) for the respec-
tive mixed FL algorithms. For ease of comparison, the convergence bounds are summarized in Table
3. The Theorems and Proofs of these convergence bounds are given in Appendix C. As mentioned
  10
      By its definition in Equation 2 combined with the triangle inequality.
  11
      By its definition in Equation 2, it is convex combination of fi .
   12
      Note: ∇ff (x) is useful for theoretical convergence analysis, but cannot be practically computed in a real
cross-device FL setting. In contrast, ∇fc (x) can be computed.


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 3: Order of number of rounds required to be within   of optimal mixed loss, for different mixing
strategies. See Appendix C. σ 2 as in (4), σc2 as in (6), G and B as in Def. 5.2 with wf = wc = 1/2. β
is smoothness (Def. D.1), µ is convexity bound (Def. D.4). K is client local steps taken (≥ 2), S is
client cohort size (per round). D and F are initial distances/loss errors, described in Appendix C.

                  PARALLEL T RAINING                          1- W GT                        2- W GT
                     2              √
                   (σ    +Sσc2 )            2                 (σ   2
                                                                       +KSσc2 )              (σ 2 +Sσc2 )
  µ-C ONVEX          KSµ        + Gµ√β  + Bµβ log( 1  )           KSµ       + βµ log( 1  )     KSµ        + βµ log( 1  )
                                        √
                   (σ 2 +Sσc2 )D 2            2    2          (σ 2 +KSσc2 )D 2        2      (σ 2 +Sσc2 )D 2        2
  C ONVEX               KS 2       + G 3 β + B βD
                                                                    KS 2       + βD               KS 2       + βD
                                        √2
                   (σ 2 +Sσc2 )βF             2               (σ 2 +KSσc2 )βF                (σ 2 +Sσc2 )βF
  N ONCONVEX            KS 2       + G 3 β + B  βF                  KS 2       + βF               KS 2       + βF
                                        2


previously, the analysis extends in a straightforward manner to the setting of heterogeneous clients
                                                                   PN
assuming a bound on the variance of client gradients: for all x, N1 i=1 k∇fi (x) − ∇ff (x)k2 ≤ σf2
for some σf ≥ 0. Under this assumption, the bounds in Table 3 change by an additional Kσf2 term
in the expression involving σ 2 and σc2 in the parenthesis on the numerator of the leading term. The
derivation of these more general bounds follows on the same lines, so we omit it for brevity.
Analyzing Table 3, there are several implications to be drawn.

Significant (G,B)-BGD impedes PARALLEL T RAINING The convergence bounds for PARAL -
LEL T RAINING show a dependence on the G and B parameters from Definition 5.2. If a mixed FL
problem involves a large amount of dissimilarity between the federated and centralized gradients (i.e.,
if G   0 or B   1), then PARALLEL T RAINING will be slower to converge than alternatives.

Significant σc2 impedes 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER is more
sensitive to central variance σc2 . Unlike the other algorithms, the impact of σc2 on convergence scales
with the number of steps K. 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER requires a central batch size |Bc | that
is K times larger to achieve the same impact on convergence. Intuitively, this makes sense; in a
round, PARALLEL T RAINING and 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER sample K fresh batches during
centralized optimization, while 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER only samples a single central batch.

2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER should always converge at least as well as others The conver-
gence bound for 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER is unaffected by gradient dissimilarity (i.e., G   0
or B   1), unlike PARALLEL T RAINING. Also, the bound for 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER is less
sensitive to σc2 than the bound for 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER (as described above).

5.3   A NALYSIS OF E XPERIMENTS

PARALLEL T RAINING has a convergence bound substantially different than the G RADIENT T RANS -
FER algorithms; the dependence on the BGD parameters G and B indicates there are mixed FL
problems where PARALLEL T RAINING is slower to converge than G RADIENT T RANSFER (in either
form). How can we know if a particular problem is one where PARALLEL T RAINING will have
slower convergence? It would be useful to know G and B, but they cannot be exactly measured. G
and B (Definition 5.2) are upper bounds holding ∀x, and the entire space of x cannot realistically be
checked. Instead, we introduce sampled approximations to empirically estimate these upper bounds.
                                                       ˜ f , ∇f
Let x(t) be the global model at start of round t. Let ∇f      ˜ c , ∇f
                                                                     ˜ be approximations of federated,
                                                          t      t     t
centralized, total gradients at round t. Considering Definition 5.2, we define G̃t as a sampled
approximation of G assuming B = 1, and B̃t as a sampled approximation of B assuming G = 0:


                 ˜f = 1
                        X
                ∇f          gi (x(t) ) ,        ˜ c = gc (x(t) ),
                                               ∇f                              ˜ = ∇f
                                                                              ∇f    ˜ f + ∇f
                                                                                           ˜c
                   t                               t                             t     t      t
                      S i∈S
                                                                                                                       (7)
            1   ˜f
                     2   1   ˜c
                                  2
                                       ˜
                                           2                               1   ˜f
                                                                                    2   1   ˜c
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                        ˜
                                                                                                            2
   G̃2t =      ∇f  t   +    ∇f  t   − ∇f t   , B̃t2 =                         ∇f  t   +    ∇f  t     / ∇f t
            wf           wc                                                wf           wc


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Table 4: Sampled approximations of (G,B)-BGD. (See Appendix B.1 for details.)

                         S MILE C LASSIFICATION L ANGUAGE M ODELING M OVIE R ECOMMEND .
      max10≤t≤100 G̃2t   49.04                    0.03                      0.03
      max10≤t≤100 B̃t2   1.26                     1.34                      1.50


Table 4 states maximums of G̃2t and B̃t2 for the experiments of Section 4. This provides some
theoretical explanation for empirical observations made during the experiments.
    • Smile Classification (4.1) As discussed, PARALLEL T RAINING is at a disadvantage when
      G   0 or B   1, and Table 4 (left column) shows that G̃t is significantly large in smile
      classification. This aligns with our empirical observation in Figure 2a of PARALLEL T RAINING
      converging slower than either G RADIENT T RANSFER algorithm.
    • Language Modeling (4.2) Table 4 (center column) shows language modeling with more trivial
      gradient dissimilarity: G̃t ≈ 0 and B̃t ≈ 1. PARALLEL T RAINING should be competitive.
      Figure 2b empirically confirms this to be true; all algorithms converge roughly equivalently.

6    C ONCLUSION

This paper has introduced mixed FL, including motivation, algorithms and their convergence proper-
ties, and intuition for when a given algorithm will be useful for a given problem. Our experiments
indicate mixed FL can improve accuracy and reduce communication and computation across tasks.
This work focused on jointly learning from a single decentralized client population and a centralized
entity, as it illuminates the key aspects of the mixed FL problem. Note that mixed FL and the
associated properties we define in this paper (like mixed FL (G, B)-BGD) are easily expanded to
work with multiple (> 1) distinct client populations participating. E.g., a population of mobile
phones and a separate population of smart speakers, or mobile phones separated into populations
with distinct capabilities/usage (high-end vs. low-end, or by country/language). Also, there need not
be a centralized entity; mixing can be solely between distinct federated datasets.
It is interesting to reflect on the bounds of Table 3, and what they indicate about the benefits of
separating a single decentralized client population into multiple populations for mixed FL purposes.
The bounds are in terms of σ 2 (representing within population ‘variability’) and G and B (representing
cross-population ‘variability’). Splitting a population based on traits will likely decrease σ 2 (each
population is now more homogeneous) but introduce or increase G and B (populations are now
distinctive). This might indicate scenarios where G RADIENT T RANSFER methods (only bounded by
σ 2 ) become more useful and PARALLEL T RAINING (also bound by G and B) becomes less useful.
The limits of our convergence bounds should be noted. First, they are ‘loose’; practical performance
in particular algorithmic scenarios could be better, and thus comparisons between algorithms could
differ. Second, our bounds assume IID federated data, which is invalid in practice; convergence
properties differ on non-IID data. While our analysis, extended to handle non-IID data, shows that
the bounds do not materially change, it is still a place where theory and practice slightly diverge.
It is important to note that mixed FL is orthogonal to the choice of algorithm for federated training.
For simplicity, this paper described mixed FL with F EDAVG used for federated training. However,
one could use DP-FedAvg (McMahan et al. (2018)) or DP-FTRL (Kairouz et al. (2021b)) with
mixed FL to ensure that DP protections are applied to the federated data. Similarly, an adaptive
S ERVERO PTIMIZER like F EDADAM (Reddi et al., 2020) could be used in the federated portion of
training (preliminary mixed FL results with F EDADAM are given in Appendix B.4.4).
In principle, mixed FL techniques are expected to have positive societal impacts insofar as they further
develop the toolkit for FL (which has security and privacy benefits to users) and improve accuracy on
final inference distributions. Also, we’ve shown (Section 4.2) how mixed FL can address participation
biases that arise in FL. However, the addition of server-based data to federated optimization raises
the possibility that biases in large public corpora find their way into more applications of FL.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Abadi, Andy Chu, Ian Goodfellow, Brendan McMahan, Ilya Mironov, Kunal Talwar, and
 Li Zhang. Deep learning with differential privacy. In 23rd ACM Conference on Computer and
 Communications Security (ACM CCS), 2016.
Ehsan Amid, Arun Ganesh, Rajiv Mathews, Swaroop Ramaswamy, Shuang Song, Thomas Steinke,
  Vinith M Suriyakumar, Om Thakkar, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Public data-assisted mirror descent
  for private model training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00193, 2021.
Galen Andrew, Om Thakkar, Brendan McMahan, and Swaroop Ramaswamy. Differentially private
  learning with adaptive clipping. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17455–
 17466, 2021.
Anonymous. Anonymized for iclr submission review., a.
Anonymous. Anonymized for iclr submission review., b.
Apple. Designing for privacy (video and slide deck). Apple WWDC, https://developer.
  apple.com/videos/play/wwdc2019/708, 2019.
Hilal Asi, John Duchi, Alireza Fallah, Omid Javidbakht, and Kunal Talwar. Private adaptive gradient
  methods for convex optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 383–392.
  PMLR, 2021.
Sebastian Caldas, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Konečný, H Brendan McMahan, Virginia Smith, and
  Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01097,
  2018.
Zachary Charles, Kallista Bonawitz, Stanislav Chiknavaryan, Brendan McMahan, et al. Federated
  select: A primitive for communication-and memory-efficient federated learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2208.09432, 2022.
Paul Covington, Jay Adams, and Emre Sargin. Deep neural networks for youtube recommendations.
  In Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference on recommender systems, pp. 191–198, 2016.
Ahmet M Elbir, Sinem Coleri, and Kumar Vijay Mishra. Hybrid federated and centralized learning.
  In 2021 29th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), pp. 1541–1545. IEEE, 2021.
Robert French. Catastrophic forgetting in connectionist networks. Trends in cognitive sciences, 3:
 128–135, 05 1999. doi: 10.1016/S1364-6613(99)01294-2.
GroupLens. Movielens 1m dataset.              URL https://grouplens.org/datasets/
  movielens/1m/.
Andrew Hard, Kanishka Rao, Rajiv Mathews, Françoise Beaufays, Sean Augenstein, Hubert Eichner,
  Chloé Kiddon, and Daniel Ramage. Federated learning for mobile keyboard prediction. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.03604, 2018.
Andrew Hard, Kurt Partridge, Neng Chen, Sean Augenstein, Aishanee Shah, Hyun Jin Park, Alex Park,
  Sara Ng, Jessica Nguyen, Ignacio Lopez Moreno, et al. Production federated keyword spotting via
  distillation, filtering, and joint federated-centralized training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06322,
  2022.
F Maxwell Harper and Joseph A Konstan. The movielens datasets: History and context. Acm
  transactions on interactive intelligent systems (tiis), 5(4):1–19, 2015.
Florian Hartmann. Predicting text selections with federated learning. Google AI Blog, https://ai.
  googleblog.com/2021/11/predicting-text-selections-with.html, 2021.
Wonyong Jeong, Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, and Sung Ju Hwang. Federated semi-supervised
 learning with inter-client consistency & disjoint learning. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR) 2021. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
 2021.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaggle.   Stack overflow data. URL https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/
  stackoverflow/stackoverflow.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Keith Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Advances
  and open problems in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04977, 2019.
Peter Kairouz, Monica Ribero Diaz, Keith Rush, and Abhradeep Thakurta. (nearly) dimension
  independent private erm with adagrad rates
  via publicly estimated subspaces. In Mikhail Belkin and Samory Kpotufe (eds.), Proceedings of
  Thirty Fourth Conference on Learning Theory, volume 134 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 2717–2746. PMLR, 15–19 Aug 2021a. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v134/kairouz21a.html.
Peter Kairouz, Brendan McMahan, Shuang Song, Om Thakkar, Abhradeep Thakurta, and Zheng Xu.
  Practical and private (deep) learning without sampling or shuffling. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 5213–5225. PMLR, 2021b.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebastian U
  Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Mime: Mimicking centralized stochastic algorithms in
  federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03606, 2020a.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebastian U Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for on-device federated
  learning. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2020b.
Tian Li, Manzil Zaheer, Sashank J Reddi, and Virginia Smith. Private adaptive optimization with
  side information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05963, 2022.
Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J. Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 24:109–165, 1989.
H Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proceedings of
  the 20th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1273–1282, 2017.
  Initial version posted on arXiv in February 2016.
H Brendan McMahan, Daniel Ramage, Kunal Talwar, and Li Zhang. Learning differentially private
  recurrent language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
  2018.
Nicole Mitchell, Johannes Ballé, Zachary Charles, and Jakub Konečnỳ. Optimizing the
  communication-accuracy trade-off in federated learning with rate-distortion theory. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.02664, 2022.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive
  coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Swaroop Ramaswamy, Rajiv Mathews, Kanishka Rao, and Françoise Beaufays. Federated learning
  for emoji prediction in a mobile keyboard. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04329, 2019.
Swaroop Ramaswamy, Om Thakkar, Rajiv Mathews, Galen Andrew, H. Brendan McMahan, and
  Françoise Beaufays. Training production language models without memorizing user data. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2009.10031, 2020.
Roger Ratcliff. Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and
  forgetting functions. Psychological review, 97 2:285–308, 1990.
Sashank Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečnỳ,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and H Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2003.00295, 2020.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jae Hun Ro, Theresa Breiner, Lara McConnaughey, Mingqing Chen, Ananda Theertha Suresh,
  Shankar Kumar, and Rajiv Mathews. Scaling language model size in cross-device federated
  learning. In ACL 2022 Workshop on Federated Learning for Natural Language Processing, 2022.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=ShNG29KGF-c.
Sebastian U Stich. Unified optimal analysis of the (stochastic) gradient method. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.04232, 2019.
TFDS Wikipedia (20201201.en) documentation. Tensorflow datasets (tfds) wikipedia documentation,
  2022. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/datasets/catalog/wikipedia#
  wikipedia20201201en.
TFF CelebA documentation. tff.simulation.datasets.celeba.load_data doc-
  umentation, 2022. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/federated/api_docs/
  python/tff/simulation/datasets/celeba/load_data.
TFF StackOverflow documentation. tff.simulation.datasets.stackoverflow.load_data
  documentation, 2022. URL https://www.tensorflow.org/federated/api_docs/
  python/tff/simulation/datasets/stackoverflow/load_data.
Jianyu Wang, Zachary Charles, Zheng Xu, Gauri Joshi, H. Brendan McMahan, Blaise Agüera y Arcas,
   Maruan Al-Shedivat, Galen Andrew, Salman Avestimehr, Katharine Daly, et al. A field guide to
   federated optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06917, 2021.
White House Report. Consumer data privacy in a networked world: A framework for protect-
 ing privacy and promoting innovation in the global digital economy. Journal of Privacy and
 Confidentiality, 2013.
Wikimedia Foundation. Wikimedia downloads. URL https://dumps.wikimedia.org.
Felix Yu, Ankit Singh Rawat, Aditya Krishna Menon, and Sanjiv Kumar. Federated learning with
  only positive labels. 2020.
Xu Zhang, Felix X Yu, Sanjiv Kumar, and Shih-Fu Chang. Learning spread-out local feature
  descriptors. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision, pp. 4595–
 4603, 2017.
Yue Zhao, Meng Li, Liangzhen Lai, Naveen Suda, Damon Civin, and Vikas Chandra. Federated
  learning with non-iid data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.00582, 2018.
Yingxue Zhou, Zhiwei Steven Wu, and Arindam Banerjee. Bypassing the ambient dimension: Private
  sgd with gradient subspace identification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.03813, 2020.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A         P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
A.1        D OWNLOAD S IZE

G RADIENT T RANSFER (either 1- WAY or 2- WAY) requires sending additional data as part of the
communication from server to clients at the start of a federated round. Apart from the usual model
checkpoint weights, with G RADIENT T RANSFER we must now also transmit ‘augmenting’ gradients
of the model weights w.r.t centralized data as well. Naively, this doubles the download size as the
gradient is the same size as the model. However, the augmenting gradients should be amenable to
compression, e.g. using an approach such as Mitchell et al. (2022).

A.2        U PLOAD S IZE

With PARALLEL T RAINING and 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, no client gradient information is
used outside of the clients themselves, so there is no additional information (apart from the model
deltas and aggregation weights) to upload to the server. With 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, client
gradient information is used in centralized training, so needs to be conveyed to the server somehow.
When the FL client optimization is SGD, the average client gradient in a round (over all clients
participating, over all steps) can be determined from the model deltas and aggregation weights that
are already being sent back to the server, meaning no additional upload bandwidth is necessary. Apart
from bandwidth considerations, this also means there is no additional vector for private data leakage.
The algorithm to do this is as follows.
                                                                                (t)
Each client i transmits to the server a local model change ∆i and an aggregation weight pi that is
related to number of steps taken Ki . The average total gradient applied at client i during round t is:

                                                                      1   (t)
                                                        ḡ (t) = −      ∆                                (8)
                                                                     ηKi i
The average client gradient (i.e., w.r.t. just client data) at client i is:

                                                    (t)         1  (t)
                                                  ḡi     =−      ∆ − g̃c(t)                             (9)
                                                               ηKi i
             (t)
where g̃c is the augmenting centralized gradient that was calculated from centralized data and used
in round t. The average (across the cohort) of average client gradients, weighted by Ki , is:

                                            (t)       1   X (t)
                                          ḡf     =− P       ∆i − g̃c(t)                                (10)
                                                    η i Ki i

                                    (t)
This average client gradient ḡf is in the spirit of SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020b) Equation
                                                                     (t+1)
4, Option II. It will be used as the augmenting federated gradient g̃f     in the subsequent round
t + 1, to augment centralized optimization. See Algorithm 1.

A.3        D EBUGGING AND H YPERPARAMETER I NTUITION VIA K = 1

As these algorithms each involve different hyperparameters, validating that software implementa-
tions13 are behaving as expected is non-trivial. Something that proved useful for debugging purposes,
as well as provided practical experience in understanding equivalences between the algorithms, was
to perform test cases with the number of local steps K set to 1. In this setting, the three mixed FL
algorithms are effectively identical and should make equivalent progress during training.
Note that the convergence bounds of Table 3 hold for K ≥ 2, so this takes us outside the operating
regime where the bounds predict performance. It also takes us outside an operating regime that is
typically useful (FL use cases generally find multiple steps per round to be beneficial). But it does
serve a purpose when debugging.
    13
         An open-source mixed FL code repository will be shared with the public version of the paper.


                                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a) G̃2t vs. Round t.                                (b) B̃t2 vs. Round t.

Figure 4: Sampled approximations of mixed FL (G, B)-BGD, for the three experiments in Section 4.


B     E XPERIMENTS : A DDITIONAL I NFORMATION AND R ESULTS

B.1     G̃t AND B̃t M ETRICS P LOTS

Table 4 is an informative comparison of the mixed FL optimization landscape of the three respective
experiments conducted in Section 4. It includes maximum values for the metrics G̃t and B̃t (the
sampled approximations of the parameters defined in (G, B)-BGD (Definition 5.2). Here we provide
some additional information.
Figure 4 plots these sampled approximation metrics over the first 100 rounds of training. We ran 5
simulations per experiment and took the maximum at each round across simulations. We used the
same hyperparameters as described below (in Subsection B.2), except taking only a single step per
round (K = 1).

B.2     A DDITIONAL D ETAILS FOR E XPERIMENTS IN S ECTION 4

General Notes on Hyperparameter Selection For the various experiments in Section 4, we
empirically determined good hyperparameter settings (as documented in Tables 5-10). Our general
approach for each task was to leave server learning rate ηs at 1, select a number of steps K that
made the most use of the examples in each client’s cache, and then do a sweep of client learning
rates η to determine a setting that was fast but didn’t diverge. For PARALLEL T RAINING and 2- WAY
G RADIENT T RANSFER, which involve central optimization and merging, we set the merging learning
rate ηm to be 1, and set the central learning rate ηc as the product of client and server learning rates:
ηc = ηηs (and since ηs = 1, this meant client and central learning rates were equal).

General Notes on Comparing Algorithms We generally kept hyperparameters equivalent when
comparing the algorithms. For example, we aimed to set batch sizes for all algorithms such that
central and client gradient variances σ 2 and σc2 have equivalent impact on convergence (meaning
|Bc | = S|Bi | for PT and 2- W GT, and |Bc | = KS|Bi | for 1- W GT). In the case of language model
training with 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, following this rubric would have meant a central batch
size |Bc | of 12800; we reduced this in half for practical computation reasons. For a given task, we
also generally kept learning rates the same for all algorithms. Interestingly, we observed that as η
(and ηc , if applicable) is increased for a given task, the 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER algorithm is
the first of the three to diverge, and so we had to adjust, e.g., in the language modeling experiment we
used a lower η for 2- W GT than for PT and 1- W GT.

B.2.1    C ELEBA S MILE C LASSIFICATION
Datasets The CelebA federated dataset consists of 9,343 raw clients, which can be broken into
train/evaluation splits of 8,408/935 clients, respectively (TFF CelebA documentation, 2022). The raw
clients have average cache size of ∼ 21 face images. The images are about equally split between
smiling and unsmiling faces. In order to enlarge cache size, we group three raw clients together into
one composite client, so our federated training data involves 2,802 clients with caches of (on average)
∼ 63 face images (and about half that when we limit the clients to only have smiling faces).


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Smile classifier training,                Table 6: Smile classifier training,
federated hyperparameters.                         centralized and overall hyperparameters.

                         (all)                        (1- W GT)      (PT and 2- W GT)             (all)
        S        |Bi |    K       η      ηs              |Bc |     |Bc | K     ηc   ηm          wf wc
       100        5       2      0.01   1.0             1000       500      2    =η      1.0    0.5     0.5


Table 7: Language model training,                  Table 8: Language model training,
federated hyperparameters.                         centralized and overall hyperparameters.

                         (all)                      (1- W GT)       (PT and 2- W GT)                (all)
   S        |Bi | K              η            ηs       |Bc |      |Bc | K      ηc  ηm          wf           wc
  100        8     16 2.0 (2- W GT: 1.0) 1.0           6400       800     16    =η     1.0     0.75     0.25


Table 9: Movie recommender training,               Table 10: Movie recommender training,
federated hyperparameters.                         centralized and overall hyperparameters.

                         (all)                        (1- W GT)      (PT and 2- W GT)             (all)
        S        |Bi |     K      η     ηs               |Bc |     |Bc | K      ηc  ηm          wf wc
       100        16      10     0.5    1.0                −        −      10    =η      1.0    0.5     0.5


Our evaluation data consists of both smiling and unsmiling faces, and is meant to stand in for
the inference distribution (where accurate classification of both smiling and unsmiling inputs is
necessary). Note that as CelebA contains smiling and unsmiling faces in nearly equal amounts, a
high evaluation accuracy cannot come at the expense of one particular label being poorly classified.

Model Architecture The architecture used is a very basic fully-connected neural network14 with a
single hidden layer of 64 neurons with ReLU activations.

Hyperparameter Settings The settings used in mixed FL training are shown in Tables 5 and 6.
SGD was used for all optimizers: C LIENT O PTIMIZER and S ERVERO PTIMIZER, and (if PT or 2- W
GT) C ENTRAL O PTIMIZER and M ERGE O PTIMIZER.

B.2.2       S TACK OVERFLOW /W IKIPEDIA L ANGUAGE M ODELING

Datasets The Stack Overflow dataset is a large-scale federated dataset, consisting of 342,477
training clients and 204,088 evaluation clients (TFF StackOverflow documentation, 2022). The
training clients have average cache size of ∼ 400 examples, and evaluation clients have average
cache size of ∼ 80 examples. The Wikipedia dataset (wikipedia/20201201.en) consists of
6,210,110 examples (TFDS Wikipedia (20201201.en) documentation, 2022), which we partition by
designating the first 5,000,000 examples for training and the remainder for evaluation. All raw text
data is processed into sequences of 100 characters.
Our evaluation data is a combined dataset consisting of randomly shuffled examples drawn from the
Stack Overflow evaluation clients and the Wikipedia dataset. After accounting for raw examples dis-
carded during processing, the evaluation dataset is comprised of approximately 75% Stack Overflow
and 25% Wikipedia. Hence, we used this weighting proportion when performing mixed FL training
in the language modeling problem (Table 8).

  14
     Adapted from an online tutorial involving CelebA binary attribute classification: “TensorFlow Constrained
Optimization Example Using CelebA Dataset”.


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) Evaluation Accuracy on Stack Overflow vs. Round.        (b) Evaluation Accuracy on Wikipedia vs. Round.

Figure 5: Language model accuracy, evaluated on only decentralized (left) or centralized (right) data.


Model Architecture The architecture used is a recurrent neural network (RNN)15 with an embed-
ding dimension of 256 and 1024 GRU units.

Hyperparameter Settings The settings used in mixed FL training are shown in Tables 7 and
8. Note that in this experiment we also found clipping the norm of gradients (both federated and
centralized) to be beneficial, for all mixed FL algorithms. We used adaptive clipping for the federated
gradients (via the method described in Andrew et al. (2021), without noise addition) and a fixed clip
value of 0.2 for the centralized gradients. SGD was used for all optimizers: C LIENT O PTIMIZER and
S ERVERO PTIMIZER, and (if PT or 2- W GT) C ENTRAL O PTIMIZER and M ERGE O PTIMIZER.

Evaluation Accuracy on Individual Data Splits Figure 5 shows the accuracy of models (trained
either via mixed FL or pure FL) when evaluated on only federated data (Stack Overflow) or only cen-
tralized data (Wikipedia) individually. Confirming what we expect, the various mixed FL algorithms
do a good job of achieving accuracy on both datasets. But if we train only via FL (without mixing),
then we do a good job of learning the federated data (Stack Overflow) character sequences, but aren’t
nearly as accurate at predicting the next character in centralized data (Wikipedia) sequences.

B.2.3      M OVIE L ENS M OVIE R ECOMMENDATION

Dataset The MovieLens 1M dataset (GroupLens) contains approximately 1 million ratings from
6,040 users on 3,952 movies. Examples are grouped by user, forming a natural data partitioning
across clients. For all mixed FL algorithms we study, we keep examples from 20% of users (randomly
selecting 20% of users and shuffling the examples of these users) as the datacenter data, and use
examples from the remaining 80% users as client data. With this data splitting strategy, the server
data won’t include the same individual client distributions but it will still be sampled from the same
meta distribution of clients. We then split the clients data into the train and test sets, resulting in 3,865
train, 483 validation, and 483 test users. The average cache size of each client is ∼ 160 examples.

Model Architecture The architecture used is the same as Anonymous (b), a dual encoder represen-
tation learning model with a bag-of-word encoder for the left tower (which takes in a list of movies a
user has seen) and a simple embedding lookup encoder for the right tower (which takes in the next
movie a user sees).

Hyperparameter Settings The settings used in mixed FL training are shown in Tables 9 and 10.
In Subsection 4.3, SGD was used for all optimizers: C LIENT O PTIMIZER and S ERVERO PTIMIZER,
and (if PT or 2- W GT) C ENTRAL O PTIMIZER and M ERGE O PTIMIZER. See Appendix B.4.4 for an
additional experiment where ADAM is used as the S ERVERO PTIMIZER in 1- W GT.

Recall@10 As mentioned in Subsection 4.3, all mixed FL algorithms achieved similar global
recall@10 compared to the baseline. Figure 6 shows evaluation recall@10 over 2000 training rounds.

  15
       Adapted from an online tutorial involving next character prediction: “Text generation with an RNN”.


                                                       16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Figure 6: Next movie prediction performance (recall@10).


      Table 11: Computation and communication overheads for Movie Recommendation task.

                        baseline       PARALLEL T RAINING          1- W GT        2- W GT
                            2                    2                   2
          Comp.      (K · N · d)/2           (N · d)/2            (N · d)/2     (N 2 · d)/2
          Comm.        2·N ·d                 2·n·d                3·n·d         3·n·d


B.3   C OMPUTATION AND C OMMUNICATION S AVINGS FOR M OVIE R ECOMMENDATION

This section provides a detailed analysis of the computation and communication savings brought by
mixed FL in the movie recommendation task.
For movie recommendation, both the input feature and the label are movie IDs with a vocabulary
size of N . They share the same embedding table, with an embedding dimension of d. The input
features and label embedding layers account for most of the model parameters in a dual encoder.
Therefore, we use the total size of the feature and label embeddings to approximate the model size:
M = (N + N ) · d. Batch size is Bi and local steps per round is K. Let the averaged number of
movies in each client’s local dataset for each training round be n, smaller than Bi · K.


Computation As shown in the second row of Table 11, the amount of computation for regulariza-
tion term is (K · N 2 · d)/2 if calculating on-device (baseline). When computing the regularization
term on the server (mixed FL), the complexity is (N 2 · d)/2. The total computation saving with
mixed FL is ((K − 1) · N 2 · d)/2. We use (N 2 · d)/2 instead of N 2 · d for regularization term
computation which is more accurate for an optimized implementation.
The total computation complexity of the forward pass is O(Bi d + Bi d2 + Bi2 d), where the three items
are for the bag-of-word encoder, the context hidden layer, and similarity calculation. The hinge loss
and spreadout computation is O(Bi ) + O(0.5N 2 d). The gradient computation is O(2Bi d2 + 2Bi2 d)
for network backward pass and O(Bi ) + O(N d) for hinge and spreadout. Therefore, when computing
the regularization term on the server with mixed FL, the computation savings for each client is
1 − (Bi d + 3Bi d2 + 3Bi2 d + 2Bi )/(Bi d + 3Bi d2 + 3Bi2 d + 2Bi + 0.5N 2 d + N d), which is 99.98%
for all mixed FL algorithms.


Communication The communication overheads of each algorithm are presented in the last row of
Table 11. For the baseline, the server and each client need to communicate the full embedding table
and the gradients, so the communication overhead is 2 · N · d or 494KB. With PARALLEL T RAINING,
the server and each client only communicate movie embeddings and the gradients corresponding to
movies in that client’s local datasets. Thus the communication traffic is reduced to 2 · n · d or 20KB.
G RADIENT T RANSFER requires the server to send both the movie embeddings and gradients to each
client. The communication overhead then becomes 3 · n · d or 30KB. Overall, mixed FL can save
more than 93.9% communication overhead than the baseline.


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             (a) Eval. Loss vs. Round.                         (b) Eval. AUC (ROC) vs. Round.

          Figure 7: Smile classifier training, 1- W GT with various central batch sizes |Bc |.


             (a) Eval. Loss vs. Round.                         (b) Eval. AUC (ROC) vs. Round.

          Figure 8: Smile classifier training, 2- W GT with various central batch sizes |Bc |.

B.4     A DDITIONAL O BSERVATIONS AND E XPERIMENTS

B.4.1    E FFECT OF σC2 ON CONVERGENCE
Table 3 shows that the theoretical bounds on rounds to convergence are directly proportional to the
client variance bound σ 2 and central variance bound σc2 . Also, as discussed in Subsection 5.2, 1- WAY
G RADIENT T RANSFER is more sensitive to high central variance than the other two algorithms.
Whereas in the other algorithms the impact of σc2 on convergence scales with cohort size S, in 1- WAY
G RADIENT T RANSFER it scales with cohort size S and steps taken per round K.
To observe the effect of σc2 in practice, and compare its effect on 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER
vs. 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, we ran sweeps of CelebA smile classification training, varying
the central batch size |Bc |. The plots of evaluation loss and evaluation AUC of ROC are shown in
Figures 7 (1- W GT) and 8 (2- W GT). For each central batch size setting, we ran 10 trials; the plots
show the means of each setting’s trials, with corresponding 95% confidence bounds.
Figure 7 confirms the sensitivity of 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER to central variance, with ex-
periments using larger central batches Bc converging faster than experiments using smaller central
batches. However, at least in the case of this task, the benefits of lower variance disappear quickly.
The convergence of AUC of ROC did not appreciably improve for central batch sizes larger than
25. Presumably there is little effect at these larger central batch sizes because in these cases the
convergence is now dominated by client variance (i.e., further convergence improvements would
come from increasing client batch size |Bi |).
Comparing Figure 8 with Figure 7, we empirically observe that 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER has
lower sensitivity than 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER to central batch size/central variance.

B.4.2    T RADING η FOR K
The convergence bounds of Table 3 have an additional implication, in regards to the trade off between
client learning rate η (and central learning rate ηc ) and number of local steps taken K.

It’s better to reduce η and ηc and increase K, but there are limits The convergence bounds are
not related to client or central learning rate (η or ηc ), but are inversely related to local steps K. In
general, it’s best to take as many steps as possible, and if necessary reduce learning rates accordingly.
But there are limits to how large K can be. First, clients have finite caches of data, and K will always
be limited by cache size divided by batch size. Second, in the case of 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER,


                                                  18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          (a) Eval. Loss vs. Round (PT).                  (b) Eval. AUC (ROC) vs. Round (PT).


        (c) Eval. Loss vs. Round (1- W GT).            (d) Eval. AUC (ROC) vs. Round (1- W GT).


        (e) Eval. Loss vs. Round (2- W GT).             (f) Eval. AUC (ROC) vs. Round (2- W GT).

 Figure 9: Smile classifier training with different η and K settings (for each mixed FL algorithm).

any increase in K means that central variance σc2 must be proportionally reduced (as mentioned
above), necessitating even larger central batch sizes (which at some point is infeasible).
We empirically observed this relationship by running smile classification (Figure 9) and language
modeling (Figure 10) experiments where client learning rate η (and central learning rate ηc ) are
inversely proportionally varied with K. For each hyperparameter configuration we ran 5 trials; the
figures include 95% confidence intervals. The results confirm that reducing these learning rates, and
making a corresponding increase in the number of steps, is beneficial. It never hurts convergence,
and often helps.

B.4.3   D IFFERENCES IN EFFECTIVE STEP SIZE
Table 12 in Appendix C shows that in order to yield the convergence bounds stated in this paper, each
algorithm makes different assumptions of maximum effective step size. From this we draw one final
implication in regards to comparing the mixed FL algorithms.

For given η, maximum K varies by algorithm, or, for given K, maximum η varies by algorithm
Consider just effective federated step size η̃ = ηηs K for the moment. Assume that server learning
rate ηs is held constant. Then each mixed FL algorithm has a different theoretical upper bound on the
product of client learning rate η and local steps per round K. If using a common η, the theoretical
upper limit on K varies by mixed FL algorithm. Alternatively if using a common K, the theoretical
upper limit on η varies by mixed FL algorithm.
The maximum effective step sizes of Table 12 imply that 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER has narrower
limits than 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER on the allowable ranges of η and K. It also indicates that
for PARALLEL T RAINING the allowable range of η, ηc , and K depends on the B parameter from
mixed FL (G, B)-BGD (Definition 5.2).
Some of this behavior has been observed empirically, when hyperparameter tuning our experiments
(discussed in Subsection B.2). For example, for the language modeling experiment, assuming a


                                                 19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           (a) Eval. Loss vs. Round (PT).                   (b) Eval. Accuracy vs. Round (PT).


        (c) Eval. Loss vs. Round (1- W GT).               (d) Eval. Accuracy vs. Round (1- W GT).


        (e) Eval. Loss vs. Round (2- W GT).               (f) Eval. Accuracy vs. Round (2- W GT).

Figure 10: Language model training with different η and K settings (for each mixed FL algorithm).


          (a) Evaluation Loss vs. Round.                    (b) Evaluation Accuracy vs. Round.

Figure 11: Language model training, with higher η for PT and 1- W GT (K = 16 for all). The
increased learning rate boosts progress on evaluation loss and accuracy early in optimization, but
does not change the number of rounds ultimately required for convergence. All three algorithms have
reached similar loss and accuracy by round 3000, and are still converging.



constant number of steps of K = 16, 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER tends to diverge when learning
rate η was increased beyond 1.0, whereas 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER is observed to converge
even with learning rate η of 5.0. (PARALLEL T RAINING is in-between; it still converges with learning
rate η of 3.0, but diverges when learning rate η is 5.0.) An interesting characteristic to note is that
using different η in different algorithms does not really impact comparative convergence. Figure 11
shows convergence in the language modeling experiment, when 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER uses
η = 1.0 and 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER and PARALLEL T RAINING both use η = 3.0 (in all
cases, with K = 16). The higher learning rate of 1- W GT and PT helps a little early, but does not
impact the number of rounds to convergence. This holds with the theoretical convergence bounds of
Table 3, which show a relationship with steps K but not learning rates (as also discussed above).


                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Next movie prediction performance when training with adaptive optimizer (client opti-
mizer: SGD, server optimizer: ADAM).



B.4.4    1- W GT WITH ADAPTIVE OPTIMIZATION

We briefly studied the performance of 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER when using ADAM in place
of SGD as the server optimizer, i.e., F EDADAM (Reddi et al., 2020). Note that the server adaptive
optimizer requires a smaller learning rate to perform well. Figure 12 reports the results of using
ADAM as the server optimizer with a server learning rate of 0.01. All the other hyperparameters are
the same as in Tables 9 and 10. We observe that (1) ADAM works better than SGD, leading to better
convergence, and (2) 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER performs almost the same as the baseline when
using ADAM. We will extend our investigation of mixed FL with adaptive optimization in the future.
This will include studying methods for applying adaptive optimization to PARALLEL T RAINING and
2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER; these algorithms are more complicated since they involve additional
optimizers (C ENTRAL O PTIMIZER and M ERGE O PTIMIZER).


B.4.5    C OMPARISON WITH T RANSFER L EARNING

Section 3 discussed how transfer learning is ill-suited for mixed FL. Here we show why.
Recall the bias mitigation mixing task of Section 4.2. The end goal is a single trained language model
that performs well both for high-end and low-end mobile phone users. We use Stack Overflow and
Wikipedia datasets as respective experimental stand-ins, as they model the problem well. They are in
the same domain (Latin alphabet) and same language (English) but with distinct usage distributions.
Transfer learning sequentially trains the language model, first ‘pretraining’ on one dataset and then
switching to ‘fine-tune’ on the other. One could first centrally pretrain (with Wikipedia), then switch
to federated fine-tuning (with Stack Overflow), or do the converse. Figure 13 shows what happens.
The switches take place at 250 rounds. We also show PARALLEL T RAINING as a point of comparison.
Figure 13 shows that in transfer learning, catastrophic forgetting of the pretraining task occurs after
switching to the fine-tuning task. The centralized pretraining case precipitously drops its evaluation
accuracy on datacenter data (Wikipedia). The federated pretraining case does the same with federated
data (Stack Overflow). Figure 13a shows that PARALLEL T RAINING achieves superior evaluation
accuracy on the stand-in for the desired inference distribution (i.e. the combined Stack Overflow and
Wikipedia datasets).


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               (a) Eval. Accuracy on All Data vs. Round.


 (b) Eval. Accuracy on Stack Overflow vs. Round.         (c) Eval. Accuracy on Wikipedia vs. Round.

Figure 13: Mixed FL endeavors to learn both data distributions, but transfer learning fails to retain
knowledge of the pretraining task. When the pretraining-to-fine-tuning switch happens at round 250,
the transfer learning cases fit to the new distribution and ‘forget’ the previous distribution they were
pretrained on. PARALLEL T RAINING does not suffer from this problem as it sees data from both
distributions throughout training.


To simplify Figure 13 we don’t show G RADIENT T RANSFER results, but they would match PARALLEL
T RAINING (e.g., as shown in Figures 1b and 2b). Because the PARALLEL T RAINING and G RADIENT
T RANSFER algorithms presented in this paper jointly train on both data distributions in parallel (as
opposed to sequentially), they avoid catastrophic forgetting.


                                                   22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 12: Maximum effective federated step size, η̃ = ηηs K, for convergence bounds in Appendix C
and Table 3. When applicable (PT, 2- W GT) the effective centralized step size, ηc K, shares the same
maximum (and assume that merging learning rate ηm is 1). β is the smoothness bound (Def. D.1).

                                             PT             1- W GT          2- W GT

                                              1                   1              1    1
                       µ-C ONVEX          6(1+B 2 )β             8β       min 81β  , 15µ
                                              1                   1              1
                       C ONVEX            6(1+B 2 )β             8β             81β
                                              1                   1              1
                       N ONCONVEX         6(1+B 2 )β            18β             24β


Table 13: Assumptions on merging or server learning rates, for convergence bounds in Appendix C
and Table 3.

                                              PT                1- W GT     2- W GT
                                                                     √
                             (A SSUMES )      ηm ≥ 1            ηs ≥ S      ηm ≥ 1


C     C ONVERGENCE T HEOREMS

The three subsections that follow state theorems for convergence (to an error smaller than  ) for the
respective mixed FL algorithms. The convergence bounds are summarized in Table 3 in Section
5. Tables 12 and 13 convey some supporting aspects of the convergence bounds, about limits on
effective step size (η̃ = ηηs K) and assumptions on learning rates.

C.1    PARALLEL T RAINING

 Given Assumption 5.1, one can view PARALLEL T RAINING as a ‘meta-F EDAVG’ involving two
‘meta-clients’. One meta-client is the population of IID federated clients (collectively having loss ff ),
 and the other meta-client is the centralized data at the datacenter (having loss fc ). As such, we can
 take the convergence theorem for F EDAVG derived in Karimireddy et al. (2020b) (Section 3, Theorem
 I) and observe that it applies to the number of rounds T to reach convergence in the PARALLEL
T RAINING scenario.
Theorem C.1. For PARALLEL T RAINING, where the federated data is IID (Assumption 5.1), for
β-smooth functions ff and fc which satisfy Definition 5.2, the number of rounds T to reach an
expected error smaller than   is:
                                                                    √
                                                  (σ 2 +Sσc2 )
                                                                          2

                     µ-Strongly convex:     T = Õ   KSµ
                                                               + Gµ√β  + Bµ β log( 1  )
                                                                       √

                                                   (σ 2 +Sσc2 )D 2   G β    B 2 βD 2
                     General convex:        T =O        KS  2      +   3 +
                                                                       2
                                                                       √
                                                   (σ 2 +Sσc2 )βF    G β    B 2 βF
                     Non-convex:            T =O        KS 2
                                                                   +   3 +
                                                                       2


                                                   2
where F = f (x(0) ) − f (x∗ ), D2 = x(0) − x∗          . Conditions for above: ηm ≥ 1; ηc , ηηs ≤ 6 1+B 21 βKη .
                                                                                                   (      )   m


Proof. The analysis is exactly along the lines of the analysis in Karimireddy et al. (2020b), Appendix
D.2, in the context of F EDAVG. Effectively, the analysis applies to the ‘meta-F EDAVG’ problem
of PARALLEL T RAINING, with two ‘meta-clients’, one being the central loss/data (with stochastic
gradients with variance of σc2 ) and the other being the federated loss/data. The homogeneity of the
clients and the averaging over the sampled clients effectively reduces the variance of the stochastic
              2
gradients to σ /S . The analysis follows in a straightforward manner by accounting for the variance in
appropriate places. We omit the details for brevity.


                                                           23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2   1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER

We now provide convergence bounds for the 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER scenario. Unlike
PARALLEL T RAINING, which could be thought of as a ‘meta’ version of an existing FL algorithm
(F EDAVG), 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER is an entirely new FL algorithm. As such, we must
formulate a novel proof (Appendix D) of its convergence bounds.
Given Assumption 5.1, the following Theorem gives the number of rounds to reach a given expected
error.
Theorem C.2. For 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, where the federated data is IID (Assumption
5.1), for β-smooth functions fi and fc , the number of rounds T to reach an expected error smaller
than   is:
                                             (σ 2 +KSσc2 )
                                                                                                        q
         µ-Strongly convex:     T = Õ           KSµ
                                                           + µβ log( 1  )                   when ηs >       5            1
                                                                                                                S, η ≤ 8βKη
                                                  2
                                                                                                        q8                 s
                                                      +KSσc2 )D 2
                                                                                2

                                             (σ
         General convex:        T =O                   KS 2
                                                                         + βD

                                                                                            when ηs >       5
                                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                              S, η ≤ 8βKηs

                                             (σ   2
                                                      +KSσc2 )βF
                                                                                                        √
         Non-convex:            T =O                   KS 2
                                                                         + βF

                                                                                            when ηs ≥                 1
                                                                                                            S, η ≤ 18βKηs


                                                            2
where F = f (x(0) ) − f (x∗ ), D2 = x(0) − x∗                   .

Proof. Detailed proof given in Appendix D.

C.3   2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER

Given Assumption 5.1, one can view 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER as a ‘meta-SCAFFOLD’
involving two ‘meta-clients’ (analogous to the view of PARALLEL T RAINING as ‘meta-F EDAVG’
in Subsection C.1). As such, we can take the convergence theorem for SCAFFOLD derived in
Karimireddy et al. (2020b) (Section 5, Theorem III) and observe that it applies to the number of
rounds T to reach convergence in the 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER scenario.
Theorem C.3. For 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, where the federated data is IID (Assumption
5.1), for β-smooth functions ff and fc , the number of rounds T to reach an expected error smaller
than   is:

                             (σ 2 +Sσc2 )

 µ-Strongly convex:    T = Õ             + µβ log( 1  )                   when ηm ≥ 1; ηc , ηηs ≤ min                    1
                                                                                                                             ,   1
                              KSµ                                                                                      81βKηm 15µKηm
                             (σ +Sσc )D 2
                                2     2

                                                βD 2                                                  1
 General convex:       T =O           2     +
                                                                           when ηm ≥ 1; ηc , ηηs ≤ 81βKη
                              2 KS 2                                                                    m
                             (σ +Sσc )βF        βF                                                    1
 Non-convex:           T =O       KS  2     +
                                                                           when ηm ≥ 1; ηc , ηηs ≤ 24βKηm


                                                            2
where F = f (x(0) ) − f (x∗ ), D2 = x(0) − x∗                   .

Proof. The analysis is exactly along the lines of the analysis in Karimireddy et al. (2020b), Appendix
E, in the context of SCAFFOLD. Effectively, the analysis applies to the ‘meta-SCAFFOLD’ problem
of 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, with two ‘meta-clients’, one being the central loss/data (with
stochastic gradients with variance of σc2 ) and the other being the federated loss/data. The homogeneity
of the clients and the averaging over the sampled clients effectively reduces the variance of the
                         2
stochastic gradients to σ /S . The analysis follows in a straightforward manner by accounting for the
variance in appropriate places. We omit the details for brevity.


                                                                    24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     C ONVERGENCE P ROOFS FOR 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER
We will prove the convergence rate of 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER for 3 different cases: strongly
convex, general convex, and non-convex. While these proofs are influenced by those for SCAFFOLD
in Karimireddy et al. (2020b), we note some additional technical challenges we face with 1- WAY
G RADIENT T RANSFER. First, as the name indicates, gradient information only flows one way (in
SCAFFOLD, gradient information flows from and to all clients). Second, we only sample a batch of
centralized data once per round (whereas SCAFFOLD can draw multiple batches during a round).
The result is that (as described in Subsection 5.2), 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER works out to be
more sensitive to central variance σc2 and number of steps K than 2- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER.
We will first state a number of definitions and lemmas in Subsection D.1 that are needed in proving
convergence rate of 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, before proceeding to the actual proofs in
Subsection D.2.

D.1     A DDITIONAL D EFINITIONS AND L EMMAS

Note that some of the lemmas below are restatements of lemmas given in Karimireddy et al. (2020b).
We opt to restate here (versus referencing the relevant lemma in Karimireddy et al. (2020b) each
time) due to the volume of usage of the lemmas, to ease the burden on the reader.
We will first present the subset of definitions and lemmas which don’t make any assumptions of
convexity (Subsection D.1.1), followed by the subset that assume convexity (Subsection D.1.2)

D.1.1    G ENERAL D EFINITIONS AND L EMMAS
Definition D.1 (β-Smoothness). A function h is β-smooth if it satisfies:
                         k∇h(x) − ∇h(y)k ≤ β kx − yk , for any x, y
This implies the following quadratic upper bound on h:

                                                       β         2
               h∇h(x), y − xi ≥ − h(x) − h(y) + kx − yk , for any x, y
                                                       2

Lemma D.2 (Relaxed triangle inequality). Let {v1 , . . . , vτ } be τ vectors in Rd . Then for any a > 0:

                                 2                   2             1         2
                       kvi + vj k ≤ (1 + a) kvi k + 1 +                kvj k
                                                                   a
Also:
                                      τ     2          τ
                                    X               X           2
                                         vi ≤ τ            kvi k
                                        i=1                i=1


Proof. The first statement for any a > 0 follows from the identity:
                                                                                 2
                                                                    √

                         2                2         1        2               1
               kvi + vj k = (1 + a) kvi k + 1 +         kvj k −       avi + √ vj
                                                    a                         a
                                                                     2
The second statement follows from the convexity of v → kvk and Jensen’s inequality:
                                            τ     2              τ
                                       1X                  1X         2
                                             vi       ≤          kvi k
                                       τ i=1               τ i=1


Lemma D.3 (Separating mean and variance). Let {Ξ1 , . . . , Ξτ } be τ random variables in Rd which
are not necessarily independent. First suppose that their mean is E[Ξi ] = ξi and variance is bounded
               2
as E[kΞi − ξi k ] ≤ σ 2 . Then:
                                              
                                       τ     2        τ     2
                                     X               X
                                E       Ξi  ≤           ξi + τ 2 σ 2
                                      i=1                  i=1



                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now instead suppose that their conditional mean is E[Ξi |Ξi−1 , . . . , Ξ1 ] = ξi , i.e. the variables
{Ξi − ξi } form a martingale difference sequence, and the variance is bounded same as above. Then
we can show the tighter bound:
                                                           
                                   τ     2            τ     2
                                 X                   X
                           E        Ξi  ≤ 2E          ξi  + 2τ σ 2
                                    i=1                   i=1



                                                                 2          2
Proof. For any random variable X, E[X 2 ] = (E[X − E[X]]) + (E[X]) implying:
                                                                    
                           τ     2        τ    2        τ            2
                         X               X            X
                    E        Ξi  =         ξi + E      (Ξi − ξi ) 
                              i=1           i=1                 i=1

Expanding the last term of the above expression using relaxed triangle inequality (Lemma D.2) proves
the first claim:                            
                             τ             2        τ
                            X                     X      h             i
                                                                     2
                      E        (Ξi − ξi )  ≤ τ       E kΞi − ξi k ≤ τ 2 σ 2
                              i=1                   i=1

For the second statement, ξi is not deterministic and depends on Ξi−1 , . . . , Ξ1 . Hence we have to
resort to the cruder relaxed triangle inequality to claim:
                                                                              
                          τ      2             τ      2        τ                 2
                         X                    X                X
                   E        Ξi  ≤ 2E            ξi  + 2E     (Ξi − ξi ) 
                        i=1                  i=1                      i=1

Then we use the tighter expansion of the second term:
                             
              τ             2
             X                    X                              X h          2
                                                                                i
       E        (Ξi − ξi )  =       E [hΞi − ξi , Ξj − ξj i] =  E kΞi − ξi k ≤ τ σ 2
              i=1                     i,j                              i

The cross terms in the above expression have zero mean since {Ξi − ξi } form a martingale difference
sequence.

D.1.2    D EFINITIONS AND L EMMAS A SSUMING C ONVEXITY
Definition D.4 (µ-Convexity). A function h is µ-convex for µ ≥ 0 if it satisfies:
                                                     µ          2

                h∇h(x), y − xi ≤ − h(x) − h(y) + kx − yk , for any x, y
                                                     2
When µ > 0, we have strong convexity, a quadratic lower bound on h.
Proposition D.5 (Convexity and smoothness). If client losses fi and centralized loss fc are each
β-smooth (Definition D.1), and x∗ is an optimum of the overall loss f (as defined in Equation 1),
then the following holds true:
                   N
                                                                      !
          1    1 X                    ∗ 2                       ∗ 2
                     k∇fi (x) − ∇fi (x )k + k∇fc (x) − ∇fc (x )k         ≤ f (x) − f (x∗ )
         2β N i=1


Proof. Define the functions f˜i (x) := fi (x) − h∇fi (x∗ ), xi, for all clients i, and the function
f˜c (x) := fc (x) − h∇fc (x∗ ), xi. Since fi and fc are convex and β-smooth, so are f˜i and f˜c , and
furthermore their gradients vanish at x∗ ; hence, x∗ is a common minimizer for f˜i , f˜c and f . Using
the β-smoothness of f˜i and fc , we have
               1                                         1
                 k∇f˜i (x)k2 ≤ f˜i (x) − f˜i (x) and       k∇f˜c (x)k2 ≤ f˜c (x) − f˜c (x).
              2β                                        2β
               PN                            PN
Note that N1 i=1 f˜i + f˜c = f since N1 i=1 ∇fi (x∗ ) + ∇fc (x∗ ) = ∇f (x∗ ) = 0. The claimed
bound then follows from the above two facts.


                                                   26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proposition D.6 (Convex bound on gradient of overall loss). If client losses fi and centralized loss
fc are each µ-convex (Definition D.4) and β-smooth (Definition D.1), and x∗ is an optimum of the
overall loss f (as defined in Equation 1), then the expected norm of the gradient of overall loss is
bounded as:
                                            2
                                E k∇f (x)k ≤ 4βE [f (x) − f (x∗ )]


Proof.
                         2                             2
           E k∇f (x)k = E k∇f (x) − ∇f (x∗ )k
                                          N                                               2
                                1 X
                             =E       (∇fi (x) − ∇fi (x∗ )) + (∇fc (x) − ∇fc (x∗ ))
                                N i=1
Applying the relaxed triangle inequality (Lemma D.2) twice:
                                      N                        2
                    2    1 X                                                                  2
         E k∇f (x)k ≤ 2E       (∇fi (x) − ∇fi (x∗ ))               + 2E k∇fc (x) − ∇fc (x∗ )k
                         N i=1
                                  N
                             1 X                          2                           2
                        ≤ 2E       k(∇fi (x) − ∇fi (x∗ ))k + 2E k∇fc (x) − ∇fc (x∗ )k
                             N i=1
                             "    N
                                                                                     #
                               1 X                      ∗   2                   ∗ 2
                        ≤ 2E         k(∇fi (x) − ∇fi (x ))k + k∇fc (x) − ∇fc (x )k
                               N i=1
Applying Proposition D.5:
                                              2
                                E k∇f (x)k ≤ 2E [2β (f (x) − f (x∗ ))]
                                           ≤ 4βE [f (x) − f (x∗ )]


Lemma D.7 (Perturbed strong convexity). The following holds for any β-smooth and µ-strongly-
convex function h, and any x, y, z in the domain of h:
                                                      µ     2            2
                  h∇h(x), z − yi ≥ h(z) − h(y) + ky − zk − β kz − xk
                                                      4


Proof. Given any x, y, and z, we get the following two inequalities using smoothness (Definition
D.1) and strong convexity (Definition D.4) of h:
                                                            β          2
                             h∇h(x), z − xi ≥h(z) − h(x) −     kz − xk
                                                            2
                                                            µ          2
                                            ≥h(x) − h(y) + ky − xk
                                                            2
Further, applying the relaxed triangle inequality (Lemma D.2) gives:
                             µ           2   µ         2  µ          2
                               ky − xk ≥ ky − zk − kx − zk
                             2               4            2
Combining all the inequalities together we have:
                                                       µ        2  β+µ        2
               h∇h(x), z − yi ≥ h(z) − h(y) +            ky − zk −     kz − xk
                                                       4            2
The lemma follows since β ≥ µ.
Lemma D.8 (Contractive mapping). For any β-smooth and µ-strongly convex function h, values x
and y in the domain of h, and step-size (learning rate) η ≤ β1 , the following holds true:
                                                           2                    2
                        kx − η∇h(x) − y + η∇h(y)k ≤ (1 − µη) kx − yk



                                                  27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. Expanding terms, and applying smoothness (Definition D.1):
                                        2               2                        2
      kx − η∇h(x) − y + η∇h(y)k = kx − yk + η 2 k∇h(x) − ∇h(y)k
                                                 − 2ηh∇h(x) − ∇h(y), x − yi
                                         2     2

                                ≤ kx − yk + η β − 2η h∇h(x) − ∇h(y), x − yi
If step-size is such that η ≤ β1 , then:

                 η 2 β − 2η h∇h(x) − ∇h(y), x − yi ≤ −ηh∇h(x) − ∇h(y), x − yi


Finally, for µ-strong convexity (Definition D.4) of h we have:
                                                                            2
                           −ηh∇h(x) − ∇h(y), x − yi ≤ −µη kx − yk



D.2    P ROOFS OF T HEOREM C.2

We will now prove the rates of convergence stated in Theorem C.2 for 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER.
Subsection D.2.1 proves the convergence rates for strongly convex and general convex cases, and
Subsection D.2.2 proves the convergence rates for the non-convex case.
Let S be the cardinality of the cohort of clients S participating in a round of training. Let the server
and client optimizers be SGD. Let the clients all take an equal number of steps K, and let η̃ be the
‘effective step-size’, equal to Kηs η. With 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER, the server update of the
global model at round t can be written as:


                                                        K
                                             η̃ X X        (t,k)

                      x(t+1) − x(t) = −               gi (xi ) + gc (x(t) )
                                            KS
                                                  i∈S k=1
                                                                                                   (11)
                                                                 K
                                                       η̃ X X        (t,k)

                      x(t+1) − x(t) = −η̃gc (x(t) ) −           gi (xi )
                                                      KS
                                                            i∈S k=1


Henceforth, let E|t [·] denote expectation conditioned on x(t) . As in Karimireddy et al. (2020b), we’ll
define a client local ‘drift’ term in round t as:

                                              N    K             2
                                         1 XX       (t,k)
                              E (t) =          E|t xi     − x(t)                                   (12)
                                        KN i=1
                                                  k=1
Lemma D.9 (Bound on variance of server update). The variance of the server update is bounded as:

                       2                          2 2                                   2
           (t+1)   (t)          2 2 (t)      2              2        2             (t)
   E|t x         −x        ≤ 4η̃ β E + 2η̃           σ + σc + 2η̃ E|t ∇f (x )
                                                 KS


Proof. Let S denote the set of clients sampled in round t. For brevity, we will use ∆x to refer to
x(t+1) − x(t) .

                                        2
              2          (t+1)      (t)
    E|t k∆xk = E|t x           −x

                                                               2
                                                                
                                   K
                         η̃  XX              (t,k)
                = E|t                  gi (xi ) + gc (x(t) )    
                        KS
                             i∈S k=1

                                                                                           2
                                                                                            
                                   K
                         η̃  XX              (t,k)

                ≤ E|t                  gi (xi ) − ∇ff (x(t) ) + ∇ff (x(t) ) + gc (x(t) )    
                        KS
                               i∈S k=1



                                                     28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We separate terms by applying the relaxed triangle inequality (Lemma D.2):


                                                       2
                                                        
                             K
                                                                                         2

        2     2       1 X   X        (t,k)       (t)            2          (t)       (t)
E|t k∆xk ≤ 2η̃ E|t             gi (xi ) − ∇ff (x )       + 2η̃ E|t ∇ff (x ) + gc (x )
                     KS
                        i∈S k=1                              |             {z              }
           |                     {z                      }                 B
                                                 A


In term A, we separate mean and variance for the client stochastic gradients gi , using Lemma D.3
and Equation 4:

                                                                2
                                                                 
                                   K                                     2 2
                               1 X X         (t,k)

                                                                   + 4η̃ σ
              A ≤ 4η̃ 2 E|t           ∇ff (xi ) − ∇ff (x(t) )
                              KS                                       KS
                                        i∈S k=1


We apply the relaxed triangle inequality (Lemma D.2) followed by smoothness (Definition D.1), to
convert it to an expression in terms of drift E (t) :


                                   N   K
                           4η̃ 2 X X                                                                           4η̃ 2 σ 2

                                                                                                   2
                                                                 (t,k)
                  A≤                 E|t                 ∇ff (xi         ) − ∇ff (x(t) )                   +
                           KN i=1                                                                               KS
                                       k=1
                                 N X
                             2 2 X K
                                                                                           4η̃ 2 σ 2

                           4η̃ β                                               2
                                                              (t,k)
                     ≤                         E|t        xi          − x(t)           +
                            KN      i=1 k=1
                                                                                            KS
                                             4η̃ 2 σ 2
                     ≤ 4η̃ 2 β 2 E (t) +
                                              KS

In term B we have a full gradient of the federated loss ∇ff and a stochastic gradient of the centralized
loss gc . We use Lemma D.3 to separate the stochastic gradient into a full gradient of the centralized
loss ∇fc and a variance term, allowing us to express in terms of full gradient of the overall loss ∇f .


                                                                                   2
                           B = 2η̃ 2 E|t        ∇ff (x(t) ) + gc (x(t) )

                                                                                       2
                             ≤ 2η̃ 2 E|t  ∇ff (x(t) ) + ∇fc (x(t) )                            + 2η̃ 2 σc2

                                                      2
                             ≤ 2η̃ 2 E|t ∇f (x(t) )       + 2η̃ 2 σc2



Combining A and B back together:

                                                               2 2                                                         2
                       2           2 2 (t)            2
            E|t k∆xk ≤ 4η̃ β E               + 2η̃               σ + σc2           + 2η̃ E|t   2
                                                                                                           ∇f (x )   (t)
                                                              KS



D.2.1    C ONVEX C ASES
We will state two lemmas, one (Lemma D.10) related to the progress in round t towards reaching x∗ ,
and the other (Lemma D.11) bounding the federated clients ‘drift’ in round t, E (t) . We then combine
the two lemmas together to give the proofs of convergence rate for the strongly convex (µ > 0) and
general convex (µ = 0) cases.


                                                                29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma D.10 (One round progress). Suppose our functions satisfy bounded variance σ 2 , µ-convexity
                                                              1
(Definition D.4), and β-smoothness (Definition D.1). If η̃ < 8β , the updates of 1- WAY G RADIENT
T RANSFER satisfy:


                                         2            3µη̃               2                          5
                                     ∗
          E|t       x(t+1)
                             −x                  ≤ 1−          x(t) − x∗ − η̃ f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ ) + E (t)
                                                        2                                          16

                                                           2    2 2     2
                                                     + 2η̃        σ + σc
                                                               KS

Proof. The expected server update, with N total clients in the federated population, is:

                                                                N K
                         h             i      h          i   η̃ X X h      (t,k)
                                                                                 i
                        E x(t+1) − x(t) = −η̃E gc (x(t) ) −         E gi (xi )
                                                            KN i=1
                                                                                         k=1

                                                                                                       2
The distance from optimal x∗ in parameter space at round t is x(t) − x∗                                    . The expected distance
from optimal at round t + 1, conditioned on x(t) and earlier rounds, is:


                             2                                                   2
E|t       x(t+1) − x∗                = E|t           x(t+1) − x(t) + x(t) − x∗

                                                           2       D h              i           E                    2
                                     = x(t) − x∗               + 2 E|t x(t+1) − x(t) , x(t) − x∗ + E|t x(t+1) − x(t)
                                                                 |             {z               } |        {z          }
                                                                                 C                                         D

For clarity, we now focus on individual terms, beginning with C:

                          D h                 i                E
                    C = 2 E|t x(t+1) − x(t) , x(t) − x∗
                          *                               N X   K
                                                                                  !       +
                                  h         i       η̃   X          h
                                                                          (t,k)
                                                                                i
                      =2     −η̃E gc (x(t) ) −                     E gi (xi ) , x(t) − x∗
                                                  KN i=1
                                                               k=1
                                                                *N K                           +
                           D
                                  (t)   ∗       (t)
                                                    E      2η̃    XX              (t,k) ∗  (t)
                      = 2η̃ ∇fc (x ), x − x            +                  ∇ff (xi ), x − x
                        |           {z              } KN i=1 k=1
                                    C1                   |                    {z               }
                                                                                         C2


We can use convexity (Definition D.4) to bound C1, with x = x(t) , and y = x∗ :

                                                                       µ           2
                                     C1 ≤ −2η̃ fc (x(t) ) − fc (x∗ ) +   x(t) − x∗
                                                                       2
                                                                                               (t,k)
We apply perturbed convexity (Lemma D.7) to bound C2, with x = xi                                      , y = x∗ , and z = x(t) :

                      N K                                                 2              2

                 2η̃ X X             ∗          (t)         (t,k)    (t)       µ   (t) ∗
           C2 ≤                 ff (x ) − ff (x ) + β xi          −x         −    x −x
                KN i=1                                                         4
                         k=1

                                                              2
                                                                            N K               2
                          (t)          ∗      µ     (t)   ∗         2β η̃ X X (t,k)
              ≤ −2η̃ ff (x ) − ff (x ) +          x −x            +                xi  − x(t)
                                              4                     KN i=1
                                                                               k=1

                                              µ               2
              ≤ −2η̃ ff (x(t) ) − ff (x∗ ) +      x(t) − x∗       + 2β η̃E (t)
                                              4


                                                                      30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Combining C1 and C2 back together:


                                                       3µ           2
                                                                           ∗
                            C ≤ −2η̃ f (x ) − f (x ) +    x(t) − x∗
                                                             (t)
                                                                                                             + 2β η̃E (t)
                                                        4

Now we turn to term D, which is the variance of the server update (from Lemma D.9):


                                                    2                                        2 2                                            2
      D = E|t           x(t+1) − x(t)                       ≤ 4η̃ 2 β 2 E (t) + 2η̃ 2          σ + σc2       + 2η̃ 2 E|t       ∇f (x(t) )
                                                                                            KS

We can leverage Proposition D.6 to replace the norm squared of the gradient of the overall loss:


                                                2                                        2 2                         h                   i
D = E|t             x(t+1) − x(t)                       ≤ 4η̃ 2 β 2 E (t) + 2η̃ 2          σ + σc2       + 8η̃ 2 βE|t f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ )
                                                                                        KS

Returning to our equation for the expected distance from optimal x∗ in parameter space, and making
use of the bounds we established for C and D:


                                2                                  2       D h              i           E                    2
E|t       x(t+1) − x∗                   = x(t) − x∗                    + 2 E|t x(t+1) − x(t) , x(t) − x∗ + E|t x(t+1) − x(t)
                                                                         |             {z               } |        {z          }
                                                                                               C                                            D

                                                                   2                     3µ            2
                                           (t)     ∗                   (t)          ∗           (t)  ∗
                                        ≤ x −x          − 2η̃ f (x ) − f (x ) +              x −x
                                                                                          4

                                                                                       2 2
                                             + 2β η̃E (t) + 4η̃ 2 β 2 E (t) + 2η̃ 2      σ + σc2
                                                                                      KS
                                                          h                      i
                                             + 8η̃ 2 βE|t f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ )

                                               3µη̃                    2
                                        ≤ 1−            x(t) − x∗
                                                2

                                             + 8η̃ 2 β − 2η̃ f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ )

                                                                                     2 2
                                             + 2η̃β (1 + 2η̃β) E (t) + 2η̃ 2            σ + σc2
                                                                                    KS

                    1
Assuming that η̃ ≤ 8β :


                                            2            3µη̃               2                          5
                                        ∗
          E|t       x   (t+1)
                                −x                  ≤ 1−          x(t) − x∗ − η̃ f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ ) + E (t)
                                                           2                                          16

                                                              2    2 2     2
                                                        + 2η̃        σ + σc
                                                                  KS



Lemma D.11 (Bounded drift). Suppose our functions satisfy bounded variance, µ-convexity (Defini-
tion D.4), and β-smoothness (Definition D.1). Then the drift is bounded as:

                                      h                   i             1 2
                  E (t) ≤ 12K 2 η 2 βE f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ ) + 3K 2 η 2     σ + σc2
                                                                        K



                                                                               31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. We begin with the summand of the drift term, looking at the drift of a particular client i at
local step k. Expanding this summand out:

                                            2                                                                 2
                      (t,k)                                  (t,k−1)            (t,k−1)
           E|t xi             − x(t)             = E|t xi              − η gi (xi       ) + gc (x(t) ) − x(t)
                                                                                                                              2
                                                             (t,k−1)                     (t,k−1)
                                                 = E|t xi              − x(t) − ηgi (xi                 ) − ηgc (x(t) )           .

Separating mean and variance of the client gradient, then using the relaxed triangle inequality (Lemma
D.2) to further separate out terms:

                                  2                                                                                 2
           (t,k)                                   (t,k−1)                          (t,k−1)
   E|t xi          − x(t)             ≤ E|t xi      − x(t) − η∇ff (xi     ) − ηgc (x(t) ) + η 2 σ 2
                                                                                                         2
                                             1        (t,k−1)

                                                                               (t,k−1)
                                      ≤ 1+       E|t xi       − x(t) − η ∇ff (xi       ) − ∇ff (x(t) )
                                             a |                          {z                             }
                                                                                              F
                                                                                                    2
                                                 + (1 + a) η 2 ∇ff (x(t) ) + gc (x(t) )                 + η2 σ2 .

Term F is bounded via the contractive mapping lemma (Lemma D.8), provided that η ≤ β1 :

                                                                            2                                       2
                                                        (t,k−1)                           (t,k−1)
                      F ≤ (1 − µη)E|t xi                          − x(t)         ≤ E|t xi                − x(t)         .

Putting back into the bound on drift on client i at local step k, and letting a = K:

                              2                                             2                                                     2
         (t,k)                                         (t,k−1)
  E|t xi         − x(t)           ≤ K+1
                                     K E|t xi                    − x(t)         + 2Kη 2 ∇ff (x(t) ) + gc (x(t) )                      + η2 σ2 .

Unrolling the recursion:

                                                                                  k−1
                                            2                             2
                    (t,k)                                                                                                   K+1 j
                                                                                  X
                          − x(t)                     2      (t)       (t)   2 2

           E|t     xi                           ≤ 2Kη ∇ff (x ) + gc (x ) + η σ                                               K
                                                                                                               j=0

                                                                                2
                                                ≤ 2Kη 2 ∇ff (x(t) ) + gc (x(t) ) + η 2 σ 2 (2K)
                                                                                          2
                                                ≤ 4K 2 η 2 ∇ff (x(t) ) + gc (x(t) )               + 2Kη 2 σ 2 .

The second inequality above uses the following bound:
                              k−1
                                        K+1 j
                              X
                                                    1 k

                                         K    ((1 + K ) − 1) = K ≤ (e − 1)K ≤ 2K.
                              j=0


Now separating mean and variance of the central gradient:

                                        2                                                     2
                   (t,k)
        E|t xi             − x(t)           ≤ 4K 2 η 2 ∇ff (x(t) ) + ∇fc (x(t) ) + 2K 2 η 2 σc2 + 2Kη 2 σ 2

                                                                   2             1 2
                                                 2 2         (t)          2 2            2
                                            ≤ 4K η ∇f (x ) + 2K η                  σ + σc .
                                                                                 K

Finally, we apply Proposition D.6:


                                                                       32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                2       1 2
                         E (t) ≤ 4K 2 η 2 ∇f (x(t) )                      σ + σc2
                                                                    + 2K 2 η 2
                                                                        K

                                                  h                   i             1 2
                                  ≤ 16K 2 η 2 βE|t f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ ) + 2K 2 η 2     σ + σc2 .
                                                                                    K

                    1
Assuming that η̃ ≤ 8β :

                                                                         η̃ 2 1 2

                                            η̃   h                   i
                                  E (t) ≤ 2 2 E|t f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ ) + 2 2    σ + σc2
                                           ηs                            ηs K



Proofs of Theoremq
                 C.2 for Convex Cases                               Adding the statements of Lemmas D.10 and D.11, and
                                   5          1                 1
assuming that ηs >                 8 S, η = 8βKηs so that η̃ = 8β , we get:



                                       2            3µη̃                    2
                                   ∗
       E|t        x   (t+1)
                              −x               ≤ 1−           x(t) − x∗ − η̃ f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ )
                                                      2
                                                                                                 η̃ 2 1 2

                                                      5       η̃     h
                                                                            (t)         ∗
                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                   2
                                                   +        2 2 E|t f (x ) − f (x ) + 2 2                   σ + σc
                                                     16       η                                  ηs K
                                                             s
                                                               2 2
                                                   + 2η̃ 2        σ + σc2
                                                             KS

                                                    3µη̃                    2
                                               = 1−           x(t) − x∗ − η̃ f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ )
                                                      2
                                                     5 η̃       h                    i
                                                   +      2
                                                            E|t f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ )
                                                     8η
                                                       s 2
                                                                       η̃ 2
                                                                                      2
                                                        5 η̃                    2      5 η̃         2
                                                   +             +  4         σ   +           + 2η̃     σc2
                                                        8 Kηs2        KS               8 ηs2

                                                    3µη̃                    2
                                               ≤ 1−           x(t) − x∗
                                                      2

                                                        S−1
                                                                         h                    i   5σ 2
                                                   −              η̃E|t f (x(t) ) − f (x∗ ) +               + 3σc2 η̃ 2 .
                                                           S                                          KS
We can now remove the conditioning over x(t) by taking an expectation on both sides over x(t) , to
get a recurrence relation of the same form.
For the case of strong convexity (µ > 0), we can use lemmas (e.g., Lemma 1 in Karimireddy et al.
(2020b), Lemma 2 in Stich (2019)) which establish a linear convergence rate for such recursions.
This results in the following bound16 for T ≥ 8β
                                              3µ :

                                                    2
                                                   σ + KSσc2

                  h
                           (T )
                                   i
                                          ∗                      (0) ∗
                                                                       2       −3µT
                 E f (x̄          ) − f (x ) = Õ            +µ x −x     exp           ,
                                                     µKST                       16β
where x̄(T ) is a weighted average of x(1) , x(2) , . . . , x(T +1) with geometrically decreasing weights
(1 − 3µη̃
      2 )
          1−r
                for x(r) , r = 1, 2, . . . , T + 1.
This yields an expression for the number of rounds T to reach an error  :

                                                              σ 2 + KSσc2

                                                                           β          1
                                                 T = Õ                   + log
                                                                  KSµ      µ
  16
       The Õ notation hides dependence on logarithmic terms which can be removed by using varying step-sizes.


                                                                       33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For the case of general convexity (µ = 0), we can use lemmas (e.g., Lemma 2 in Karimireddy et al.
(2020b), Lemma 4 in Stich (2019)) which establish a sublinear convergence rate for such recursions.
In this case we get the following bound:


                                                             2                                         !
                                           8β x(0) − x∗
                                                                     p
                                                                         20σ 2 + 12KSσc2 x(0) − x∗

   h               i               S
 E f (x̄   (T )
                  ) − f (x∗ ) ≤                                  +             p                           ,
                                  S−1          T +1                               KS (T + 1)
                 1
                        PT +1
where x̄(T ) = T +1       t=1   x(t) .
This yields an expression for the number of rounds T to reach an error  :

                                                                !
                                           σ 2 + KSσc2 D2   βD2
                                   T =O                   +       .
                                                KS 2

                                                                                               2
In the above expression, D2 is a distance in parameter space at initialization, x(0) − x∗          .

D.2.2     N ON -C ONVEX C ASE
We will now prove the rate of convergence stated in Theorem C.2 for the non-convex case for 1- WAY
G RADIENT T RANSFER. We will state two lemmas, one (Lemma D.12) establishing the progress
made in each round, and one (Lemma D.13) bounding how much the federated clients ‘drift’ in a
round during the course of local training. We then combine the two lemmas together give the proof
of convergence rate for the non-convex case.
Lemma D.12 (Non-convex one round progress). The progress made in a round can be bounded as:

         h           i              4η̃           2  β            2 2
      E|t f (x(t+1) ) ≤ f (x(t) ) −     ∇f (x(t) ) + E (t) +         σ + σc2 β η̃ 2
                                     9               27         KS



Proof. We begin by using the smoothness of f to get the following bound on the expectation of
f (x(t+1) ) conditioned on x(t) :

         h            i                   D                           E β                 2
               (t+1)                (t)          (t)     (t+1)    (t)        (t+1)    (t)
      E|t f (x       ) ≤ E|t f (x ) + ∇f (x ), x               −x      +    x      −x
                                                                          2
                                         D                         E β                       2
                        ≤ f (x(t) ) + E|t ∇f (x(t) ), x(t+1) − x(t) + E|t x(t+1) − x(t) .
                                                                        2

Substituting in the definition of the 1- WAY G RADIENT T RANSFER server update (Equation 11), and
using Assumption 5.1 for the expectation of the client stochastic gradient:

                                           *                       K
                                                                                                +
          h           i                                       η̃ X X        (t,k)

       E|t f (x(t+1) ) ≤ f (x(t) ) + E|t       ∇f (x(t) ), −           gi (xi ) + gc (x(t) )
                                                             KS
                                                                 i∈S k=1
                                     β                    2
                                 + E|t x(t+1) − x(t)
                                     2
                                          *                 N X
                                                              K
                                                                                            +
                                                        1   X           (t,k)

                          ≤ f (x(t) ) − η̃ ∇f (x(t) ),            ∇ff (xi ) + ∇fc (x(t) )
                                                       KN i=1
                                                                 k=1
                                    β                 2
                                   + E|t x(t+1) − x(t) .
                                    2

Next, we make use of the fact that −ab = 21 ((b − a)2 − a2 − b2 ) ≤ − 21 a2 + 21 (b − a)2 :


                                                     34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         h           i              η̃             2
      E|t f (x(t+1) ) ≤ f (x(t) ) −     ∇f (x(t) )
                                    2
                                          N K                                       2
                                 η̃    1 XX               (t,k)       (t)

                                                                                (t)
                             +                      ∇ff (xi ) + ∇fc (x ) − ∇f (x )
                                 2 KN i=1
                                              k=1
                                   β                    2
                                + E|t x(t+1) − x(t)
                                   2
                                      η̃             2
                               (t)
                         ≤ f (x ) −       ∇f (x(t) )
                                      2
                                   η̃
                                            N K
                                         1 XX                                 2
                                                            (t,k)       (t)
                                +                     ∇ff (xi ) − ∇ff (x )
                                   2 KN i=1
                                              k=1
                                   β                  2
                                + E|t x(t+1) − x(t)
                                   2
                                      η̃            2
                               (t)
                         ≤ f (x ) −      ∇f (x(t) )
                                      2
                                          N K                                2
                                   η̃ 1 X X                (t,k)
                                +                E|t ∇ff (xi ) − ∇ff (x(t) )
                                   2 KN i=1
                                             k=1
                                β                 2
                               + E|t x(t+1) − x(t) .
                                2
Next, we use smoothness (Definition D.1), and the definition of client drift (Equation 12):

                    h           i               η̃            2
                 E|t f (x(t+1) ) ≤ f (x(t) ) −     ∇f (x(t) )
                                                 2
                                                      N K
                                            η̃β 2 1 X X            (t,k)
                                                                                2
                                        +                     E|t xi     − x(t)
                                              2 KN i=1
                                                          k=1
                                              β                  2
                                          + E|t x(t+1) − x(t)
                                              2
                                                 η̃           2  η̃β 2 (t)
                                   ≤ f (x(t) ) −    ∇f (x(t) ) +      E
                                                 2                 2
                                              β                  2
                                          + E|t x(t+1) − x(t) .
                                              2
The last term is the variance of the server update, for which we can substitute the bound from Lemma
D.9:

       h           i               η̃                2    η̃β 2 (t)
    E|t f (x(t+1) ) ≤ f (x(t) ) −        ∇f (x(t) ) +           E
                                   2                       2
                               β                              2 2                             2
                                         2 2 (t)        2               2       2         (t)
                            +       4η̃ β E + 2η̃                 σ + σc + 2η̃ E|t ∇f (x )
                               2                            KS
                                                                       2
                                      η̃                          2    η̃β
                           (t)                   2          (t)
                     ≤ f (x ) −           − β η̃     ∇f (x ) +              + 2η̃ β E (t)
                                                                                 2 3
                                      2                                  2

                                2         2 2        2
                            + η̃ β          σ + σc .
                                        KS
                                              1
Assuming a bound on effective step-size η̃ ≤ 18β :

            h             i           4η̃          2 β (t)    2 2
                 (t+1)           (t)           (t)
        E|t f (x         ) ≤ f (x ) −     ∇f (x ) + E +         σ + σc β η̃ 2 .
                                                                     2
                                       9             27      KS

                                                   35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma D.13 (Non-convex bounded drift). Suppose our functions satisfy bounded variance and
β-smoothness (Definition D.1). Then the drift is bounded as:
                                                      2η̃ 2 1 2

                               4η̃                 2
                       (t)                   (t)                     2
                      E ≤          E ∇f (x ) + 2               σ + 4σc .
                             9βηs2                     ηs    K

Proof. We begin with the summand of the drift term, looking at the drift of a particular client i at
local step k. Expanding this summand out:

                                            2                                                              2
                       (t,k)                              (t,k−1)            (t,k−1)
               E xi            − x(t)           = E xi              − η gi (xi       ) + gc (x(t) ) − x(t)
                                                                                                                        2
                                                          (t,k−1)                        (t,k−1)
                                                = E xi              − x(t) − ηgi (xi                ) − ηgc (x(t) )         .

Separating mean and variance of the client gradient:

                                       2                                                                            2
               (t,k)                                (t,k−1)                            (t,k−1)
        E xi           − x(t)              ≤ E xi             − x(t) − η∇ff (xi                   ) − ηgc (x(t) )       + η2 σ2 .

Next we use relaxed triangle inequality (Lemma D.2) to further separate terms:


                       2                   1                                 2
     (t,k)                                              (t,k−1)
E xi         − x(t)        ≤       1+              E xi           − x(t)
                                           a
                                                                                              2
                                                                  (t,k−1)
                            + (1 + a) η 2 E ∇ff (xi        ) + gc (x(t) ) + η 2 σ 2

                                  1                         2
                                            (t,k−1)
                           ≤ 1+       E xi          − x(t)
                                  a
                                                                                                                     2
                                                     (t,k−1)
                            + (1 + a) η 2 E ∇ff (xi          ) − ∇ff (x(t) ) + gc (x(t) ) − ∇fc (x(t) ) + ∇f (x(t) )
                            + η2 σ2

                                  1                     2
                                         (t,k−1)
                           ≤ 1+       E xi       − x(t)
                                  a
                                                                                                    2                                    2
                                                                    (t,k−1)
                               + (1 + a) 2η 2 E ∇ff (xi                       ) − ∇ff (x(t) ) + (1 + a) 4η 2 E ∇f (x(t) )
                                              |                              {z              }
                                                                             H
                                                                                          2
                               + (1 + a) 4η E gc (x ) − ∇fc (x(t) ) +η 2 σ 2 .
                                                    2             (t)

                                            |         {z           }
                                                                        J

In the above inequality, term H can be converted via smoothness (Definition D.1), and term J is the
variance of the centralized stochastic gradient (Equation 6). Letting a = K, we have:


                               2           K +1                          2                     2
         (t,k)                                             (t,k−1)
    E   xi     − x(t)              ≤                 2 2
                                                + 2Kη β E xi       − x(t) + 4Kη 2 E ∇f (x(t) )
                                            K
                         + 4Kη 2 σc2 + η 2 σ 2 .
Unrolling the above recurrence, we get:
                                                           k−1
                                                           X  K + 1           j
                  2                           2
     (t,k)    (t)            2          (t)      2 2 2 2                 2 2
E xi       −x       ≤ 4Kη E ∇f (x ) + 4Kη σc + η σ                  + 2Kη β
                                                           j=0
                                                               K
                                                                                                       k−1                           j
                                   4η̃ 2                   η̃ 2                                                K + 1 2η̃ 2 β 2
                                                                                                       X
                                                       2                             1 2
                                                 (t)
                           ≤             E ∇f (x     )   +                             σ + 4σc2                     +
                                   Kηs2                    Kηs2                      K                  j=0
                                                                                                                K     Kηs2


                                                                        36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                    2       2
                           1                 2η̃ β
Assuming ηs ≥ 1, and η̃ ≤ 18β , we have K+1              163
                                         K + Kη 2 ≤ 1 + 162K , and hences

 k−1
 X                           j       K−1
                   2    2            X                   j                       K                  163
        K+1  2η̃ β                                163                 163
         K + Kηs2                ≤           1 + 162K        = 1 + ( 162K            − 1) 162K
                                                                                           163 ≤ (e
                                                                                                    162 − 1)K ≤ 2K.

  j=0                                j=0



                                                                        η̃ 2

                                     2             2η̃               2                      1 2
                (t,k)
           E xi         − x(t)           ≤             2
                                                         E ∇f (x(t) ) +                       σ + 4σc2        2K
                                                 9βKηs                  Kηs2                K

Adding back the summation terms over i and k, the bound on client drift is:

                                                                 2η̃ 2

                                          4η̃                2                      1 2
                             E (t) ≤           E ∇f (x (t)
                                                           )   +                      σ + 4σc2 .
                                         9βηs2                    ηs2               K



Proofs of Theorem√C.2 for Non-Convex Case Adding the statements of Lemmas D.12 and D.13,
and assuming ηs ≥ S, we get:

               h           i                4η̃                2       2 2
            E|t f (x(t+1) ) ≤ f (x(t) ) −         ∇f (x(t) ) +             σ + σc2 β η̃ 2
                                             9                        KS
                                                                         2

                                  β       4η̃                    2   2η̃     1 2
                                                         (t)                          2
                               +                E  ∇f (x     )     +          σ  + 4σ c
                                  27 9βηs2                            η2 K
                                                                      s
                                            1                  2       3 2
                             ≤ f (x(t) ) − η̃ ∇f (x(t) ) +                 σ + 2σc2 β η̃ 2
                                            3                         KS

With the above, we have a recursive bound on the loss after round t + 1. We can use lemmas (e.g.,
Lemma 2 in Karimireddy et al. (2020b), Lemma 4 in Stich (2019))   √ which establish a sub-linear
                                                     1
convergence rate for such recursions. Assuming η̃ ≤ 18β and ηs ≥ S, we get:
                                                          q
                                                               3

                                                         6         2      2
                                      (t)
                                          2    54βF           KS σ + 2σc βF
                      min        ∇f (x ) ≤            +          √             .
                t∈{1,2,...,T +1}              T +1                 T +1

In the above expressions, F is the error at initialization, f (x(0) ) − f (x∗ ).
This yields an expression for the number of rounds T to reach an error  :
                                                                  !
                                         σ 2 + KSσc2 βF       βF
                               T =O                        +        .
                                              KS 2


                                                               37
