Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C OUNTERING THE ATTACK -D EFENSE C OMPLEXITY
G AP FOR ROBUST C LASSIFIERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         We consider the decision version of defending and attacking Machine Learning
         classifiers. We provide a rationale for known difficulties in building robust models
         by proving that, under broad assumptions, attacking a polynomial-time classifier is
         N P -complete in the worst case; conversely, training a polynomial-time model that
         is robust on even a single input is ΣP2 -complete, barring collapse of the Polynomial
         Hierarchy. We also provide more general bounds for non-polynomial classifiers.
         We point out an alternative take on adversarial defenses that can sidestep such
         a complexity gap, by introducing Counter-Attack (CA), a system that computes
         on-the-fly robustness certificates for a given input up to an arbitrary distance bound
         ε. Finally, we empirically investigate how heuristic attacks can approximate the
         true decision boundary distance, which has implications for a heuristic version of
         CA. As part of our work, we introduce UG100, a dataset obtained by applying both
         heuristic and provably optimal attacks to limited-scale networks for MNIST and
         for CIFAR10. We hope our contributions can provide guidance for future research.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Adversarial attacks, i.e. algorithms designed to fool machine learning models, represent a significant
threat to the applicability of such models in real-world contexts (Brendel et al., 2019; Brown et al.,
2017; Wu et al., 2020). Despite years of research effort, countermeasures (i.e. “defenses”) to
adversarial attacks are frequently fooled by applying small tweaks to existing techniques (Carlini &
Wagner, 2016; 2017a; Croce et al., 2022; He et al., 2017; Hosseini et al., 2019; Tramer et al., 2020).
We argue that this pattern is due to differences between the fundamental mathematical problems that
defenses and attacks need to tackle. Specifically, we prove that while attacking a polynomial-time
classifier is N P -complete in the worst case, training a polynomial-time model that is robust
even on a single input is ΣP  2 -complete. We also provide more general bounds for non-polynomial
classifiers, showing that a A-time classifier can be attacked in N P A time. We then give an informal
intuition for our theoretical results, which also applies to heuristic attacks and defenses. Our result
highlights that, unless the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses, there exists a potential, structural,
difficulty for defense approaches that focus on building robust classifiers at training time.
We then show that the asymmetry can be sidestepped by an alternative perspective on adversarial
defenses. As an exemplification, we introduce a new technique, named Counter-Attack (CA) that,
instead of training a robust model, evaluates robstness on the fly for a specific input by running
an adversarial attack. This simple approach, while very simple, provides robustness guarantees
against perturbations of an arbitrary magnitude ε. Additionally, we prove that while generating a
certificate is N P -complete in the worst case, attacking CA using perturbations of magnitude
ε′ > ε is ΣP2 -complete, which represents a form of computational robustness – weaker than the one
by (Garg et al., 2020), but holding under much more general assumptions. CA can be applied in any
setting where at least one untargeted attack is known, while also allowing one to capitalize on future
algorithmic improvements: as adversarial attacks become stronger, so does CA.
Finally, we investigate the empirical performance of an approximate version of CA where a
heuristic attack is used instead of an exact one. This version achieves reduced computational time,
at the cost of providing only approximate guarantees. We found heuristic attacks to be high-quality
approximators for exact decision boundary distances, in experiments over a subsample of MNIST
and CIFAR10 and small-scale Neural Networks. In particular, a pool of seven heuristic attacks


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


provided an accurate (average over-estimate between 2.04% and 4.65%) and predictable (average
R2 > 0.99) approximation of the true optimum. We compiled our benchmarks and generated
adversarial examples (both exact and heuristic) in a new dataset, named UG100, and made it
publicly available1 . Overall, we hope our contributions can support future research by highlighting
potential structural challenges, pointing out key sources of complexity, inspiring research on heuristics
and tractable classes, and suggesting alternative perspectives on how to build robust classifiers.


2    R ELATED W ORK

Robustness bounds for NNs were first provided in (Szegedy et al., 2013), followed by (Hein &
Andriushchenko, 2017) and (Weng et al., 2018b). One major breakthrough was the introduction
of automatic verification tools, such as the Reluplex solver (Katz et al., 2017). However, the same
work also showed that proving properties of a ReLU network is N P -complete. Researchers tried to
address this issue by working in three directions. The first is building more efficient solvers based
on alternative formulations (Dvijotham et al., 2018; Singh et al., 2018; Tjeng et al., 2019). The
second involves training models that can be verified with less computational effort (Leino et al.,
2021; Xiao et al., 2019) or provide inherent robustness bounds (Sinha et al., 2018). The third focuses
on guaranteeing robustness under specific threat models (Han et al., 2021) or input distribution
assumptions (Dan et al., 2020; Sinha et al., 2018). Since all these approaches have limitations that
reduce their applicability (Silva & Najafirad, 2020), heuristic defenses tend to be more common
in practice. Exact approaches can also be used to compute provably optimal adversarial examples
(Carlini et al., 2017; Tjeng et al., 2019), although generating them requires a non-trivial amount of
computational resources. Refer to Appendix M for a more in-depth overview of certified defenses.
Another line of research has focused on understanding the nature of robustness and adversarial attacks.
Frameworks such as (Dreossi et al., 2019), (Pinot et al., 2019) and (Pydi & Jog, 2021) focused on
formalizing the concept of adversarial robustness. Some studies have highlighted trade-offs between
robustness (under specific definitions) and properties such as accuracy (Dobriban et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2019), generalization (Min et al., 2021) and invariance (Tramèr et al., 2020). However, some of
these results have been recently questioned, suggesting that these trade-offs might not be inherent
in considered approaches (Yang et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). Adversarial attacks have also
been studied from the point of view of Bayesian learning to derive robustness bounds and provide
insight into the role of uncertainty (Rawat et al., 2017; Richardson & Weiss, 2021; Vidot et al., 2021).
Adversarial attacks have also been studied in the context of game theory (Ren et al., 2021), identifying
Nash equilibria between attacker and defender (Pal & Vidal, 2020; Zhou et al., 2019).
Finally, some works have also focused on the computational complexity of specific adversarial
attacks and defenses. In particular, Mahloujifar & Mahmoody (2019) showed that there exist exact
polynomial-time attacks against classifiers trained on product distributions. Similarly, Awasthi
et al. (2019) showed that for degree-2 polynomial threshold functions there exists a polynomial-time
algorithm that either proves that the model is robust or finds an adversarial example. Other works have
also provided hardness results; Degwekar et al. (2019) showed that there exist certain classification
tasks such that learning a robust model is as hard as solving the Learning Parity with Noise problem
(which is N P -hard); Song et al. (2021) showed that learning a single periodic neuron over noisy
isotropic Gaussian distributions in polynomial time would imply that the Shortest Vector Problem
(conjectured to be N P -hard) can be solved in polynomial time. Finally, Garg et al. (2020) showed
that, by requiring attackers to provide a valid cryptographic signature for inputs, it is possible to
prevent attacks with limited computational resources from fooling the model in polynomial time.


3    BACKGROUND AND F ORMALIZATION

Extensive literature in the field of adversarial attacks suggests that generating adversarial examples is
comparatively easier than building robust classifiers (Carlini & Wagner, 2016; 2017a; Croce et al.,
2022; He et al., 2017; Hosseini et al., 2019; Tramer et al., 2020). In this section, we introduce some
key definitions that we will employ to provide a theoretically grounded, potential, motivation for such
    1
      All our code, datasets, pretrained weights and results are available anonymously under MIT license at
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/counter-attack.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


discrepancy. We aim at capturing the key traits shared by most of the literature on adversarial attacks,
so as to identify properties that are valid under broad assumptions.
We start by defining the concept of adversarial example, which intuitively represents a modification
of a legitimate input that is so limited as to be inconsequential from a practical perspective, but
classified erroneously by a target model. Formally, let f : X → {1, . . . , N } be a discrete classifier.
Let Bp (x, ε) = {x′ ∈ X | ∥x − x′ ∥p ≤ ε} be a Lp ball of radius ε and center x. Then we have:
Definition 1 (Adversarial Example). Given an input x, a threshold ε, and a Lp norm2 , an adversarial
example is an input x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε) such that f (x′ ) ∈ C(x), where C(x) ⊆ {1, . . . , N } \ {f (x)}.

This definition is a simplification compared to human perception, but it is adequate for a sufficiently
small ε, and it is adopted in most of the relevant literature. An adversarial attack can then be viewed
as an optimization procedure that attempts to find an adversarial example. We define an adversarial
attack for a classifier f as a function af,p : X → X that solves the following optimization problem:
                                     arg min{∥x′ − x∥p | f (x′ ) ∈ C(x)}                                 (1)
                                       x′ ∈X

The attack is considered successful if the returned solution x′ = af,p (x) also satisfies ∥x′ − x∥p ≤ ε.
We say that an attack is exact if it solves Equation (1) to optimality; otherwise, we say that the attack
is heuristic. An attack is said to be targeted if C(x) = Ct,y′ (x) = {y ′ } with y ′ ̸= f (x); it is instead
untargeted if Cu (x) = {1, . . . , N } \ {f (x)}. We define the decision boundary distance d∗p (x) of a
given input x as the minimum Lp distance between x and another input x′ such that f (x) ̸= f (x′ ).
Note that this is also the value of ∥af,p (x) − x∥p for an exact, untargeted, attack.
Intuitively, a classifier is robust w.r.t. an example x iff x cannot be successfully attacked. Formally:
Definition 2 ((ε, p)-Local Robustness). A discrete classifier f is (ε, p)-locally robust w.r.t. an example
x ∈ X iff ∀x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε) we have f (x′ ) = f (x).

We then provide some additional definitions that are needed for our results, namely ReLU networks
and FSFP spaces. ReLU networks are defined as follows:
Definition 3 (ReLU network). A ReLU network is a composition of sum, multiplication by a constant,
and ReLU activation, where ReLU : R → R+     0 is defined as ReLU (x) = max(x, 0).

Note that any hardness result for ReLU classifiers also applies to the more general class of classifiers.
Fixed-Size Fixed-Precision (FSFP) spaces, on the other hand, capture two common assumptions
about real-world input spaces: all inputs can be represented with the same number of bits and there
exists a positive minorant of the distance between inputs.
Definition 4 (Fixed-Size Fixed-Precision space). Given a real p > 0, a space X ⊆ Rn is FSFP if
there exists a ν ∈ R such that ∀x.|r(x′ )| ≤ ν (where |r(x)| is the size of the representation of x)
and there exists a µ ∈ R such that µ > 0 and ∀x, x′ ∈ X. (∥x′ − x∥p < µ =⇒ x = x′ ).

Examples of FSFP spaces include most image encodings, as well as 32-bit and 64-bit IEE754 tensors.
Examples of non-FSFP spaces include the set of all rational numbers in an interval. Similarly to
ReLU networks, hardness results for FSFP spaces also apply to more general spaces.

4       A N A SYMMETRICAL S ETTING
In this section, we provide a theoretically sound result that is a viable explanation for why attacks
seem to outperform defenses. The core of our analysis is proving that attacks are less computationally
expensive than defenses in the worst case, unless the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses. Specifically,
we prove that the decision version of attacking a ReLU classifier is N P -complete:
Theorem 13 (Untargeted L∞ attacks against ReLU classifiers are N P -complete). Let U -AT Tp be
the set of all tuples ⟨x, ε, f ⟩ such that:
                                         ∃x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε).f (x′ ) ̸= f (x)                                (2)

where x ∈ X, X is a FSFP space and f is a ReLU classifier. Then U -AT T∞ is N P -complete.
    2
        We use the term "norm" for 0 < p < 1 even if in such cases the Lp function is not subadditive.
    3
        The proofs of all our theorems and corollaries can be found in the appendices.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corollary 1.1. For every 0 < p ≤ ∞, U -AT Tp is N P -complete.
Corollary 1.2. Targeted Lp attacks (for 0 < p ≤ ∞) against ReLU classifiers are N P -complete.
Corollary 1.3. Theorem 1 holds even if we consider the more general set of polynomial-time
classifiers w.r.t. the size of the tuple.
Theorem 1 represents a minor generalization of existing results in the literature (Katz et al., 2017).
However, together with the following more general bound for non-polynomial-time classifiers, it lays
the groundwork for our main result.
Theorem 2. Let A be a complexity class, let f be a classifier, let Zf = {⟨x, y⟩ | y = f (x), x ∈ X}
and let U -AT Tp (f ) = {⟨x, ε, g⟩ ∈ U -AT Tp′ | g = f }, where U -AT Tp′ is the same as U -AT Tp but
without the ReLU classifier restriction. If Zf ∈ A, then for every 0 < p ≤ ∞, U -AT Tp (f ) ∈ N P A .
Corollary 2.1. For every 0 < p ≤ ∞, if Zf ∈ ΣP                               P
                                                   n , then U -AT Tp (f ) ∈ Σn+1 .

The latter result implies that, if Zf ∈ P , then U -AT Tp (f ) ∈ N P . Informally, Corollary 2.1
establishes that, under broad assumptions, evaluating and attacking a classifier are in complexity
classes that are strongly conjectured to be distinct, with the attack problem being the harder one.
The decision version of training a robust model is even more complex (again in the worst case):
Theorem 3 (Finding a set of parameters that make a ReLU network (ε, p)-locally robust on an input
is ΣP2 -complete). Let P L-ROBp be the set of tuples ⟨x, ε, fθ , v⟩ such that:
                     ∃θ ′ . (vf (θ ′ ) = 1 =⇒ ∀x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε).fθ′ (x′ ) = fθ′ (x))              (3)
where x ∈ X, X is a FSFP space and vf is a polynomial-time function that is 1 iff the input is a
valid parameter set for f . Then P L-ROB∞ is ΣP      2 -complete.
                                     P
Corollary 3.1. P L-ROBp is Σ2 -complete for all 0 < p ≤ ∞.
Corollary 3.2. Theorem 3 holds even if, instead of ReLU classifiers, we consider the more general
set of polynomial-time classifiers w.r.t. the size of the tuple.
Our results rely on worst-case constructions and assume that the Polynomial Hierarchy does not
collapse; moreover, both N P and ΣP      2 can be solved via super-polynomial algorithms. That said,
we believe our theorems to have a strong practical relevance. First, the Polynomial Hierarchy
collapse is strongly conjectured to be false; second, even super-polynomial algorithms can have
dramatically different run times (e.g. SAT vs Quantified Boolean Formula solvers). Finally, generic
classifiers can learn (and are known to learn) complex input-output mappings with many local
optima. Intuitively, this is the core of the scenario captured by our worst-case construction, and also
what makes Equation (1) difficult to solve. Again intuitively, robustness requires solving a nested
optimization problem with universal quantification (since we need to guarantee the same prediction
on all neighboring points), thus motivating the higher complexity class. For this reason, we think our
results provide a plausible explanation for the hardness gap that is routinely observed in the
relevant literature. Of course, there are definitely sub-cases where the problem is simple enough for
exact attacks to run in polynomial time (e.g. (Awasthi et al., 2019)); this suggests that, under specific
circumstances, guaranteed robustness could be achieved at reasonable effort. By this argument, our
proof also provides additional motivation for research on tractable classes of robust classifiers.

Additional Sources of Asymmetry There are additional, complementary, factors that may provide
an advantage to the attacker. We review them informally, since they can support efforts to build
more robust defenses. First, the attacker can gather information about the target model, e.g. by using
genuine queries (Papernot et al., 2017), while the defender has not such advantage. As a result, the
defender often needs to either make assumptions about adversarial examples (Hendrycks & Gimpel,
2017; Roth et al., 2019) or train models to identify common properties (Feinman et al., 2017; Grosse
et al., 2017). These assumptions can be exploited, such as in the case of Carlini & Wagner (2017a),
who generated adversarial examples that did not have the expected properties.Second, the attacker
can focus on one input at the time, while the defender has to guarantee robustness on a large subset
of the input space. This weakness can be exploited: for example, MagNet (Meng & Chen, 2017)
relies on a model of the entire genuine distribution, which can be sometimes inaccurate. Carlini &
Wagner (2017b) broke MagNet by searching for examples that were both classified differently and
mistakenly considered genuine. Finally, defenses cannot significantly compromise the accuracy of
a model. Adversarial training, for example, often reduces the clean accuracy of the model (Madry
et al., 2018), leading to a trade-off between accuracy and robustness.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5     S IDE -S TEPPING THE C OMPUTATIONAL A SYMMETRY
The limitations imposed by Theorem 3 cannot be addressed directly in the general case (barring
collapse of the Polynomial Hierarchy). However, they can be sidestepped by changing perspective:
we exemplify this by introducing an alternative approach to provide robust classification, which also
allows us to take advantage of existing defenses. Instead of obtaining a robust model from scratch,
we propose to evaluate the robustness of the classifier on a case-by-case basis, flagging the input if a
robust answer cannot be provided. Specifically, given a norm-order p and threshold ε, we propose to:
       • Design a model that is as robust as possible using available and practically viable defenses;
       • For every input received, determine if the model is (ε, p)-locally robust on the input by
         running an adversarial attack on the input;
       • If the attack succeeds, flag the input.
We name this technique Counter-Attack (CA). Instead of attempting to build a robust model, CA
ensures that answers from a partially robust model are flagged as unreliable when they could be
the result of an attack. This approach, while very simple, can take advantage of existing defenses,
provides robustness guarantees, and is considerably hard to fool, as we will later prove.
The behavior in case an input is flagged depends on the context. Examples include relying on a
slower but more robust model (e.g. a human), or rejecting the input altogether. This kind of approach
is viable in all cases where the goal is to support (rather than replace) human decision-making.
Note that the flagging rate of CA is heavily dependent on the robustness of the model: a model that is
robust on the entire input distribution will have a flagging rate of zero. Therefore, any improvement
in the field of adversarial defenses also decreases the flagging rate of CA. Moreover, if there are
known robustness bounds, they can be exploited to simplify the attack: for example, if the model
is known to be (εcert , p)-robust on x, with εcert < ε, the attack can focus on searching adversarial
examples in Bp (x, ε) \ Bp (x, εcert ). At the same time, developing stronger and faster attacks also
benefits CA, since better attacks can find adversarial examples more quickly.
The major drawback of CA is that it requires running an exact adversarial attack on every input.
We will investigate a possible mitigation for this phenomenon based on employing heuristic attacks,
which still provide a significant degree of robustness (see Section 6). Finally, we stress that CA is just
one of potentially several alternative paradigms that could circumvent the computational asymmetry.
We hope our contribution will encourage other researchers to investigate this direction.

5.1   F ORMAL P ROPERTIES

When used with an exact attack, CA provides formal robustness guarantees for an arbitrary p and ε:
Theorem 4. Let 0 < p ≤ ∞ and let ε > 0. Let f : X → {1, . . . , N } be a classifier and let a be an
                   a
exact attack. Let fCA : X → {1, . . . , N } ∪ {⋆} be defined as:

                             a              f (x) ∥af,p (x) − x∥p > ε
                            fCA (x) =                                                           (4)
                                            ⋆      otherwise
Then ∀x ∈ X an Lp attack on x with radius greater than or equal to ε and with ⋆ ̸∈ C(x) fails.
               a
The notation fCA  (x) refers to the classifier f combined with CA, relying on attack a. The condition
⋆ ̸∈ C(x) requires that the input generated by the attack should not be flagged by CA.
Corollary 4.1. Let 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ and let ε > 0. Let f be a classifier on inputs with n elements that
uses CA with norm p and radius ε. Then for all inputs and for all 1 ≤ r < p, Lr attacks of radius
greater than or equal to ε and with and ⋆ ̸∈ C(x) will fail. Similarly, for all inputs and for all r > p,
                                                  1 1
Lr attacks of radius greater than or equal to n r − p ε and with ⋆ ̸∈ C(x) will fail (treating ∞1
                                                                                                   as 0).

Since the only expensive step in CA consists in applying an adversarial attack to an input, the
complexity is the same as that of a regular attack. CA can therefore represent a more feasible task
compared to training a robust model.

Attacking with a Higher Radius In addition to robustness guarantees for a chosen ε, CA provides
a form of computational robustness even beyond its intended radius. To prove this statement, we first


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


formalize the task of attacking CA (referred to as Counter-CA, or CCA).This involves finding, given
a starting point x, an input x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε′ ) that is adversarial but not flagged by CA, i.e. such that
f (x′ ) ∈ C(x) ∧ ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x′ , ε).f (x′′ ) = f (x′ ). Note that, for ε′ ≤ ε, no solution exists, since
x ∈ Bp (x′ , ε) and f (x) ̸= f (x′ ).
Theorem 5 (Attacking CA with a higher radius is ΣP
                                                 2 -complete). Let CCAp be the set of all tuples
⟨x, ε, ε′ , C, f ⟩ such that:

               ∃x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε′ ). (f (x′ ) ∈ C(x) ∧ ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x′ , ε).f (x′′ ) = f (x′ ))            (5)

where x ∈ X, X is a FSFP space, ε′ > ε, f (x) ̸∈ C(x) f is a ReLU classifier and whether an
output is in C(x∗ ) for some x∗ can be decided in polynomial time. Then CCA∞ is ΣP
                                                                                 2 -complete.

Corollary 5.1. CCAp is ΣP
                        2 -complete for all 0 < p ≤ ∞.

Corollary 5.2. Theorem 5 holds even if, instead of ReLU classifiers, we consider the more general
set of polynomial-time classifiers w.r.t. the size of the tuple.

In other words, under our assumptions, fooling CA is harder than running it. This phenomenon
represents a form of computational robustness, a term introduced by Garg et al. (2020) in a very
different setting where genuine examples can be cryptographically signed. Corollary 2.1 also implies
that, unless the Polynomial Hierarchy collapses, it is impossible to obtain a better gap between
running the model and attacking (e.g. a P -time model that is ΣP 2 -hard to attack). Note that while
Theorem 5 shows that fooling CA is ΣP  2 -complete in general, attacking can be expected to be easy
in practice when ε′ ≫ ε: this is however a very extreme case, where the threshold may have been
poorly chosen or the adversarial examples might be visually distinguishable from genuine examples.

5.2   U SING H EURISTIC ATTACKS WITH CA

CA in its exact form has limited scalability due to Theorem 1. This could be addressed by using
approaches with guaranteed bounds, as suggested in Section 5, or by simply relying on heuristic
attacks. In this second scenario, to compensate for the heuristic nature of the employed attacks,
we can flag the input x′ if the attack fails to find an adversarial example in a radius of ε + b(x′ ),
where b : X → R+  0 is a buffer model. The idea behind b is that if a heuristic attack can identify an
adversarial example within a radius of ε + b(x′ ), an exact attack would be able to find an adversarial
example within a radius of ε.
The effectiveness of this approach depends on how well heuristic attacks approximate the decision
boundary distance, which is an interesting topic for investigation by itself. Note that consistency of
the estimation is in fact more important than its accuracy: if a heuristic attack overestimates d∗p (x) in
a predictable manner, we can train a buffer model to accurately correct the error.
With this approach, if the heuristic attack finds an adversarial example with distance less than ε, we
can confidently flag the input (i.e. false positives are guaranteed to be impossible). However, if the
distance is above ε, it is possible to have a false negative. Note that using approaches with guaranteed
bounds would lead to a complementary situation.

Fooling the Heuristic Attack-Based CA The fact that the heuristic relaxation of CA can over-
estimate the decision boundary distance means that it is possible to generate adversarial examples
with ε′ ≤ ε. Specifically, if an adversarial example xadv for an input x is such that d∗p (xadv ) ≤ ε
and f (xadv ) ̸= f (x) but ∥af,p (xadv ) − xadv ∥p > ε + b(xadv ), CA will incorrectly accept xadv .
However, there are several informal considerations suggesting that fooling CA might be harder than
running it. Such considerations are backed by empirical evidence in Section 6. First, both CA and
CCA need to attack the same model, but CCA has at most as much information regarding the target
model as CA, thus making the attacker at most as sample efficient as the defender. Second, fooling
CA involves solving a nested optimization problem, while CA only needs to solve one; specifically,
verifying the feasibility of a CCA solution involves running CA on the solution. Finally, as better
attacks are developed the chances of CA being fooled become slimmer, since these attacks will be
less likely to find sub-optimal adversarial examples.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6    E MPIRICAL I NVESTIGATION OF H EURISTIC ATTACKS

Section 5.2 introduced the problem of investigating how accurately heuristic attacks can approximate
the true decision boundary distance, which is needed for the heuristic version of CA to work, but also
an interesting topic per se. In this section, we test whether ∥x − xh ∥p , where xh is an adversarial
example found by a heuristic attack, is predictably close to the true decision boundary distance
(i.e. d∗p (x)). Consistently with Athalye et al. (2018) and Weng et al. (2018a), we focus on the L∞
norm. Additionally, we focus on pools of heuristic attacks. The underlying rationale is that different
adversarial attacks should be able to cover for their reciprocal blind spots, providing a more reliable
estimate. Since this evaluation is empirical, it requires sampling from a chosen distribution, in our
case specific classifiers and the MNIST (LeCun et al., 1998) and CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009)
datasets. This means that the results are not guaranteed for other distributions, or for other defended
models: studying how adversarial attacks fare in these cases is an important topic for future work.

Experimental Setup We randomly selected ~2.3k samples each from the test set of two datasets,
MNIST and CIFAR10. We used three architectures per dataset (named A, B and C), each trained
in three settings, namely standard training, PGD adversarial training (Madry et al., 2018) and PGD
adversarial training with ReLU loss and pruning (Xiao et al., 2019) (from now on referred to as
ReLU training), for a total of nine configurations per dataset. Since our analysis requires computing
exact decision boundary distances, and size and depth both have a strong adverse impact on solver
times, we used small and relatively shallow networks with parameters between ~2k and ~80k. Note
that using (more scalable) NN verification approaches that can provide bounds without tightness
guarantees is not an option, as they would prevent us from drawing any firm conclusion. For this
reason, the natural accuracies for standard training are significantly below the state of the art (89.63%
- 95.87% on MNIST and 47.85% - 55.81% on CIFAR10). Adversarial training also had a negative
effect on natural accuracies (84.54% - 94.24% on MNIST and 45.19% - 51.35% on CIFAR10),
similarly to ReLU training (83.69% - 93.57% on MNIST and 32.27% - 37.33% on CIFAR10).
We first ran a pool of heuristic attacks on each example, namely (Kurakin et al., 2017; Brendel et al.,
2019; Carlini & Wagner, 2017c; Moosavi-Dezfooli et al., 2016; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Madry et al.,
2018), as well as simply adding uniform noise to the input. Our main choice of attack parameters
(from now on referred to as the “strong” parameter set) prioritizes finding adversarial examples at the
expense of computational time. For each example, we considered the nearest feasible adversarial
example found by any attack in the pool. We then ran the exact solver-based attack MIPVerify
(Tjeng et al., 2019), which is able to find the nearest adversarial example to a given input. The entire
process (including test runs) required ~45k core-hours on an HPC cluster. Each node of the cluster
has 384 GB of RAM and features two Intel CascadeLake 8260 CPUs, each with 24 cores and a
clock frequency of 2.4GHz. We removed the examples for which MIPVerify crashed in at least one
setting, obtaining 2241 examples for MNIST and 2269 for CIFAR10. We also excluded from our
analysis all adversarial examples for which MIPVerify did not find optimal bounds (atol = 1e-5, rtol
= 1e-10), which represent on average 11.95% of the examples for MNIST and 16.30% for CIFAR10.
Additionally, we ran the same heuristic attacks with a faster parameter set (from now on referred to
as the “balanced” set) on a single machine with an AMD Ryzen 5 1600X six-core 3.6 GHz processor,
16 GBs of RAM and an NVIDIA GTX 1060 6 GB GPU. The process took approximately 8 hours.
Refer to Appendix G for a more comprehensive overview of our experimental setup.

Distance Approximation Across all settings, the mean distance found by the strong attack pool
is 4.09±2.02% higher for MNIST and 2.21±1.16% higher for CIFAR10 than the one found by
MIPVerify. For 79.81±15.70% of the MNIST instances and 98.40±1.63% of the CIFAR10 ones, the
absolute difference is less than 1/255, which is the minimum distance in 8-bit image formats. The
balanced attack pool performs similarly, finding distances that are on average 4.65±2.16% higher for
MNIST and 2.04±1.13% higher for CIFAR10. The difference is below 1/255 for 77.78±16.08% of
MNIST examples and 98.74±1.13% of CIFAR10 examples. We compare the distances found by the
strong attack pool for MNIST A and CIFAR10 (using standard training) with the true decision bound
distances in Figure 1. Refer to Appendix I for the full data.
For all datasets, architectures and training techniques there appears to be a strong, linear, correlation
between the distance of the output of the heuristic attacks and the true decision boundary distance.
We chose to measure this by training a linear regression model linking the two distances. For the


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         ·10−2                                                                ·10−2

                     8
Estimated Distance                                                                        3


                                                                     Estimated Distance
                     6

                                                                                          2
                     4

                                                                                          1
                     2


                     0                                                                    0

                           0     2         4         6     8                                    0       1            2      3
                                     True Distance       ·10−2                                              True Distance       ·10−2
                                 (a) MNIST A                                                          (b) CIFAR10 A

Figure 1: Distances of the nearest adversarial example found by the strong attack pool compared
to those found by MIPVerify on MNIST A and CIFAR10 A with standard training. The black line
represents the theoretical optimum. Note that no samples are below the black line.


strong parameter set, we find that the average R2 across all settings is 0.992±0.004 for MNIST
and 0.997±0.003 for CIFAR10. The balanced parameter set performs similarly, achieving an R2
of 0.990±0.006 for MNIST and 0.998±0.002 for CIFAR10. From these results, we conjecture that
increasing the computational budget of heuristic attacks does not necessarily improve predictability,
although further tests would be needed to confirm such a claim. Note that such a linear model can
also be used as a buffer function for heuristic CA. Another (possibly more reliable) procedure would
consist in using quantile fitting; results for this approach are reported in Appendix H.

Attack Pool Ablation Study Due to the nontrivial computational requirements of running several
attacks on the same input, we now study whether it is possible to drop some attacks from the pool
without compromising its predictability. Specifically, we consider all possible pools of size n (with
a success rate of 100%) and pick the one with the highest average R2 value over all architectures
and training techniques. As show in Figure 2, adding attacks does increase predictability, although
with diminishing returns. For example, the pool composed of the Basic Iterative Method, the Brendel
& Bethge Attack and the Carlini & Wagner attack achieves on its own a R2 value of 0.988±0.004
for MNIST+strong, 0.986±0.005 for MNIST+balanced, 0.935±0.048 for CIFAR10+strong and
0.993±0.003 for CIFAR10+balanced. Moreover, dropping both the Fast Gradient Sign Method and
uniform noise leads to negligible (≪ 0.001) absolute variations in the mean R2 . These findings
suggest that, as far as consistency is concerned, the choice of attacks represents a more important
factor than the number of attacks in a pool. Refer to Appendix J for a more in-depth overview of how
different attack selections affect consistency and accuracy.

Efficient Attacks We then explore if it possible to increase the efficiency of attacks by optimizing
for fast, rather than accurate, results. We pick three new parameter sets (namely Fast-100, Fast-1k
and Fast-10k) designed to find the nearest adversarial examples within the respective number of calls
to the model. We find that while Deepfool is not the strongest adversarial attack (see Appendix I), it
provides adequate results in very few model calls. For details on these results see Appendix K.

Fooling the Heuristic Attack-Based CA An open question from Section 5.2 is the empirical
difficulty of fooling the version of CA based on heuristic attacks. Specifically, we carried on a
limited experimentation by attempting to fool a CA-defended model. We used Deepfool Fast-
1k as a heuristic attack for CA, then we built a proof-of-concept CCA implementation based on
the PGD method, thus setting a baseline for attacks against CA. This variant uses a custom loss
LCCA (x, y) = LP GD (x, y) + λ∥x − af,p (x)∥p , which rewards adversarial examples with over-
estimated decision boundary distances. We then vary λ in order to test various trade-offs between
the two terms. In order to estimate the gradient of the second term, we use Natural Evolution
Strategies (Wierstra et al., 2014). As a sanity check, we also attack using uniform noise. Due
to the high computational requirements of such an experiment (30-60 minutes and ∼1.2M model


                                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                           0.998
               0.990
                                                                                           0.996
Best Mean R2


                                                                            Best Mean R2
               0.980                                                                       0.994


                                                                                           0.992

               0.970
                                                        Strong                             0.990                                     Strong
                                                       Balanced                                                                     Balanced

                       1   2    3        4       5     6     7                                     1   2     3        4       5     6     7
                                    #Attacks in Pool                                                             #Attacks in Pool

                               (a) MNIST                                                                   (b) CIFAR10

                           Figure 2: Best mean R2 value in relation to the number of attacks in the pool.


calls per sample on the GTX 1060 machine), we only attack MNIST A Standard and CIFAR10 A
Standard on 100 samples each. For comparison, running DeepFool on ten 250-element batches takes
approximately 10 seconds. Overall, the attacks have a success rate of 0% - 3%. However, we find that
increasing ε′ (while keeping ε constant) increases the success rate, up to 100% for ε′ = 10 · ε. This
suggests that as the difference between ε′ and ε grows, so does the feasibility of fooling CA, which is
consistent with our analysis. More in-depth results of our experiments can be found in Appendix L.

UG100 Dataset We collect all the adversarial examples found by both MIPVerify and the heuristic
attacks into a new dataset, which we name UG100. UG100 can be used to benchmark new adversarial
attacks. Specifically, we can determine how strong an attack is by comparing it to both the theoretical
optimum and heuristic attack pools. Another potential application involves studying factors that
affect whether adversarial attacks perform sub-optimally.

7                C ONCLUSION

We proved that attacking is N P -complete in the worst case, while training a robust model is ΣP       2-
complete, barring collapse of the Polynomial Hierarchy. We then showed how such a structural
asymmetry can be sidestepped by adopting a different perspective on defense. This is exemplified by
Counter-Attack, a technique that can identify non-robust points in N P time. We showed that CA
can provide robustness guarantees up to an arbitrary ε. The CA approach naturally benefits from
improvements in the field of adversarial attacks, and can be combined with other forms of defense.
Due to its independence from the specific characteristics of the defended model, CA can also be
applied to non-ML tools (e.g. signature-based malware detectors). We also believe that it should
be possible to extend CA beyond classification. Finally, in an empirical evaluation we showed that
heuristic attacks can provide an accurate and consistent approximation of the true decision boundary,
which has implications for the viability of a heuristic version of CA. While our investigation is limited
to small scale networks, we expect improvements in the field of NN verification will enable testing
whether the observed results generalize to larger architectures.
Overall, we hope that our contributions can provide broad benefits to the field of adversarial robustness
by 1) highlighting a potential, structural, challenge; 2) pointing out how that can be sidestepped by a
change in perspective; 3) showing a proof-of-concept defense based on this idea; 4) providing an
experimentation and dataset to serve as a baseline and starting point.

R EPRODUCIBILITY
We provide all our code and data in the repository linked in Section 1. Additionally, we report
the key reproducibility information in Section 6, while all the other information can be found in
Appendices G and L. To ensure maximum reproducibility, we also used consistent seeds across all
experiments (one for parameter tuning and one for actual experiments). We also made sure to only
rely on tools that are either open-source or for which there are free academic licenses. Concerning
theoretical results, we provide full proofs of all theorems and corollaries in the appendices. Finally,


                                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for users with a slow internet connection, we also provide UG100 in JSON format (containing only
the found adversarial distances).

R EFERENCES
Anish Athalye, Nicholas Carlini, and David Wagner. Obfuscated gradients give a false sense of
  security: Circumventing defenses to adversarial examples. In International Conference on Machine
 Learning, pp. 274–283. PMLR, 2018.
Pranjal Awasthi, Abhratanu Dutta, and Aravindan Vijayaraghavan. On robustness to adversarial
  examples and polynomial optimization. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Wieland Brendel, Jonas Rauber, Matthias Kümmerer, Ivan Ustyuzhaninov, and Matthias Bethge.
 Accurate, reliable and fast robustness evaluation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 32, 2019.
Tom B Brown, Dandelion Mané, Aurko Roy, Martín Abadi, and Justin Gilmer. Adversarial patch.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09665, 2017.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Defensive distillation is not robust to adversarial examples.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.04311, 2016.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Adversarial examples are not easily detected: Bypassing ten
  detection methods. In Proceedings of the 10th ACM Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and
  Security, pp. 3–14, 2017a.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Magnet and "efficient defenses against adversarial attacks" are
  not robust to adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08478, 2017b.
Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017
  IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), pp. 39–57. IEEE, 2017c.
Nicholas Carlini, Guy Katz, Clark Barrett, and David L Dill. Provably minimally-distorted adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.10207, 2017.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, J Zico Kolter, et al. (certified!!) adversarial robustness for free!
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10550, 2022.
Jeremy Cohen, Elan Rosenfeld, and Zico Kolter. Certified adversarial robustness via randomized
  smoothing. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1310–1320. PMLR, 2019.
Francesco Croce, Sven Gowal, Thomas Brunner, Evan Shelhamer, Matthias Hein, and Taylan
  Cemgil. Evaluating the adversarial robustness of adaptive test-time defenses. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.13711, 2022.
Chen Dan, Yuting Wei, and Pradeep Ravikumar. Sharp statistical guaratees for adversarially robust
  gaussian classification. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2345–2355. PMLR,
  2020.
Akshay Degwekar, Preetum Nakkiran, and Vinod Vaikuntanathan. Computational limitations in
  robust classification and win-win results. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 994–1028. PMLR,
  2019.
Gavin Weiguang Ding, Luyu Wang, and Xiaomeng Jin. AdverTorch v0.1: An adversarial robustness
  toolbox based on pytorch. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07623, 2019.
Edgar Dobriban, Hamed Hassani, David Hong, and Alexander Robey. Provable tradeoffs in adversar-
  ially robust classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05161, 2020.
Tommaso Dreossi, Shromona Ghosh, Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, and Sanjit A Seshia. A
  formalization of robustness for deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10033, 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Krishnamurthy Dvijotham, Robert Stanforth, Sven Gowal, Timothy A Mann, and Pushmeet Kohli. A
  dual approach to scalable verification of deep networks. In UAI, volume 1, pp. 3, 2018.
Reuben Feinman, Ryan R Curtin, Saurabh Shintre, and Andrew B Gardner. Detecting adversarial
  samples from artifacts. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.00410, 2017.
Sanjam Garg, Somesh Jha, Saeed Mahloujifar, and Mahmoody Mohammad. Adversarially robust
  learning could leverage computational hardness. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 364–385.
  PMLR, 2020.
Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015. URL http://
  arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572.
Kathrin Grosse, Praveen Manoharan, Nicolas Papernot, Michael Backes, and Patrick McDaniel. On
  the (statistical) detection of adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.06280, 2017.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2022. URL https://www.
  gurobi.com.
Husheng Han, Kaidi Xu, Xing Hu, Xiaobing Chen, Ling Liang, Zidong Du, Qi Guo, Yanzhi Wang,
  and Yunji Chen. Scalecert: Scalable certified defense against adversarial patches with sparse
  superficial layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Warren He, James Wei, Xinyun Chen, Nicholas Carlini, and Dawn Song. Adversarial example
 defenses: ensembles of weak defenses are not strong. In Proceedings of the 11th USENIX
 Conference on Offensive Technologies, pp. 15–15, 2017.
Matthias Hein and Maksym Andriushchenko. Formal guarantees on the robustness of a classifier
 against adversarial manipulation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. Early methods for detecting adversarial images. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (Workshop Track), 2017.
Hossein Hosseini, Sreeram Kannan, and Radha Poovendran. Are odds really odd? bypassing
  statistical detection of adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.12138, 2019.
Robin Jia, Aditi Raghunathan, Kerem Göksel, and Percy Liang. Certified robustness to adversarial
  word substitutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.00986, 2019.
Guy Katz, Clark Barrett, David Dill, Kyle Julian, and Mykel Kochenderfer. Reluplex: An efficient
  smt solver for verifying deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.01135, 2017.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Roger Koenker and Gilbert Bassett Jr. Regression quantiles. Econometrica: journal of the Economet-
  ric Society, pp. 33–50, 1978.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  Technical report, 2009.
Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio. Adversarial machine learning at scale. 2017.
Yann LeCun, Corinna Cortes, and Christopher J.C. Burges. The MNIST database of handwritten
  digits. http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/, 1998.
Klas Leino, Zifan Wang, and Matt Fredrikson. Globally-robust neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6212–6222. PMLR, 2021.
Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2018.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Saeed Mahloujifar and Mohammad Mahmoody. Can adversarially robust learning leverage computa-
  tional hardness? In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 581–609. PMLR, 2019.
Dongyu Meng and Hao Chen. Magnet: a two-pronged defense against adversarial examples. In
 Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
  pp. 135–147, 2017.
Yifei Min, Lin Chen, and Amin Karbasi. The curious case of adversarially robust models: More
  data can help, double descend, or hurt generalization. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp.
  129–139. PMLR, 2021.
Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Deepfool: a simple and
  accurate method to fool deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2574–2582, 2016.
Ambar Pal and René Vidal. A game theoretic analysis of additive adversarial attacks and defenses.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1345–1355, 2020.
Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Ian Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z Berkay Celik, and Ananthram
  Swami. Practical black-box attacks against machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on
  Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security, pp. 506–519, 2017.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward
 Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance
  deep learning library. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and
  R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, pp. 8024–8035. Curran
 Associates, Inc., 2019.
Rafael Pinot, Florian Yger, Cédric Gouy-Pailler, and Jamal Atif. A unified view on differential
  privacy and robustness to adversarial examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.07982, 2019.
Muni Sreenivas Pydi and Varun Jog. The many faces of adversarial risk. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Aditi Raghunathan, Jacob Steinhardt, and Percy Liang. Certified defenses against adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09344, 2018.
Jonas Rauber, Roland Zimmermann, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Foolbox native: Fast
  adversarial attacks to benchmark the robustness of machine learning models in pytorch, tensorflow,
  and jax. Journal of Open Source Software, 5(53):2607, 2020.
Ambrish Rawat, Martin Wistuba, and Maria-Irina Nicolae. Adversarial phenomenon in the eyes of
 bayesian deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08244, 2017.
Jie Ren, Die Zhang, Yisen Wang, Lu Chen, Zhanpeng Zhou, Yiting Chen, Xu Cheng, Xin Wang,
   Meng Zhou, Jie Shi, et al. A unified game-theoretic interpretation of adversarial robustness. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2111.03536, 2021.
Eitan Richardson and Yair Weiss. A bayes-optimal view on adversarial examples. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 22(221):1–28, 2021.
Kevin Roth, Yannic Kilcher, and Thomas Hofmann. The odds are odd: A statistical test for detecting
  adversarial examples. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5498–5507. PMLR,
  2019.
Hadi Salman, Mingjie Sun, Greg Yang, Ashish Kapoor, and J Zico Kolter. Denoised smoothing: A
  provable defense for pretrained classifiers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  33:21945–21957, 2020.
Samuel Henrique Silva and Peyman Najafirad. Opportunities and challenges in deep learning
  adversarial robustness: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.00753, 2020.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gagandeep Singh, Timon Gehr, Matthew Mirman, Markus Püschel, and Martin Vechev. Fast and
  effective robustness certification. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Aman Sinha, Hongseok Namkoong, Riccardo Volpi, and John Duchi. Certifying some distribu-
 tional robustness with principled adversarial training. In International Conference on Learning
 Representations, 2018.
Min Jae Song, Ilias Zadik, and Joan Bruna. On the cryptographic hardness of learning single periodic
 neurons. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:29602–29615, 2021.
Larry J Stockmeyer. The polynomial-time hierarchy. Theoretical Computer Science, 3(1):1–22, 1976.
Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6199, 2013.
Vincent Tjeng, Kai Y Xiao, and Russ Tedrake. Evaluating robustness of neural networks with mixed
  integer programming. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Florian Tramèr, Jens Behrmann, Nicholas Carlini, Nicolas Papernot, and Jörn-Henrik Jacobsen. Fun-
  damental tradeoffs between invariance and sensitivity to adversarial perturbations. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9561–9571. PMLR, 2020.
Florian Tramer, Nicholas Carlini, Wieland Brendel, and Aleksander Madry. On adaptive attacks to
  adversarial example defenses. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:1633–1645,
  2020.
Guillaume Vidot, Paul Viallard, Amaury Habrard, and Emilie Morvant. A pac-bayes analysis of
  adversarial robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11069, 2021.
Lily Weng, Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Zhao Song, Cho-Jui Hsieh, Luca Daniel, Duane Boning,
  and Inderjit Dhillon. Towards fast computation of certified robustness for relu networks. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5276–5285. PMLR, 2018a.
Tsui-Wei Weng, Huan Zhang, Pin-Yu Chen, Jinfeng Yi, Dong Su, Yupeng Gao, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and
  Luca Daniel. Evaluating the robustness of neural networks: An extreme value theory approach. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018b.
Daan Wierstra, Tom Schaul, Tobias Glasmachers, Yi Sun, Jan Peters, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Natural evolution strategies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):949–980, 2014.
Zuxuan Wu, Ser-Nam Lim, Larry S Davis, and Tom Goldstein. Making an invisibility cloak: Real
  world adversarial attacks on object detectors. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  1–17. Springer, 2020.
Kai Y Xiao, Vincent Tjeng, Nur Muhammad Shafiullah, and Aleksander Madry. Training for faster
  adversarial robustness verification via inducing relu stability. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.
Yao-Yuan Yang, Cyrus Rashtchian, Hongyang Zhang, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Kamalika Chaud-
  huri. A closer look at accuracy vs. robustness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 33, pp. 8588–8601, 2020.
Bohang Zhang, Tianle Cai, Zhou Lu, Di He, and Liwei Wang. Towards certifying l-infinity robustness
  using neural networks with l-inf-dist neurons. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 12368–12379. PMLR, 2021.
Hongyang Zhang, Yaodong Yu, Jiantao Jiao, Eric Xing, Laurent El Ghaoui, and Michael Jordan.
 Theoretically principled trade-off between robustness and accuracy. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 7472–7482. PMLR, 2019.
Jingfeng Zhang, Xilie Xu, Bo Han, Gang Niu, Lizhen Cui, Masashi Sugiyama, and Mohan Kankan-
   halli. Attacks which do not kill training make adversarial learning stronger. In International
   Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 11278–11287. PMLR, 2020.
Yan Zhou, Murat Kantarcioglu, and Bowei Xi. A survey of game theoretic approach for adversarial
  machine learning. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 9(3):
  e1259, 2019.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A      P ROOF P RELIMINARIES
A.1    N OTATION

We use fi to denote the i-th output of a network. We define f as
                                      f (x) = arg max{fi (x)}                                     (6)
                                                       i
for situations where multiple outputs are equal to the maximum, we use the class with the lowest
index.

A.2    µ A RITHMETIC

Given two FSFP spaces X and X ′ with distance minorants µ and µ′ , we can compute new positive
minorants after applying functions to the spaces as follows:

        • Sum of two vectors: µX+X ′ = min(µ, µ′ );
        • Multiplication by a constant: µαX = αµ;
        • ReLU: µReLU (X) = µ.

Since it is possible to compute the distance minorant of a space transformed by any of these functions
in polynomial time, it is also possible to compute the distance minorant of a space transformed by
any composition of such functions in polynomial time.

A.3    F UNCTIONS

We now provide an overview of several functions that can be obtained by using linear combinations
and ReLUs.

max Carlini et al. (2017) showed that we can implement the max function using linear combinations
and ReLUs as follows:

                                   max(x, y) = ReLU (x − y) + y                                   (7)
We can also obtain an n-ary version of max by chaining multiple instances together.

step    If X is a FSFP space, then the following scalar function:
                                         1
                           step0 (x) = (ReLU (x) − ReLU (x − µ))                                  (8)
                                         µ
is such that ∀i.∀x ∈ X, step0 (xi ) is 0 for xi ≤ 0 and 1 for xi > 0.
Similarly, let step1 be defined as follows:
                                         1
                             step1 (x) = (ReLU (x + µ) − ReLU (x))                                (9)
                                         µ

Note that ∀i.∀x ∈ X, step1 (xi ) = 0 for xi < 0 and step1 (xi ) = 1 for xi ≥ 0.

Boolean Functions We then define the Boolean functions not : {0, 1} → {0, 1}, and : {0, 1}2 →
{0, 1}, or : {0, 1}2 → {0, 1} and if : {0, 1}3 → {0, 1} as follows:
                                 not(x) = 1 − x                                                  (10)
                             and(x, y) = step1 (x + y − 2)                                       (11)
                               or(x, y) = step1 (x + y)                                          (12)
                             if (a, b, c) = or(and(not(a), b), and(a, c))                        (13)

where if (a, b, c) returns b if a = 0 and c otherwise.
Note that we can obtain n-ary variants of and and or by chaining multiple instances together.


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


cnf3 Given a set z = {{z1,1 , . . . , z1,3 }, . . . , {zn,1 , zn,3 }} of Boolean atoms (i.e. zi,j (x) = xk or
¬xk for a certain k) defined on an n-long Boolean vector x, cnf3 (z) returns the following Boolean
function:                                             ^        _
                                 cnf3′ (x) =                         zi,j (x)                            (14)
                                                i=1,...,n j=1,...,3

We refer to z as a 3CNF formula.
Since cnf3′ only uses negation, conjunction and disjunction, it can be implemented using respectively
neg, and and or. Note that, given z, we can build cnf3′ in polynomial time w.r.t. the size of z.

Comparison Functions We can use step0 , step1 and neg to obtain comparison functions as
follows:
                      geq(x, k) = step1 (x − k)                                    (15)
                        gt(x, k) = step0 (x, k)                                    (16)
                       leq(x, k) = not(gt(x, k))                                   (17)
                         lt(x, k) = not(geq(x, k))                                 (18)
                        eq(x, k) = and(geq(x, k), leq(x, k))                       (19)

Moreover, we define open : R3 → {0, 1} as follows:
                            open(x, a, b) = and(gt(x, a), lt(x, b))                                     (20)

B     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
B.1    U -AT T∞ ∈ N P

To prove that U -AT T∞ ∈ N P , we show that there exists a polynomial certificate for U -AT T that
can be checked in polynomial time. The certificate is the value of x′ , which will have a representation
of the same size as x (due to the FSFP space assumption) and can be checked by verifying:
       • ∥x − x′ ∥∞ ≤ ε, which can be checked in linear time;
       • fθ (x′ ) ̸= f (x), which can be checked in polynomial time.

B.2    U -AT T∞ IS N P -H ARD

We will prove that U -AT T∞ is N P -Hard by showing that 3SAT ≤ U -AT T∞ .
Given a set of 3CNF clauses z = {{z11 , z12 , z13 }, . . . , {zm1 , zm2 , zm3 }} defined on n Boolean
variables x1 , . . . , xn , we construct the following query q(z) for U -AT T∞ :
                                                             1
                                              q(z) = ⟨x(s) , , f ⟩                               (21)
                                                             2
where x(s) = 12 , . . . , 12 is a vector with n elements. Verifying q(z) ∈ U -AT T∞ is equivalent to

checking:
                                       ′             1
                                    ∃x ∈ B∞ xs ,         .f (x′ ) ̸= f (x(s) )                   (22)
                                                     2

Note that x ∈ B∞ x(s) , 12 is equivalent to x ∈ [0, 1]n .



Truth Values We will encode the truth values
                                               of x̂ as follows:
                                            1
                                 x′i ∈ 0,        ⇐⇒ x̂i = 0                                             (23)
                                            2

                                         1
                                x′i ∈      , 1 ⇐⇒ x̂i = 1                                               (24)
                                         2

We can obtain the truth value of a scalar variable by using isT (xi ) = gt xi , 12 . Let bin(x) =


or(isT (x1 ), . . . , isT (xn )).


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition of f    We define f as follows:
                            f1 (x) = and(not(isx(s) (x)), cnf3′ (bin(x)))                          (25)
                            f0 (x) = not(f1 (x))                                                   (26)

where cnf3′ = cnf3 (z) and isx(s) is defined as follows:

                                                     1                     1
                       isx(s) (x) = and eq x1 ,          , . . . , eq xn ,                         (27)
                                                     2                     2

Note that f is designed such that f (x(s) ) = 0, while for x′ ̸= x(s) , f (x′ ) = 1 iff the formula z is
true for the variable assignment bin(x′ ).
Lemma 1. z ∈ 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ U -AT T∞

Proof. Let z ∈ 3SAT . Therefore ∃x∗ ∈ {0, 1}n such that cnf3 (z)(x∗ ) = 1. Since bin(x∗ ) = x∗
and x∗ ̸= x(s) , f (x∗ ) = 1, which means that it is a valid solution for Equation (22). From this we
can conclude that q(z) ∈ U -AT T∞ .
Lemma 2. q(z) ∈ U -AT T∞ =⇒ z ∈ 3SAT

Proof. Since q(z) ∈ U -AT T∞ , ∃x∗ ∈ [0, 1]n \ {x(s) } that is a solution to Equation (22) (i.e.
f (x∗ ) = 1). Then cnf3′ (bin(x∗ )) = 1, which means that there exists a x̂ (i.e. bin(x∗ )) such that
cnf3′ (x̂) = 1. From this we can conclude that z ∈ 3SAT .

Since:
         • q(z) can be computed in polynomial time;
         • z ∈ 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ U -AT T∞ ;
         • q(z) ∈ U -AT T =⇒ z ∈ 3SAT .
we can conclude that 3SAT ≤ U -AT T∞ .

B.3      P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1.1

B.3.1     U -AT Tp ∈ N P
The proof is identical to the one for U -AT T∞ .

B.3.2     U -AT Tp IS N P -H ARD
The proof that q(z) ∈ U -AT Tp =⇒ z ∈ 3SAT is very similar to the one for U -AT T∞ . Since
q(z) ∈ U -AT Tp , we know that ∃x∗ ∈ Bp (x(s) , ε) \ {x(s) }.f (x∗ ) = 1, which means that there
exists a x̂ (i.e. bin(x∗ )) such that cnf3′ (x̂) = 1. From this we can conclude that z ∈ 3SAT .
The proof that z ∈ 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ U -AT Tp is slightly different, due to the fact that since
x∗ ̸∈ Bp (x(s) , 12 ) we need to use a different input to prove that ∃x′ ∈ Bp (x(s) ).f (x′ ) = 1.
Let 0 < p < ∞. Given a positive integer n and a real 0 < p < ∞, let ρp,n (r) be a positive minorant
of the L∞ norm of a vector on the Lp sphere
                                         √
                                             of radius r. For example, for n = 2, p = 2 and r = 1,
                                           2
any positive value less than or equal to 2 is suitable. Note that, for 0 < p < ∞ and n, r > 0,
ρp,n (r) < r.
Let z ∈ 3SAT . Therefore ∃x∗ ∈ {0, 1}n such that cnf3 (z)(x∗ ) = 1. Let x∗∗ be defined as:
                                      1
                                         − ρp,n 12     x∗i = 0

                                ∗∗     2
                              xi = 1              1                                        (28)
                                                       x∗i = 1

                                       2 + ρp,n 2

By construction, x∗∗ ∈ Bp x(s) , ρp,n 21 . Additionally, bin(x∗∗ ) = x∗ , and since we know that


z is true for the variable assignment x∗ , we can conclude that f (x∗∗ ) = 1, which means that x∗∗ is
a valid solution for Equation (22). From this we can conclude that q(z) ∈ U -AT Tp .


                                                   16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.4     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1.2

The proof is identical to the proof of Theorem 1 (for p = ∞) and Corollary 1.1 (for 0 < p < ∞),
with the exception of requiring f (x′ ) = 1.

B.5     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 1.3

The proof that attacking a polynomial-time classifier is in N P is the same as that for Theorem 1.
Attacking a polynomial-time classifier is N P -hard due to the fact that the ReLU networks defined in
the proof of Theorem 1 are polynomial-time classifiers. Since attacking a general polynomial-time
classifier is a generalization of attacking a ReLU polynomial-time classifier, the problem is N P -hard.


C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proving that U -AT Tp (f ) ∈ N P A means proving that it can be solved in polynomial time by a
non-deterministic Turing machine with an oracle that can solve a problem in A. Since Zf ∈ A, we
can do so by picking a non-deterministic Turing machine with access to an oracle that solves Zf . We
then generate non-deterministically the adversarial example and return the output of the oracle. Due
to the FSFP assumption, we know that the size of this input is the same as the size of the starting
point, which means that it can be generated non-deterministically in polynomial time. Therefore,
U -AT Tp (f ) ∈ N P A .

C.1     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 2.1

Follows directly from Theorem 2 and the definition of ΣP
                                                       n.



D      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

D.1     P RELIMINARIES

ΠP
 2 3SAT is the set of all z such that:

                                                      ∀x̂∃ŷ.R(x̂, ŷ)                                (29)

where R(x̂, ŷ) = cnf3 (z)(x̂1 , . . . , x̂n , ŷ1 , . . . , ŷn ).
Stockmeyer (1976) showed that Π2 3SAT is ΠP
                                          2 -complete. Therefore, coΠ2 3SAT , which is defined
as the set of all z such that:
                                      ∃x̂∀ŷ¬R(x̂, ŷ)                                    (30)
is ΣP
    2 -complete.


D.2     P L-ROB∞ ∈ ΣP
                    2

P L-ROB∞ ∈ ΣP
            2 if there exists a problem A ∈ P and a polynomial q such that ∀Γ = ⟨x, ε, fθ , vf ⟩:

           Γ ∈ P L-ROB ⇐⇒ ∃y.|y| ≤ q(|Γ|) ∧ (∀z.(|z| ≤ q(|Γ|) =⇒ ⟨Γ, y, z⟩ ∈ A))                      (31)
This can be proven by setting y = θ ′ , z = x′ and A as the set of triplets ⟨Γ, θ ′ , x′ ⟩ such that all of
the following are true:

         • vf (θ ′ ) = 1;
         • ∥x − x′ ∥∞ ≤ ε;
         • fθ (x) = fθ (x′ ).

Since all properties can be checked in polynomial time, A ∈ P and thus P L-ROB∞ ∈ ΣP
                                                                                   2.


                                                              17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3      P L-ROB∞ IS ΣP
                      2 -H ARD

We will prove that P L-ROB∞ is ΣP
                                2 -hard by showing that coΠ2 3SAT ≤ P L-ROB∞ .

Let nx̂ be the length of x̂ and let nŷ be the length of ŷ.
Given a set z of 3CNF clauses, we construct the following query q(z) for P L-ROB:
                                                       1
                                         q(z) = ⟨x(s) , , fθ , vf ⟩                                (32)
                                                       2
where x(s) = 12 , . . . , 12 is a vector with nŷ elements and vf (θ) = 1 ⇐⇒ θ ∈ {0, 1}nx̂ . Note


that θ ′ ∈ {0, 1}nx̂ can be checked in polynomial time w.r.t. the size of the input.

Truth Values We will encode the truth values of x̂ as a set of binary parameters θ ′ , while we will
encode the truth values of ŷ using x′ through the same technique mentioned in Appendix B.2.

Definition of fθ     We define fθ as follows:

         • fθ,1 (x) = and(not(isx(s) (x)), cnf3′′ (θ, x)), where cnf3′′ is defined over θ and bin(x) us-
           ing the same technique mentioned in Appendix B.2 and isx(s) (x) = andi=1,...,n eq(xi , 12 );
         • fθ,0 (x) = not(fθ,1 (x)).

Note that fθ (x(s) ) = 0 for all choices of θ. Additionally, fθ is designed such that:

                     1
 ∀x′ ∈ B∞ x(s) ,         \ {x(s) }.∀θ ′ . (vf (θ ′ ) = 1 =⇒ (fθ′ (x′ ) = 1 ⇐⇒ R(θ ′ , bin(x′ )))) (33)
                     2
Lemma 3. z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ P L-ROB∞

Proof. Since z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT , there exists a Boolean vector x∗ such that ∀ŷ.¬R(x∗ , ŷ).
Then both of the following statements are true:

         • vf (x∗ ) = 1, since x∗ ∈ {0, 1}nx̂ ;

         • ∀x′ ∈ B∞ (x(s) , ε).fx∗ (x′ ) = 0, since fx∗ (x′ ) = 1 ⇐⇒ R(x∗ , bin(x′ ));

Therefore, x∗ is a valid solution for Equation (3) and thus q(z) ∈ P L-ROB∞ .
Lemma 4. q(z) ∈ P L-ROB∞ =⇒ z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT

Proof. Since q(z) ∈ P L-ROB∞ , there exists a θ ∗ such that:

                         vf (θ) = 1 ∧ ∀x′ ∈ B∞ (x(s) , ε).fθ∗ (x′ ) = fθ∗ (x(s) )                  (34)

Note that θ ∗ ∈ {0, 1}nx̂ , since vf (θ ∗ ) = 1. Moreover, ∀ŷ.¬R(θ ∗ , ŷ), since bin(ŷ) = ŷ and
fθ∗ (ŷ) = 1 ⇐⇒ R(θ ∗ , ŷ).
Therefore, θ ∗ is a valid solution for Equation (30), which implies that z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT .



Since:

         • q(z) can be computed in polynomial time;
         • z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ P L-ROB∞ ;
         • q(z) ∈ P L-ROB∞ =⇒ z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT .

we can conclude that coΠ2 3SAT ≤ P L-ROB∞ .


                                                    18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.4     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 3.1

D.4.1    P L-ROBp ∈ ΣP
                     2

The proof is identical to the one for P L-ROB∞ .

D.4.2    P L-ROBp IS ΣP
                      2 -H ARD

We follow the same approach used in the proof for Corollary 1.1.

Proof of q(z) ∈ P L-ROBp =⇒ z  ∈ coΠ2 3SAT                 If q(z) ∈ P L-ROBp , it means that
∃θ ∗ . vf (θ ∗ ) = 1 =⇒ ∀x′ ∈ Bp x(s) , 12 .f (x′ ) = 0 . Then ∀ŷ, there exists a corresponding
input y ∗∗ ∈ Bp x(s) , 12 defined as follows:


                                           1
                                              − ρp,n 12

                                                          ŷ = 0
                                   ∗∗
                                  yi = 1   2
                                                      1
                                                          i                                 (35)
                                           2 + ρp,n 2     ŷi = 1

such that e(y) (y ∗∗ ) = ŷ. Since y ∗∗ ∈ Bp x(s) , 12 , cnf3′′ (θ ∗ , bin(y ∗∗ )) = 0, which means that


R(θ ∗ , ŷ) is false. In other words, ∃θ ∗ .∀ŷ.¬R(θ ∗ , ŷ), i.e. z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT .

Proof of z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ P L-ROBp                The proof is very similar to the corresponding
one for Theorem 3.
If z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT , then ∃x̂∗ .∀   ŷ.¬R(x̂, ŷ). Set θ ∗ = x̂∗ . We know that fθ∗ (x(s) ) = 0. We also
know that ∀x′ ∈ Bp x(s) , 12 \ {x(s) }. (fθ∗ (x) = 1 ⇐⇒ cnf3′′ (θ ∗ , x′ ) = 1). In other words,


∀x′ ∈ Bp x(s) , 12 \ {x(s) }. (fθ∗ (x′ ) = 1 ⇐⇒ R(θ ∗ , bin(x′ ))). Since R(θ ∗ , ŷ) is false for all


choices of ŷ, ∀x′ ∈ Bp x(s) , 12 \ {x(s) }.fθ∗ (x′ ) = 0. Given the fact that fθ∗ (x(s) ) = 0, we can

conclude that θ ∗ satisfies Equation (3).

D.5     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 3.2

Similarly to the proof of Corollary 1.3, it follows from the fact that ReLU classifiers are polynomial-
time classifiers (w.r.t. the size of the tuple).


E     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4

There are two cases:

        • ∀x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε).f (x′ ) = f (x): then the attack fails because f (x) ̸∈ C(x);
        • ∃x′ ∈ Bp (x, ε).f (x′ ) ̸= f (x): then due to the symmetry of the Lp norm x ∈ Bp (x′ , ε).
          Since f (x) ̸= f (x′ ), x is a valid adversarial example for x′ , which means that f (x′ ) = ⋆.
          Since ⋆ ̸∈ C(x), the attack fails.

E.1     P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 4.1

Assume that ∀x.||x||r ≥ η||x||p and fix x(s) ∈ X. Let x′ ∈ Br (x(s) , ηε) be an adversarial example.
Then ||x′ − x(s) ||r ≤ ηε, and thus η||x′ − x(s) ||p ≤ ηε. Dividing by η, we get ||x′ − x(s) ||p ≤ ε,
which means that x(s) is a valid adversarial example for x′ and thus x′ is rejected by p-CA.
We now proceed to find the values of η.

E.1.1    1≤r<p

We will prove that ||x||r ≥ ||x||p .


                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                x
Case p < ∞ Consider e = ||x||     p
                                    . e is such that ||e||p = 1 and for all i we have |ei | ≤ 1. Since
r < p, for all 0 ≤ t ≤ 1 we have |t| ≤ |t|r . Therefore:
                                    p


                                n
                                          !1/r       n
                                                               !1/r
                              X                    X
                     ||e||r =      |ei |r      ≥        |ei |p      = ||e||p/r
                                                                           p   =1                 (36)
                                        i=1                 i=1

Then, since ||e||r ≥ 1:
                                  ||x||r = || ||x||p e||r = ||x||p ||e||r ≥ ||x||p                    (37)

Case p = ∞ Since ||x||r ≥ ||x||p for all r < p and since the expressions on both sides of the
inequality are compositions of continuous functions, as p → ∞ we get ||x||r ≥ ||x||∞ .

E.1.2    r>p
                                    1    1
We will prove that ||x||r ≥ n r − p ||x||p .

Case r < ∞          Hölder’s inequality states that, given α, β ≥ 1 such that α1 + β1 = 1 and given f and
g, we have:
                                               ||f g||1 ≤ ||f ||α ||g||β                              (38)
             r
Setting α = r−p , β = pr , f = (1, . . . , 1) and g = (xp1 , . . . , xpn ), we know that:
                          Pn         p          p
        • ||f g||1 =       i=1 (1 · xi ) = ||x||p ;
                     Pn      1/α
        • ||f ||α = ( i=1 1)     = n1/α ;
                     P            p/r
                           pr/p                     p/r
                                      = ( i=1 xri )     = ||x||pr .
                                          P
        • ||g||β =    i=1 xi


Therefore ||x||pp ≤ n1/α ||x||pr . Raising both sides to the power of 1/p, we get ||x||p ≤ n1/(pα) ||x||r .
Therefore:                                                      1   1
                                ||x||p ≤ n(r−p)/(pr) ||x||r = n p − r ||x||r                         (39)
                1     1
Dividing by n p − r we get:
                                                 1    1
                                               n r − p ||x||p ≤ ||x||r                                (40)

Case r = ∞ Since the expressions on both sides of the inequality are compositions of continuous
                                       1
functions, as r → ∞ we get ||x||∞ ≥ n− p ||x||p .

F     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5

F.1     CCA∞ ∈ ΣP
                2

                                                                                     ′
CCA∞ ∈ ΣP
        2 iff there exists a problem A ∈ P and a polynomial p such that ∀Γ = ⟨x, ε, ε , C, f ⟩:

           Γ ∈ CCA∞ ⇐⇒ ∃y.|y| ≤ p (|Γ|) ∧ (∀z.(|z| ≤ p(|Γ|) =⇒ ⟨Γ, y, z⟩ ∈ A))                        (41)

This can be proven by setting y = x′ ,z = x′′ and A as the set of all triplets ⟨Γ, x′ , x′′ ⟩ such that all
of the following are true:

        • ∥x − x′ ∥∞ ≤ ε′
        • f (x′ ) ∈ C(x)
        • ∥x′′ − x′ ∥∞ ≤ ε
        • f (x′′ ) = f (x′ )

Since all properties can be checked in polynomial time, A ∈ P .


                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   CCA∞ IS ΣP
               2 -H ARD

We will show that CCA∞ is ΣP
                           2 -hard by proving that coΠ2 3SAT ≤ CCA∞ .

First, suppose that the length of x̂ and ŷ differ. In that case, we pad the shortest one with additional
variables that will not be used.
Let n be the maximum of the lengths of x̂ and ŷ.
Given a set z of 3CNF clauses, we construct the following query q(z) for CCA∞ :
                                                           1
                                          q(z) = ⟨x(s) , γ, , Cu , h⟩                                       (42)
                                                           2

where 14 < γ < 12 and x(s) =        1          1

                                    2, . . . , 2       is a vector with n elements. Verifying q(z) ∈ CCA∞ is
equivalent to checking:


              ′       1            ′              ′′    ′ 1         ′′      ′
          ∃x ∈ B xs ,         . h(x ) ̸= h(x) ∧ ∀x ∈ B x ,     . h(x ) = h(x )                              (43)
                      2                                    4

Note that x′ ∈ [0, 1]n .

Truth Values We will encode the truth values of x̂ and ŷ as follows:

                              ′′       1
                           xi ∈ 0,         ⇐⇒ x̂i = 0 ∧ ŷi = 0
                                       4

                                    1 1
                          x′′i ∈     ,     ⇐⇒ x̂i = 0 ∧ ŷi = 1
                                    4 2
                                                                                                            (44)
                                    1 3
                          x′′i ∈     ,     ⇐⇒ x̂i = 1 ∧ ŷi = 0
                                    2 4

                                    3
                           x′′i ∈     , 1 ⇐⇒ x̂i = 1 ∧ ŷi = 1
                                    4

Let ex̂i (x) = gt xi , 21 . Let:



                                                  1 1              3
                           eŷi (x) = or open xi , ,    , open xi , , 1                                     (45)
                                                  4 2              4

Note that ex̂i (x′′i ) returns the truth value of x̂i and eŷi (x′′i ) returns the truth value of ŷi (as long as
the input is within one of the ranges described in Equation (44)).

Invalid Encodings All the encodings other than the ones described in Equation (44) are not valid.
We define invF as follows:

                               invF (x) = ori=1,...,n or(out(xi ), edge(xi ))                               (46)

where out(xi ) = or(leq(xi , 0), geq(xi , 1)) and

                                                1             1             3
                    edge(xi ) = or eq xi ,          , eq xi ,     , eq xi ,                                 (47)
                                                4             2             4

On the other hand, we define invT as follows:

                                                                    1
                                     invT (x) = ori=1,...,n eq xi ,                                         (48)
                                                                    2

                                                            21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Definition of h Let g be a Boolean formula defined over e(x) (x) and e(y) (x) that returns the value
of R (using the same technique as cnf3′ ).
We define h as a two-class classifier, where:
                          h1 (x) = or(invT (x), and(not(invF (x)), g(x)))                                (49)

and h0 (x) = not(h1 (x)).
Note that:

       • If xi = 12 for some i, the top class is 1; therefore, h(x(s) ) = 1;
       • Otherwise, if x is not a valid encoding, the top class is 0;
    • Otherwise, the top class is 1 if R(e(x) (x), e(y) (x)) is true and 0 otherwise.
Lemma 5. z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ CCA∞

Proof. If z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT , then there exists a Boolean vector x∗ such that ∀ŷ.¬R(x∗ , ŷ).
We now prove that setting x′ = x∗ satisfies Equation (5). First, note that h(x∗ ) = 0, which satisfies
h(x′ ) ̸= h(x). Then we need to verify that ∀x′′ ∈ B∞ (x∗ , γ).h(x) = 0.
                                                                                    n
For every x′′ ∈ B∞ (x∗ , γ), we know that x′′ ∈ ([−γ, γ] ∪ [1 − γ, 1 + γ]) . There are thus two
cases:

       • x′′ is not a valid encoding, i.e. x′′i ≤ 0∨x′′i ≥ 1∨x′′i ∈ 14 , 34 for some i. Then h(x′′ ) = 0.


         Note that, since γ < 12 , 12 ̸∈ [−γ, γ] ∪ [1 − γ, 1 + γ], so it is not possible for x′′ to be an
         invalid encoding that is classified as 1;
       • x′′ is a valid encoding. Then, since γ < 12 , e(x) (x′′ ) = x∗ . Since h(x′′ ) = 1 iff
         R(e(x) (x′′ ), e(y) (x′′ )) is true and since R(x∗ , ŷ) is false for all choices of ŷ, h(x′′ ) = 0.

Therefore, x∗ satisfies Equation (43) and thus q(z) ∈ CCA∞ .


Lemma 6. q(z) ∈ CCA∞ =⇒ z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT

Proof. Since q(z) ∈ CCA, there exists a x∗ ∈ B x(s) , 12 such that h(x∗ ) ̸= h(x(s) ) and


∀x′′ ∈ B∞ (x∗ , γ).h(x′′ ) = h(x′ ). We will prove that e(x) (x∗ ) is a solution to coΠ2 3SAT .
Since h(x(s) ) = 1, h(x∗ ) = 0, which means that ∀x′′ ∈ B∞ (x∗ , γ).h(x′′ ) = 0.
We know that x∗ ∈ B∞ x(s) , 21 = [0, 1]n . We first prove by contradiction that x∗ ∈

                            n
 [0, 12 − γ) ∪ ( 12 + γ, 1] . If x∗i ∈ [ 12 − γ, 12 + γ] for some i, then the vector x(w) defined as
follows:                                         1
                                        (w)            i=j
                                      xj = 2 ∗                                                  (50)
                                                   xi otherwise
is such that x(w) ∈ B∞ (x∗i , γ) and h x(w) = 1 (since invT x(w) = 1). This contradicts the fact

                                                                              n
that ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ).h(x) = 0. Therefore, x∗ ∈ [0, 12 − γ) ∪ ( 21 + γ, 1] .
As a consequence, ∀x′′ ∈ B∞ (x∗ , γ).e(x) (x′′ ) = e(x) (x∗ ).
We now prove that ∀ŷ ∗ .∃x′′∗ ∈ B∞ (x∗ , γ) such that e(y) (x′′∗ ) = ŷ ∗ . We can construct such x′′∗
as follows. For every i:

                                                                              1
       • If e(x) (x∗ ) = 0 and e(y) (x∗ ) = 0, set x′′∗

                                                    i equal to a value in 0, 4 ;

                                                                          1
       • If e(x) (x∗ ) = 0 and e(y) (x∗ ) = 1, set x′′∗

                                                    i equal to a value in 4 , γ ;

                                                                                 3
       • If e(x) (x∗ ) = 1 and e(y) (x∗ ) = 0, set x′′∗

                                                    i equal to a value in 1 − γ, 4 ;


                                                     22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                  3
         • If e(x) (x∗ ) = 1 and e(y) (x∗ ) = 1, set x′′∗

                                                      i equal to a value in       4, 1 .


By doing so, we have obtained a x′′∗ such that x′′∗ ∈ B∞ (x∗ , γ) and e(y) (x′′∗ ) = ŷ ∗ .
Since:

         • e(x) (x′′ ) = e(x) (x∗ ) for all x′′ ;
         • h(x′′ ) = 0 for all x′′ ;

         • h(x′′ ) = 1 iff R(e(x) (x′′ )), e(y) (x′′ )) is true;

R(e(x) (x∗ ), ŷ ∗ ) is false for all choices of ŷ ∗ . In other words, x̂∗ is a solution to Equation (30) and
thus z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT .



Since:

         • q(z) can be computed in polynomial time;
         • z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ CCA∞ ;
         • q(z) ∈ CCA∞ =⇒ z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT ;

we can conclude that coΠ2 3SAT ≤ CCA.

F.3   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 5.1

The proof of CCAp ∈ ΣP
                     2 is the same as the one for Theorem 5.

For the hardness proof, we follow a more involved approach compared to those for Corollaries 1.1
and 3.1.
First, let ερp,n be the value of epsilon such that ρp,n ερp,n = 12 . In other words, Bp (x(s) , ερp,n ) is


an Lp ball that contains [0, 1]n , while the intersection of the corresponding Lp sphere and [0, 1]n is
the set {0, 1}n (for p < ∞).
Let invT′ (x) be defined as follows:

                                                             1
                    invT′ (x) = ori=1,...,n       or eq xi ,     , leq(xi , 0), geq(xi , 1)              (51)
                                                             2

Let invF′ (x) be defined as follows:

                                                            1             3
                         invF′ (x) = ori=1,...,n or eq xi ,     , eq xi ,                                (52)
                                                            4             4

We define h′ as follows:
                                h′1 = or(invT′ (x), and(not(invF′ (x)), g(x))                            (53)
with h′0 (x) = not(h′1 (x)).
Note that:

         • If xi ∈ (−∞, 0] ∪ { 21 } ∪ [1, ∞) for some i, then the top class is 1;
         • Otherwise, if x is not a valid encoding, the top class is 0;
         • Otherwise, the top class is 1 if R(e(x) (x), e(y) (x)) is true and 0 otherwise.

Finally, let 81 < γ ′ < 14 . Our query is thus:
                                                               1
                                           q(z) = ⟨x(s) , γ ′ , , Cu , h′ ⟩                              (54)
                                                               2

                                                          23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT =⇒ q(z) ∈ CCAp If z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT , then ∃x∗ .∀ŷ.¬R(x∗ , ŷ). Let
x∗∗ be defined as follows:             1
                                         x∗i = 0
                                x∗∗
                                 i  =  4
                                       3                                           (55)
                                       4 x∗i = 1

Note that:

       • x∗∗ ∈ Bp x(s) , ερp,n ;


       • e(x) (x∗∗ ) = x∗ ;
       • f (x∗∗ ) = 0, since x∗∗ ∈ { 14 , 34 }n ;
       • Since γ ′ < 14 , there is no i such that ∃x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗∗ , γ ′ ).x′′i ∈ (−∞, 0] ∪
                                                                                               1
                                                                                                2   ∪ [1, ∞);
       • For all x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗∗ , γ ′ ):
             – If x′′ is not a valid encoding (i.e. x′′i ∈ { 41 , 34 } for some i), then h′ (x′′ ) = 0;
             – Otherwise, h′ (x′′ ) = 1 iff R(e(x) (x′′ ), e(y) (x′′ )) is true.

Therefore, since ∀ŷ.¬R(x∗ , ŷ), we know that ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗∗ , γ ′ ).f (x′′ ) = 0. In other words, x∗∗
is a solution to Equation (5).

Proof of q(z) ∈ CCAp  =⇒                 z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT If q(z) ∈ CCAp , then  we know
that ∃x∗ ∈ Bp x(s) , ερp,n . h′ (x∗ ) ̸= h(x(s) ) ∧ ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ).h′ (x′′ ) = h′ (x∗ ) . In other
words, ∃x∗ ∈ Bp x(s) , ερp,n . (h′ (x∗ ) = 0 ∧ ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ).h′ (x′′ ) = 0).

                                                                                          n
We will first prove by contradiction that x∗ ∈ (γ ′ , 21 − γ ′ ) ∪ ( 21 + γ ′ , 1 − γ ′ ) .
First, suppose that x∗i ∈ (−∞, 0) ∪ (1, ∞) for some i. Then h′ (x∗ ) = 0 due to the fact that
invT (x∗ ) = 1.
Second, suppose that x∗i ∈ [0, γ ′ ] ∪ [1 − γ ′ , 1] for some i. Then x(w) , defined as follows:
                                                   i = j ∧ x∗i ∈ [0, γ ′ ]
                                         
                                         0
                                (w)
                              xj = 1               i = j ∧ x∗i ∈ [1 − γ ′ , 1]                             (56)
                                          ∗
                                           xj j ̸= i
is such that x(w) ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ) but h′ (x(w) ) = 1.
Finally, suppose that x∗i ∈ [ 12 − γ, 12 + γ] for some i. Then x(w) , defined as follows:
                                                  1
                                          (w)           i=j
                                         xj = 2 ∗                                                          (57)
                                                   xj otherwise
is such that x(w) ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ) but h′ (x(w) ) = 1.
                                                           n
Therefore, x∗ ∈ (γ ′ , 21 − γ ′ ) ∪ ( 12 + γ ′ , 1 − γ ′ ) .
As a consequence ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ).e(x) (x′′ ) = e(x) (x′ ).
From this, due to the fact that γ ′ > 18 and that p > 0, we can conclude that for all ŷ, there exists a
x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ) such that:

                              ′′      1        ∗      ′ 1     ′
                            xi ∈ 0,       for xi ∈ γ , − γ , ŷi = 0
                                      4                 2

                             ′′    1 1         ∗      ′ 1     ′
                            xi ∈    ,     for xi ∈ γ , − γ , ŷi = 1
                                   4 2                  2
                                                                                                   (58)
                             ′′    1 3         ∗     1    ′       ′
                            xi ∈    ,     for xi ∈     + γ , 1 − γ , ŷi = 0
                                   2 4               2

                              ′′   3           ∗     1    ′       ′
                            xi ∈     , 1 for xi ∈      + γ , 1 − γ , ŷi = 1
                                   4                 2


                                                       24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In other words, for all ŷ there exists a corresponding x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ) such that e(y) (x′′ ) = ŷ.
Therefore, since h′ (x′′ ) = 1 iff R(e(x) (x′′ ), e(y) (x′′ )) is true and since ∀x′′ ∈ Bp (x∗ , γ ′ ).h′ (x′′ ) =
0, we can conclude that ∀ŷ.¬R(e(x) (x∗ ), ŷ). In other words, z ∈ coΠ2 3SAT .


F.4   P ROOF OF C OROLLARY 5.2

Similarly to the proof of Corollary 1.3, it follows from the fact that ReLU classifiers are polynomial-
time classifiers (w.r.t. the size of the tuple).


G     F ULL E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

All our code is written in Python + PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019), with the exception of the MIPVerify
interface, which is written in Julia. When possible, most experiments were run in parallel, in order to
minimize execution times.


Models All models were trained using Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) and dataset augmentation.
We performed a manual hyperparameter and architecture search to find a suitable compromise
between accuracy and MIPVerify convergence. The process required approximately 4 months. When
performing adversarial training, following (Madry et al., 2018) we used the final adversarial example
found by the Projected Gradient Descent attack, instead of the closest. To maximize uniformity, we
used for each configuration the same training and pruning hyperparameters (when applicable), which
we report in Table 1. We report the chosen architectures in Tables 2 and 3, while Table 4 outlines
their accuracies and parameter counts.


UG100 The first 250 samples of the test set of each dataset were used for hyperparameter tuning
and were thus not considered in our analysis. For our G100 dataset, we sampled uniformly across
each ground truth label and removed the examples for which MIPVerify crashed. Table 5 details the
composition of the dataset by ground truth label.


Attacks For the Basic Iterative Method (BIM), the Fast Gradient Sign Method (FGSM) and the
Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) attack, we used the implementations provided by the AdverTorch
library (Ding et al., 2019). For the Brendel & Bethge (B&B) attack and the Deepfool (DF) attack, we
used the implementations provided by the Foolbox Native library (Rauber et al., 2020). The Carlini
& Wagner and the uniform noise attacks were instead implemented by the authors. We modified
the attacks that did not return the closest adversarial example found (i.e. BIM, Carlini & Wagner,
Deepfool, FGSM and PGD) to do so. For the attacks that accept ε as a parameter (i.e. BIM, FGSM,
PGD and uniform noise), for each example we first performed an initial search with a decaying value
of ε, followed by a binary search. In order to pick the attack parameters, we first selected the strong
set by performing an extensive manual search. The process took approximately 3 months. We then
modified the strong set in order to obtain the balanced parameter set. We report the parameters of
both sets (as well as the parameters of the binary and ε decay searches) in Table 6.


MIPVerify We ran MIPVerify using the Julia library MIPVerify.jl and Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization,
LLC, 2022). Since MIPVerify can be sped up by providing a distance upper bound, we used the
same pool of adversarial examples utilized throughout the paper. For CIFAR10 we used the strong
parameter set, while for MNIST we used the strong parameter set with some differences (reported in
Table 7). Since numerical issues might cause the distance upper bound computed by the heuristic
attacks to be slightly different from the one computed by MIPVerify, we ran a series of exploratory
runs, each with a different correction factor (1.05, 1.25, 1.5, 2), and picked the first factor that caused
MIPVerify to find a feasible (but not necessarily optimal) solution. If the solution was not optimal,
we then performed a main run with a higher computational budget. We provide the parameters of
MIPVerify in Table 8. We also report in Table 9 the percentage of tight bounds for each combination.


                                                       25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        Table 1: Training and pruning hyperparameters.

                                                            Value
                  Parameter Name
                                               MNIST             CIFAR10
                                  Common Hyperparameters
                  Epochs                                     425
                  Learning Rate                              1e-4
                  Batch Size                       32               128
                  Adam β                                  (0.9, 0.999)
                  Flip %                                      50%
                  Translation Ratio                            0.1
                  Rotation (deg.)                             15°
                  Adversarial Hyperparameters (Adversarial and ReLU only)
                  Attack                                     PGD
                  Attack #Iterations                         200
                  Attack Learning Rate                        0.1
                  Adversarial Ratio                            1
                  ε                                0.05             2/255
                             ReLU Hyperparameters (ReLU only)
                  L1 Regularization Coeff.       2e-5               1e-5
                  RS Loss Coeff.                1.2e-4              1e-3
                  Weight Pruning Threshold                   1e-3
                  ReLU Pruning Threshold                     90%


                                Table 2: MNIST Architectures.

                                         (a) MNIST A
                                              Input
                                             Flatten
                                  Linear (in = 784, out = 100)
                                             ReLU
                                  Linear (in = 100, out = 10)
                                             Output
                                         (b) MNIST B
                                             Input
                  Conv2D (in = 1, out = 4, 5x5 kernel, stride = 3, padding = 0)
                                             ReLU
                                            Flatten
                                  Linear (in = 256, out = 10)
                                            Output
                                          (c) MNIST C
                                             Input
                  Conv2D (in = 1, out = 8, 5x5 kernel, stride = 4, padding = 0)
                                             ReLU
                                            Flatten
                                  Linear (in = 288, out = 10)
                                            Output


                                              26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Table 3: CIFAR10 architectures.

                                          (a) CIFAR10 A
                                             Input
                  Conv2D (in = 3, out = 8, 3x3 kernel, stride = 2, padding = 0)
                                             ReLU
                                            Flatten
                                 Linear (in = 1800, out = 10)
                                            Output
                                          (b) CIFAR10 B
                                             Input
                 Conv2D (in = 3, out = 20, 5x5 kernel, stride = 4, padding = 0)
                                             ReLU
                                            Flatten
                                  Linear (in = 980, out = 10)
                                            Output
                                          (c) CIFAR10 C
                                             Input
                  Conv2D (in = 3, out = 8, 5x5 kernel, stride = 4, padding = 0)
                                             ReLU
                  Conv2D (in = 8, out = 8, 3x3 kernel, stride = 2, padding = 0)
                                             ReLU
                                            Flatten
                                   Linear (in = 72, out = 10)
                                            Output


                  Table 4: Parameter counts and accuracies of trained models.

                   Architecture    #Parameters      Training      Accuracy
                                                    Standard      95.87%
                   MNIST A         79510            Adversarial   94.24%
                                                    ReLU          93.57%
                                                    Standard      89.63%
                   MNIST B         2674             Adversarial   84.54%
                                                    ReLU          83.69%
                                                    Standard      90.71%
                   MNIST C         3098             Adversarial   87.35%
                                                    ReLU          85.67%
                                                    Standard      53.98%
                   CIFAR10 A       18234            Adversarial   50.77%
                                                    ReLU          32.85%
                                                    Standard      55.81%
                   CIFAR10 B       11330            Adversarial   51.35%
                                                    ReLU          37.33%
                                                    Standard      47.85%
                   CIFAR10 C       1922             Adversarial   45.19%
                                                    ReLU          32.27%


                                               27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Table 5: Ground truth labels of the UG100 dataset.

               (a) MNIST                                                    (b) CIFAR10

    Ground Truth     Count        %                             Ground Truth       Count       %
    0                219       9.77%                            Airplane           228       10.05%
    1                228       10.17%                           Automobile         227       10.00%
    2                225       10.04%                           Bird               228       10.05%
    3                225       10.04%                           Cat                228       10.05%
    4                225       10.04%                           Deer               226       9.96%
    5                220       9.82%                            Dog                227       10.00%
    6                227       10.13%                           Frog               227       10.00%
    7                221       9.86%                            Horse              227       10.00%
    8                225       10.04%                           Ship               225       9.92%
    9                226       10.08%                           Truck              226       9.96%


H       Q UANTILE -BASED C ALIBRATION
The buffer function in CA can be empirically calibrated so as to control the chance of false positives
(i.e. inputs wrongly reported as not robust) and false negatives (i.e. non-robust inputs reported as
being robust).
Given the strong correlation that we observed between the distance of heuristic adversarial examples
and the true decision boundary distance, using a linear model for bα seems a reasonable choice.
Under this assumption, the buffer value depends only on the distance between the original example
and the adversarial one, i.e. on d(x, af,θ (x)). This property allows us to rewrite the main check
performed by CA as:
                       ||x − af (x))||p − b(x) = α1 ||x − af,θ (x)||p + α0 ≤ ε                     (59)
The parameters α1 , α0 can then be obtained via quantile regression (Koenker & Bassett Jr, 1978) by
using the true decision boundary distance (i.e. d∗p (x)) as a target.
The approach provides a simple, interpretable mechanism to control how conservative the detection
check should be: with a small quantile, CA will tend to underestimate the decision boundary distance,
leading to fewer missed detections, but more false alarms; using a high quantile will lead to the
opposite behavior.
We test this type of buffer using 5-fold cross-validation on each configuration. Specifically, we
calibrate the model using 1%, 50% and 99% as quantiles. Tables 10 to 13 provide a comparison
between the expected quantile and the average true quantile of each configuration on the validation
folds. Additionally, we plot in Figures 3 to 8 the mean F1 score in relation to the choice of ε.

I       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
Tables 14 to 17 detail the performance of the various attack sets on every combination, while Figures 9
to 14 showcase the relation between the true and estimated decision boundary distances.

J       A BLATION S TUDY
We outline the best attack pools by size in Tables 18 to 21. Additionally, we report the performance
of pools composed of individual attacks in Tables 22 to 25. Finally, we detail the performance of
dropping a specific attack in Tables 26 to 29.

K       FAST PARAMETER S ET T ESTS
We list the chosen parameter sets for Fast-100, Fast-1k and Fast-10k in Table 30. We plot the
difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the true decision boundary


                                                  28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Table 6: Parameters of heuristic attacks.

                                                          MNIST                   CIFAR10
       Attack             Parameter Name
                                                   Strong    Balanced      Strong    Balanced
                     Initial Search Factor                             0.75
                     Initial Search Steps                               30
 BIM                 Initial Search Factor                             0.75
                     Binary Search Steps                                20
                     #Iterations                   2k        200           5k        200
                     Learning Rate                 1e-3      1e-2          1e-5      1e-3
                     Initial Attack                              Blended Noise
                     Overshoot                                        1.1
                     LR Decay                                        0.75
 Brendel & Bethge    LR Decay Every n Steps                           50
                     #Iterations                   5k        200         5k          200
                     Learning Rate                 1e-3      1e-3        1e-5        1e-3
                     Momentum                                         0.8
                     Initial Directions                              1000
                     Init Steps                                      1000
                     Minimum τ                                      1e-5
                     Initial τ                                       1
                     τ Factor                      0.95      0.9        0.99         0.9
                     Initial Const                                  1e-5
                     Const Factor                                     2
                     Maximum Const                                   20
                     Reduce Const                                  False
 Carlini & Wagner
                     Warm Start                                    True
                     Abort Early                                   True
                     Learning Rate                 1e-2      1e-2       1e-5         1e-4
                     Max Iterations                1k        100        5k           100
                     τ Check Every n Steps                            1
                     Const Check Every n Steps                        5
                     Iter. Check Every n Steps                    Disabled
                     #Iterations                                         5k
                     Candidates                                          10
 Deepfool
                     Overshoot                                          1e-5
                     Loss                                              Logits
                     Initial Search Factor                             0.75
 FGSM                Initial Search Steps                               30
                     Initial Search Factor                             0.75
                     Binary Search Steps                                20
                     Starting ε                                         1
                     Initial Search Factor                             0.75
                     Initial Search Steps                               30
                     Initial Search Factor                             0.75
 PGD
                     Binary Search Steps                                20
                     #Iterations                   5k        200           5k        200
                     Learning Rate                 1e-4      1e-3          1e-4      1e-3
                     Random Initialization                             True
                     Initial Search Factor                             0.75
                     Initial Search Steps                               30
 Uniform Noise
                     Initial Search Factor                             0.75
                     Binary Search Steps                                20
                     Runs                          8k        200           8k        200



                                              29
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7: Parameter set used to initialize MIPVerify for MNIST. All other parameters are identical to
the strong MNIST attack parameter set.

                         Attack Name          Parameter Name           Value
                                              #Iterations              5k
                         BIM
                                              Learning Rate            1e-5
                         Brendel & Bethge     Learning Rate            1e-3
                                              Tau Factor               0.99
                         Carlini & Wagner     Learning Rate            1e-3
                                              #Iterations              5k


                                Table 8: Parameters of MIPVerify.

                                                                 Value
                            Parameter Name
                                                         Exploration      Main
                     Absolute Tolerance                           1e-5
                     Relative Tolerance                          1e-10
                     Threads                                       1
                     Timeout (s)                         120              7200
                     Tightening Absolute Tolerance               1e-4
                     Tightening Relative Tolerance               1e-10
                     Tightening Timeout (s)              20               240
                     Tightening Threads                            1


                          Table 9: MIPVerify bound tightness statistics.

                             Architecture     Training         % Tight
                                              Standard         95.40%
                             MNIST A          Adversarial      99.60%
                                              ReLU             82.46%
                                              Standard         74.61%
                             MNIST B          Adversarial      85.68%
                                              ReLU             75.55%
                                              Standard         86.21%
                             MNIST C          Adversarial      97.28%
                                              ReLU             95.63%
                                              Standard         81.18%
                             CIFAR10 A        Adversarial      82.50%
                                              ReLU             92.73%
                                              Standard         56.32%
                             CIFAR10 B        Adversarial      58.88%
                                              ReLU             81.67%
                                              Standard         100.00%
                             CIFAR10 C        Adversarial      100.00%
                                              ReLU             100.00%


                                                30
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Table 10: Expected vs true quantile for MNIST strong with 5-fold cross validation.

             Architecture    Training       Expected Quantile     True Quantile
                                            1.00%                 0.99±1.02%
                             Standard       50.00%                49.93±2.35%
                                            99.00%                95.60±3.77%
                                            1.00%                 1.11±0.53%
             A
                             Adversarial    50.00%                50.25±1.58%
                                            99.00%                89.84±6.42%
                                            1.00%                 1.11±0.45%
                             ReLU           50.00%                50.02±1.72%
                                            99.00%                91.95±5.64%
                                            1.00%                 1.07±0.48%
                             Standard       50.00%                49.80±0.76%
                                            99.00%                97.76±0.71%
                                            1.00%                 1.22±1.01%
             B
                             Adversarial    50.00%                49.88±4.63%
                                            99.00%                98.10±0.36%
                                            1.00%                 1.04±0.77%
                             ReLU           50.00%                49.98±3.17%
                                            99.00%                97.69±1.41%
                                            1.00%                 1.07±0.37%
                             Standard       50.00%                50.17±1.64%
                                            99.00%                98.73±0.42%
                                            1.00%                 1.05±0.29%
             C
                             Adversarial    50.00%                49.87±3.58%
                                            99.00%                99.00±0.47%
                                            1.00%                 1.06±0.67%
                             ReLU           50.00%                50.02±1.85%
                                            99.00%                93.99±3.51%


                                              31
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Table 11: Expected vs true quantile for MNIST balanced with 5-fold cross validation.

               Architecture   Training       Expected Quantile    True Quantile
                                             1.00%                1.30±0.79%
                              Standard       50.00%               49.98±3.10%
                                             99.00%               93.99±2.59%
                                             1.00%                0.97±0.40%
               A
                              Adversarial    50.00%               50.12±1.14%
                                             99.00%               90.44±1.90%
                                             1.00%                1.02±0.31%
                              ReLU           50.00%               50.02±1.05%
                                             99.00%               95.10±2.82%
                                             1.00%                1.03±0.36%
                              Standard       50.00%               49.98±0.70%
                                             99.00%               98.88±0.45%
                                             1.00%                1.17±0.97%
               B
                              Adversarial    50.00%               50.17±4.54%
                                             99.00%               98.69±0.59%
                                             1.00%                1.04±0.49%
                              ReLU           50.00%               50.34±2.49%
                                             99.00%               98.73±0.53%
                                             1.00%                1.07±0.33%
                              Standard       50.00%               49.98±0.91%
                                             99.00%               98.88±0.55%
                                             1.00%                1.10±0.37%
               C
                              Adversarial    50.00%               50.12±4.15%
                                             99.00%               99.00±0.35%
                                             1.00%                1.06±0.67%
                              ReLU           50.00%               50.12±2.67%
                                             99.00%               98.62±0.50%


                                              32
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Table 12: Expected vs true quantile for CIFAR10 strong with 5-fold cross validation.

               Architecture   Training       Expected Quantile    True Quantile
                                             1.00%                1.09±0.86%
                              Standard       50.00%               50.09±1.84%
                                             99.00%               98.82±0.63%
                                             1.00%                1.05±0.23%
               A
                              Adversarial    50.00%               49.86±3.59%
                                             99.00%               98.90±0.62%
                                             1.00%                0.97±0.41%
                              ReLU           50.00%               49.93±3.42%
                                             99.00%               97.66±1.35%
                                             1.00%                0.98±0.18%
                              Standard       50.00%               49.91±1.18%
                                             99.00%               98.84±0.56%
                                             1.00%                0.91±0.48%
               B
                              Adversarial    50.00%               50.00±3.58%
                                             99.00%               98.69±0.72%
                                             1.00%                1.10±0.72%
                              ReLU           50.00%               49.98±2.21%
                                             99.00%               98.85±0.61%
                                             1.00%                0.93±0.60%
                              Standard       50.00%               50.00±1.86%
                                             99.00%               98.71±0.71%
                                             1.00%                1.09±0.17%
               C
                              Adversarial    50.00%               50.14±2.63%
                                             99.00%               98.27±0.81%
                                             1.00%                1.01±0.62%
                              ReLU           50.00%               50.02±2.09%
                                             99.00%               96.17±2.40%


                                              33
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     Table 13: Expected vs true quantile for CIFAR10 balanced with 5-fold cross validation.

             Architecture     Training      Expected Quantile     True Quantile
                                            1.00%                 0.95±0.61%
                              Standard      50.00%                50.32±2.38%
                                            99.00%                98.87±0.59%
                                            1.00%                 1.05±0.23%
             A
                              Adversarial   50.00%                50.23±2.65%
                                            99.00%                98.81±0.96%
                                            1.00%                 4.14±5.32%
                              ReLU          50.00%                50.37±1.02%
                                            99.00%                94.62±2.87%
                                            1.00%                 1.07±0.46%
                              Standard      50.00%                49.91±2.78%
                                            99.00%                98.93±0.73%
                                            1.00%                 1.13±0.57%
             B
                              Adversarial   50.00%                50.18±2.05%
                                            99.00%                98.82±0.71%
                                            1.00%                 1.23±0.38%
                              ReLU          50.00%                50.11±0.38%
                                            99.00%                98.77±0.51%
                                            1.00%                 0.98±0.50%
                              Standard      50.00%                50.09±2.21%
                                            99.00%                98.85±0.43%
                                            1.00%                 1.09±0.26%
             C
                              Adversarial   50.00%                49.96±2.72%
                                            99.00%                98.86±0.32%
                                            1.00%                 1.01±0.36%
                              ReLU          50.00%                49.93±1.60%
                                            99.00%                97.93±0.63%


                    Table 14: Performance of the strong attack set on MNIST.

     Architecture      Training     Success Rate     Difference   % Below 1/255      R2
                     Standard       100.00%          1.51%        98.16%            0.996
     MNIST A         Adversarial    100.00%          2.48%        81.43%            0.994
                     ReLU           100.00%          2.14%        84.33%            0.995
                     Standard       100.00%          3.38%        97.36%            0.995
     MNIST B         Adversarial    100.00%          4.34%        75.09%            0.991
                     ReLU           100.00%          4.80%        68.02%            0.992
                     Standard       100.00%          4.52%        96.92%            0.996
     MNIST C         Adversarial    100.00%          8.76%        48.78%            0.981
                     ReLU           100.00%          4.84%        68.24%            0.988


                                              34
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             1                                                                                     1


           0.95                                                                                 0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                      Mean F1
            0.9                                                                                  0.9


           0.85                                                         1%                      0.85                                                 1%
                                                                       50%                                                                           50%
                                                                       99%                                                                           99%
            0.8                                                                                  0.8
                    0        2        4             6             8         10                           0    2        4         6         8          10
                                          ε                                                                                ε
                                                                       ·10−2                                                                         ·10−2
                  (a) MNIST A Standard Strong                                                      (b) MNIST A Standard Balanced
             1                                                                                    1


           0.95                                                                                 0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                      Mean F1



            0.9                                                                                  0.9


           0.85                                                         1%                      0.85                                                 1%
                                                                       50%                                                                          50%
                                                                       99%                                                                          99%
            0.8                                                                                  0.8
                    0    5        10           15            20        25                               0    5    10        15        20        25          30
                                          ε                                                                                ε
                                                                       ·10−2                                                                        ·10−2
              (c) MNIST A Adversarial Strong                                                     (d) MNIST A Adversarial Balanced
             1                                                                                     1


           0.95                                                                                 0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                      Mean F1


            0.9                                                                                  0.9


           0.85                                                         1%                      0.85                                                  1%
                                                                       50%                                                                           50%
                                                                       99%                                                                           99%
            0.8                                                                                  0.8
                    0    5       10       15            20        25        30                           0   5    10       15        20        25     30
                                          ε                                                                                 ε
                                                                       ·10−2                                                                         ·10−2
                   (e) MNIST A ReLU Strong                                                             (f) MNIST A ReLU Balanced

Figure 3: F1 scores in relation to ε for MNIST A for each considered percentile. For ease of
visualization, we set the graph cutoff at F1 = 0.8. We also mark 8/255 (a common choice for ε) with
a dotted line.


                                                                                 35
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             1                                                                   1


           0.95                                                                0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                     Mean F1
            0.9                                                                 0.9


           0.85                                       1%                       0.85                                                  1%
                                                     50%                                                                             50%
                                                     99%                                                                             99%
            0.8                                                                 0.8
                    0    2   4     6    8    10       12                               0    2   4        6        8        10    12          14
                                   ε                                                                         ε
                                                     ·10−2                                                                           ·10−2
                  (a) MNIST B Standard Strong                                     (b) MNIST B Standard Balanced
             1                                                                    1


           0.95                                                                0.95
                                                                     Mean F1
 Mean F1


            0.9                                                                 0.9


           0.85                                      1%                        0.85                                                   1%
                                                     50%                                                                              50%
                                                     99%                                                                              99%
            0.8                                                                 0.8
                    0    5    10   15   20      25         30                           0   5       10       15       20        25         30
                                   ε                                                                         ε
                                                  ·10−2                                                                               ·10−2
              (c) MNIST B Adversarial Strong                                    (d) MNIST B Adversarial Balanced
             1                                                                    1


           0.95                                                                0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                     Mean F1


            0.9                                                                 0.9


           0.85                                       1%                       0.85                                                    1%
                                                     50%                                                                              50%
                                                     99%                                                                              99%
            0.8                                                                 0.8
                    0    5   10    15   20   25        30                               0   5   10           15       20        25      30
                                   ε                                                                         ε
                                                     ·10−2                                                                            ·10−2
                   (e) MNIST B ReLU Strong                                            (f) MNIST B ReLU Balanced

Figure 4: F1 scores in relation to ε for MNIST B for each considered percentile. For ease of
visualization, we set the graph cutoff at F1 = 0.8. We also mark 8/255 (a common choice for ε) with
a dotted line.


                                                                36
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             1                                                                               1


           0.95                                                                            0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                 Mean F1
            0.9                                                                             0.9


           0.85                                                    1%                      0.85                                                   1%
                                                                  50%                                                                            50%
                                                                  99%                                                                            99%
            0.8                                                                             0.8
                    0    2       4        6         8        10     12                              0   2       4        6         8        10     12
                                          ε                                                                              ε
                                                                  ·10−2                                                                          ·10−2
                  (a) MNIST C Standard Strong                                                 (b) MNIST C Standard Balanced
             1                                                                               1


           0.95                                                                            0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                 Mean F1



            0.9                                                                             0.9


           0.85                                                    1%                      0.85                                                  1%
                                                                  50%                                                                            50%
                                                                  99%                                                                            99%
            0.8                                                                             0.8
                    0        5       10        15        20            25                           0       5       10        15        20            25
                                          ε                                                                              ε
                                                                  ·10−2                                                                          ·10−2
              (c) MNIST C Adversarial Strong                                                (d) MNIST C Adversarial Balanced
             1                                                                               1


           0.95                                                                            0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                 Mean F1


            0.9                                                                             0.9


           0.85                                                    1%                      0.85                                                   1%
                                                                  50%                                                                            50%
                                                                  99%                                                                            99%
            0.8                                                                             0.8
                    0    5       10           15        20        25                                0    5      10           15        20        25
                                          ε                                                                              ε
                                                                  ·10−2                                                                          ·10−2
                   (e) MNIST C ReLU Strong                                                        (f) MNIST C ReLU Balanced

Figure 5: F1 scores in relation to ε for MNIST C for each considered percentile. For ease of
visualization, we set the graph cutoff at F1 = 0.8. We also mark 8/255 (a common choice for ε) with
a dotted line.


                                                                            37
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             1                                                                                      1


           0.95                                                                                   0.95


                                                                                        Mean F1
 Mean F1


            0.9                                                                                    0.9


           0.85                                                        1%                         0.85                                                1%
                                                                       50%                                                                            50%
                                                                       99%                                                                            99%
            0.8                                                                                    0.8
                   0        1               2                 3                4                           0        1               2            3           4
                                        ε                                                                                       ε
                                                                       ·10−2                                                                         ·10−2
              (a) CIFAR10 A Standard Strong                                                         (b) CIFAR10 A Standard Balanced
             1                                                                                      1


           0.95                                                                                   0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                        Mean F1



            0.9                                                                                    0.9


           0.85                                                        1%                         0.85                                                1%
                                                                       50%                                                                           50%
                                                                       99%                                                                           99%
            0.8                                                                                    0.8
                    0   2   4       6           8       10        12     14                                0   2        4   6           8   10       12     14
                                        ε                                                                                       ε
                                                                       ·10−2                                                                         ·10−2
             (c) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Strong                                                     (d) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Balanced
             1                                                                                      1


           0.95                                                                                   0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                        Mean F1


            0.9                                                                                    0.9


           0.85                                                        1%                         0.85                                                1%
                                                                       50%                                                                            50%
                                                                       99%                                                                            99%
            0.8                                                                                    0.8
                   0    2       4   6               8    10        12        14                            0    2       4   6           8   10       12     14
                                        ε                                                                                       ε
                                                                       ·10−2                                                                         ·10−2
                  (e) CIFAR10 A ReLU Strong                                                              (f) CIFAR10 A ReLU Balanced

Figure 6: F1 scores in relation to ε for CIFAR10 A for each considered percentile. For ease of
visualization, we set the graph cutoff at F1 = 0.8. We also mark 8/255 (a common choice for ε) with
a dotted line.


                                                                                   38
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             1                                                                                  1


           0.95                                                                               0.95


                                                                                    Mean F1
 Mean F1


            0.9                                                                                0.9


           0.85                                                 1%                            0.85                                             1%
                                                               50%                                                                             50%
                                                               99%                                                                             99%
            0.8                                                                                0.8
                   0        1                2           3                 4                           0        1            2           3                 4
                                        ε                                                                               ε
                                                               ·10−2                                                                           ·10−2
              (a) CIFAR10 B Standard Strong                                                     (b) CIFAR10 B Standard Balanced
             1                                                                                  1


           0.95                                                                               0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                    Mean F1



            0.9                                                                                0.9


           0.85                                                     1%                        0.85                                              1%
                                                                   50%                                                                         50%
                                                                   99%                                                                         99%
            0.8                                                                                0.8
                   0    2           4       6        8        10         12                            0    2       4       6        8        10        12
                                        ε                            −2                                                 ε
                                                               ·10                                                                             ·10−2
             (c) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Strong                                                 (d) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Balanced
             1                                                                                   1


           0.95                                                                               0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                                    Mean F1


            0.9                                                                                0.9


           0.85                                                     1%                        0.85                                                 1%
                                                                   50%                                                                             50%
                                                                   99%                                                                             99%
            0.8                                                                                0.8
                   0    2       4       6        8       10        12                                  0    2       4   6        8       10        12
                                         ε                                                                               ε
                                                                   ·10−2                                                                           ·10−2
                  (e) CIFAR10 B ReLU Strong                                                          (f) CIFAR10 B ReLU Balanced

Figure 7: F1 scores in relation to ε for CIFAR10 B for each considered percentile. For ease of
visualization, we set the graph cutoff at F1 = 0.8. We also mark 8/255 (a common choice for ε) with
a dotted line.


                                                                               39
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             1                                                                          1


           0.95                                                                       0.95


                                                                            Mean F1
 Mean F1


            0.9                                                                        0.9


           0.85                                           1%                          0.85                                             1%
                                                         50%                                                                          50%
                                                         99%                                                                          99%
            0.8                                                                        0.8
                   0     1       2           3       4             5                         0    1           2           3       4           5
                                     ε                                                                            ε
                                                         ·10−2                                                                        ·10−2
              (a) CIFAR10 C Standard Strong                                             (b) CIFAR10 C Standard Balanced
              1                                                                         1


           0.95                                                                       0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                            Mean F1



            0.9                                                                        0.9


           0.85                                            1%                         0.85                                             1%
                                                          50%                                                                         50%
                                                          99%                                                                         99%
            0.8                                                                        0.8
                   0     2       4       6       8            10                             0    2       4           6       8        10
                                     ε                                                                            ε
                                                          ·10−2                                                                       ·10−2
             (c) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Strong                                         (d) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Balanced
              1                                                                         1


           0.95                                                                       0.95
 Mean F1


                                                                            Mean F1


            0.9                                                                        0.9


           0.85                                            1%                         0.85                                             1%
                                                          50%                                                                         50%
                                                          99%                                                                         99%
            0.8                                                                        0.8
                   0         5           10              15                                  0        5               10          15
                                     ε                                                                            ε
                                                          ·10−2                                                                       ·10−2
                  (e) CIFAR10 C ReLU Strong                                              (f) CIFAR10 C ReLU Balanced

Figure 8: F1 scores in relation to ε for CIFAR10 C for each considered percentile. For ease of
visualization, we set the graph cutoff at F1 = 0.8. We also mark 8/255 (a common choice for ε) with
a dotted line.


                                                                       40
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 15: Performance of the balanced attack set on MNIST.

     Architecture     Training     Success Rate    Difference    % Below 1/255        R2
                     Standard      100.00%         1.68%         97.94%             0.995
     MNIST A         Adversarial   100.00%         2.87%         77.64%             0.993
                     ReLU          100.00%         2.55%         80.86%             0.993
                     Standard      100.00%         4.09%         96.55%             0.995
     MNIST B         Adversarial   100.00%         4.90%         72.60%             0.988
                     ReLU          100.00%         5.53%         62.96%             0.989
                     Standard      100.00%         5.43%         96.04%             0.995
     MNIST C         Adversarial   100.00%         9.50%         48.43%             0.977
                     ReLU          100.00%         5.28%         66.96%             0.986


                  Table 16: Performance of the strong attack set on CIFAR10.

     Architecture     Training     Success Rate    Difference    % Below 1/255        R2
                     Standard      100.00%         1.62%         100.00%            0.999
     CIFAR10 A       Adversarial   100.00%         4.42%         95.88%             0.995
                     ReLU          100.00%         0.26%         100.00%            1.000
                     Standard      100.00%         1.44%         100.00%            0.999
     CIFAR10 B       Adversarial   100.00%         3.17%         97.69%             0.997
                     ReLU          100.00%         1.38%         98.81%             0.999
                     Standard      100.00%         2.11%         100.00%            0.999
     CIFAR10 C       Adversarial   100.00%         3.10%         97.14%             0.996
                     ReLU          100.00%         2.35%         96.12%             0.990


                 Table 17: Performance of the balanced attack set on CIFAR10.

     Architecture     Training     Success Rate    Difference    % Below 1/255        R2
                     Standard      100.00%         1.71%         100.00%            0.999
     CIFAR10 A       Adversarial   100.00%         4.18%         96.57%             0.995
                     ReLU          100.00%         0.18%         100.00%            1.000
                     Standard      100.00%         1.53%         100.00%            0.999
     CIFAR10 B       Adversarial   100.00%         2.92%         98.46%             0.996
                     ReLU          100.00%         1.19%         98.94%             0.999
                     Standard      100.00%         2.06%         100.00%            0.999
     CIFAR10 C       Adversarial   100.00%         3.12%         97.28%             0.996
                     ReLU          100.00%         1.45%         97.44%             0.995


         Table 18: Best pools of a given size by success rate and R2 for MNIST strong.

 n    Attacks                 Success Rate     Difference       < 1/255          R2
 1    PGD                     100.00±0.00%     10.98±4.41%      51.83±27.78%     0.975±0.010
 2    C&W, PGD                100.00±0.00%     7.99±3.31%       60.68±25.43%     0.986±0.005
 3    B&B, C&W, PGD           100.00±0.00%     4.71±1.97%       77.97±15.52%     0.989±0.004
 4    B&B, C&W, DF, PGD       100.00±0.00%     4.36±2.03%       79.02±15.62%     0.991±0.005
 5    No FGSM, Uniform        100.00±0.00%     4.09±2.02%       79.81±15.70%     0.992±0.005
 6    No Uniform              100.00±0.00%     4.09±2.02%       79.81±15.70%     0.992±0.005
 7    All                     100.00±0.00%     4.09±2.02%       79.81±15.70%     0.992±0.005



                                              41
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           ·10−2                                                                          ·10−2


                      8                                                                              8
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                Estimated Distance
                      6                                                                              6


                      4                                                                              4


                      2                                                                              2


                      0                                                                              0

                             0         2        4       6             8                                     0      2        4       6        8
                                           True Distance          ·10−2                                                True Distance      ·10−2
                            (a) MNIST A Standard Strong                                                   (b) MNIST A Standard Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                          ·10−2


                      20                                                                             20
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                Estimated Distance

                      15                                                                             15

                      10                                                                             10

                       5                                                                              5

                       0                                                                              0

                              0        5      10      15         20                                          0     5      10      15    20
                                           True Distance          ·10−2                                                True Distance      ·10−2
                           (c) MNIST A Adversarial Strong                                                (d) MNIST A Adversarial Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                          ·10−2

                      30                                                                             30
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                Estimated Distance


                      20                                                                             20



                      10                                                                             10



                       0                                                                              0

                              0    5       10    15    20   25        30                                     0         10         20         30
                                            True Distance         ·10−2                                                 True Distance     ·10−2
                              (e) MNIST A ReLU Strong                                                      (f) MNIST A ReLU Balanced

Figure 9: Decision boundary distances found by the attack pools compared to those found by
MIPVerify on MNIST A. The black line represents the theoretical optimum. Note that no samples
are below the black line.


                                                                           42
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           ·10−2                                                                       ·10−2


                      10
 Estimated Distance


                                                                             Estimated Distance
                                                                                                  10



                       5                                                                           5


                       0                                                                           0

                             0     2   4    6    8      10    12                                         0     2   4    6    8    10        12        14
                                       True Distance          ·10−2                                                 True Distance            ·10−2
                            (a) MNIST B Standard Strong                                                (b) MNIST B Standard Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                       ·10−2
                      30                                                                          30
 Estimated Distance


                                                                             Estimated Distance
                      20                                                                          20



                      10                                                                          10



                       0                                                                           0

                             0     5   10   15    20     25        30                                    0     5   10   15    20       25         30
                                       True Distance          ·10−2                                                True Distance             ·10−2
                           (c) MNIST B Adversarial Strong                                          (d) MNIST B Adversarial Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                       ·10−2

                      30                                                                          30
 Estimated Distance


                                                                             Estimated Distance


                      20                                                                          20



                      10                                                                          10



                       0                                                                           0

                             0     5   10    15   20    25    30                                         0     5   10    15    20      25        30
                                        True Distance         ·10−2                                                 True Distance            ·10−2
                             (e) MNIST B ReLU Strong                                                    (f) MNIST B ReLU Balanced

Figure 10: Decision boundary distances found by the attack pools compared to those found by
MIPVerify on MNIST B. The black line represents the theoretical optimum. Note that no samples are
below the black line.


                                                                        43
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           ·10−2                                                                     ·10−2

                      8                                                                         8
 Estimated Distance


                                                                           Estimated Distance
                      6                                                                         6


                      4                                                                         4


                      2                                                                         2


                      0                                                                         0

                             0         2        4        6     8                                       0         2        4        6          8
                                           True Distance      ·10−2                                                  True Distance       ·10−2
                            (a) MNIST C Standard Strong                                              (b) MNIST C Standard Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                     ·10−2

                      20                                                                        20
 Estimated Distance


                                                                           Estimated Distance
                      15                                                                        15


                      10                                                                        10


                       5                                                                         5


                       0                                                                         0

                              0        5       10       15     20                                       0        5       10      15      20
                                           True Distance      ·10−2                                                  True Distance           ·10−2
                           (c) MNIST C Adversarial Strong                                           (d) MNIST C Adversarial Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                     ·10−2
                                                                                                30
 Estimated Distance


                                                                           Estimated Distance


                      20                                                                        20



                      10                                                                        10



                       0                                                                         0
                              0    5        10    15     20   25                                       0     5       10    15      20   25        30
                                           True Distance      ·10−2                                                  True Distance       ·10−2
                              (e) MNIST C ReLU Strong                                                  (f) MNIST C ReLU Balanced

Figure 11: Decision boundary distances found by the attack pools compared to those found by
MIPVerify on MNIST C. The black line represents the theoretical optimum. Note that no samples are
below the black line.


                                                                      44
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           ·10−2                                                                              ·10−2



                      3                                                                                  3
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                    Estimated Distance
                      2                                                                                  2


                      1                                                                                  1


                      0                                                                                  0

                             0             1           2          3                                             0             1            2         3
                                               True Distance          ·10−2                                                       True Distance          ·10−2
                           (a) CIFAR10 A Standard Strong                                                     (b) CIFAR10 A Standard Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                              ·10−2


                      4                                                                                  4
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                    Estimated Distance
                      3                                                                                  3


                      2                                                                                  2


                      1                                                                                  1


                      0                                                                                  0

                             0         1           2        3         4                                         0         1           2       3          4
                                               True Distance          ·10−2                                                       True Distance          ·10−2
                          (c) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Strong                                               (d) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                              ·10−2
                      15                                                                                 15
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                    Estimated Distance


                      10                                                                                 10



                       5                                                                                  5



                       0                                                                                  0

                              0    2       4       6    8    10   12      14                                     0    2       4       6    8    10   12      14
                                               True Distance           ·10−2                                                      True Distance          ·10−2
                             (e) CIFAR10 A ReLU Strong                                                         (f) CIFAR10 A ReLU Balanced

Figure 12: Decision boundary distances found by the attack pools compared to those found by
MIPVerify on CIFAR10 A. The black line represents the theoretical optimum. Note that no samples
are below the black line.


                                                                               45
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           ·10−2                                                                              ·10−2
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                    Estimated Distance
                      2                                                                                  2



                      1                                                                                  1



                      0                                                                                  0

                             0      0.5    1     1.5    2       2.5                                             0      0.5    1     1.5    2       2.5
                                          True Distance          ·10     −2                                                  True Distance          ·10−2
                            (a) CIFAR10 B Standard Strong                                                     (b) CIFAR10 B Standard Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                              ·10−2
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                    Estimated Distance
                      4                                                                                  4


                      2                                                                                  2


                      0                                                                                  0

                             0       1      2      3        4        5                                          0       1      2      3        4         5
                                          True Distance          ·10−2                                                       True Distance          ·10−2
                           (c) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Strong                                              (d) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Balanced
                            ·10−2                                                                              ·10−2
 Estimated Distance


                                                                                    Estimated Distance


                      10                                                                                 10


                       5                                                                                  5


                       0                                                                                  0

                              0     2     4    6     8   10     12        14                                     0     2     4    6     8   10     12        14
                                           True Distance        ·10−2                                                         True Distance        ·10−2
                             (e) CIFAR10 B ReLU Strong                                                         (f) CIFAR10 B ReLU Balanced

Figure 13: Decision boundary distances found by the attack pools compared to those found by
MIPVerify on CIFAR10 B. The black line represents the theoretical optimum. Note that no samples
are below the black line.


                                                                               46
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           ·10−2                                                                      ·10−2


                      3                                                                          3
 Estimated Distance


                                                                            Estimated Distance
                      2                                                                          2



                      1                                                                          1



                      0                                                                          0

                             0        1          2         3                                            0       1          2            3
                                       True Distance           ·10−2                                             True Distance           ·10−2
                           (a) CIFAR10 C Standard Strong                                             (b) CIFAR10 C Standard Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                      ·10−2


                      6
                                                                                                 6
 Estimated Distance


                                                                            Estimated Distance


                      4                                                                          4


                      2                                                                          2


                      0                                                                          0

                             0       2            4       6                                             0       2           4       6
                                         True Distance         ·10−2                                                True Distance        ·10−2
                          (c) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Strong                                       (d) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Balanced
                           ·10−2                                                                      ·10−2


                      15                                                                         15
 Estimated Distance


                                                                            Estimated Distance


                      10                                                                         10


                       5                                                                          5


                       0                                                                          0

                              0       5           10      15                                             0      5           10      15
                                          True Distance        ·10−2                                                True Distance        ·10−2
                             (e) CIFAR10 C ReLU Strong                                                 (f) CIFAR10 C ReLU Balanced

Figure 14: Decision boundary distances found by the attack pools compared to those found by
MIPVerify on CIFAR10 C. The black line represents the theoretical optimum. Note that no samples
are below the black line.


                                                                       47
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Table 19: Best pools of a given size by success rate and R2 for MNIST balanced.

 n       Attacks                  Success Rate      Difference       < 1/255           R2
 1       BIM                      100.00±0.00%      11.72±4.18%      50.92±26.43%      0.965±0.010
 2       BIM, B&B                 100.00±0.00%      6.11±2.28%       73.23±15.90%      0.980±0.007
 3       BIM, B&B, C&W            100.00±0.00%      5.29±2.06%       75.72±16.10%      0.986±0.005
 4       BIM, B&B, C&W, DF        100.00±0.00%      4.85±2.10%       77.33±15.85%      0.989±0.005
 5       No FGSM, Uniform         100.00±0.00%      4.65±2.16%       77.78±16.08%      0.990±0.006
 6       No Uniform               100.00±0.00%      4.65±2.16%       77.78±16.08%      0.990±0.006
 7       All                      100.00±0.00%      4.65±2.16%       77.78±16.08%      0.990±0.006

           Table 20: Best pools of a given size by success rate and R2 for CIFAR10 strong.

  n       Attacks                   Success Rate        Difference   < 1/255          R2
  1       DF                        100.00±0.00%        6.11±3.49%   95.06±4.81%      0.989±0.011
  2       DF, PGD                   100.00±0.00%        4.71±2.37%   96.32±3.56%      0.995±0.007
  3       C&W, DF, PGD              100.00±0.00%        2.54±1.30%   98.17±2.00%      0.996±0.006
  4       B&B, C&W, DF, PGD         100.00±0.00%        2.21±1.16%   98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003
  5       No FGSM, Uniform          100.00±0.00%        2.21±1.16%   98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003
  6       No Uniform                100.00±0.00%        2.21±1.16%   98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003
  7       All                       100.00±0.00%        2.21±1.16%   98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003

          Table 21: Best pools of a given size by success rate and R2 for CIFAR10 balanced.

     n    Attacks                   Success Rate        Difference   < 1/255          R2
     1    DF                        100.00±0.00%        6.11±3.49%   95.06±4.81%      0.989±0.011
     2    B&B, DF                   100.00±0.00%        2.52±1.51%   98.23±1.81%      0.995±0.004
     3    BIM, B&B, DF              100.00±0.00%        2.21±1.25%   98.53±1.52%      0.997±0.002
     4    BIM, B&B, C&W, DF         100.00±0.00%        2.06±1.16%   98.73±1.32%      0.998±0.002
     5    No FGSM, Uniform          100.00±0.00%        2.04±1.13%   98.74±1.29%      0.998±0.002
     6    No FGSM                   100.00±0.00%        2.04±1.13%   98.74±1.29%      0.998±0.002
     7    All                       100.00±0.00%        2.04±1.13%   98.74±1.29%      0.998±0.002

                     Table 22: Performance of individual attacks for MNIST strong.

           Attack       Success Rate     Difference            < 1/255         R2
           BIM          100.00±0.00%     10.90±4.42%           53.57±28.07%    0.966±0.012
           B&B          99.99±0.01%      18.50±7.09%           58.78±9.91%     0.812±0.044
           C&W          100.00±0.00%     17.52±2.74%           48.02±21.28%    0.910±0.024
           Deepfool     100.00±0.00%     21.59±7.73%           44.15±20.02%    0.923±0.027
           FGSM         99.72±0.51%      44.43±15.76%          28.20±17.30%    0.761±0.132
           PGD          100.00±0.00%     10.98±4.41%           51.83±27.78%    0.975±0.010
           Uniform      99.52±0.91%      414.47±140.54%        0.82±0.55%      0.623±0.138

                    Table 23: Performance of individual attacks for MNIST balanced.

           Attack       Success Rate     Difference            < 1/255         R2
           BIM          100.00±0.00%     11.72±4.18%           50.92±26.43%    0.965±0.010
           B&B          99.99±0.03%      18.65±7.29%           58.43±9.61%     0.812±0.039
           C&W          100.00±0.00%     22.55±3.83%           38.95±22.49%    0.904±0.025
           Deepfool     100.00±0.00%     21.59±7.73%           44.15±20.02%    0.923±0.027
           FGSM         99.72±0.51%      44.43±15.76%          28.20±17.30%    0.761±0.132
           PGD          100.00±0.00%     16.23±6.59%           48.08±28.88%    0.905±0.070
           Uniform      98.66±1.90%      521.61±181.40%        0.57±0.38%      0.484±0.122


                                                   48
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 24: Performance of individual attacks for CIFAR10 strong.

       Attack        Success Rate     Difference           < 1/255          R2
       BIM           91.96±7.40%      19.97±5.95%          80.32±12.97%     0.934±0.041
       B&B           100.00±0.00%     508.66±196.37%       42.74±7.85%      0.174±0.074
       C&W           99.98±0.02%      10.67±3.64%          90.09±5.51%      0.926±0.030
       Deepfool      100.00±0.00%     6.11±3.49%           95.06±4.81%      0.989±0.011
       FGSM          100.00±0.00%     31.80±11.12%         69.20±17.72%     0.847±0.123
       PGD           100.00±0.00%     19.36±5.99%          77.23±15.89%     0.952±0.027
       Uniform       99.99±0.02%      1206.79±277.68%      2.48±0.88%       0.910±0.044


                Table 25: Performance of individual attacks for CIFAR10 balanced.

       Attack        Success Rate     Difference           < 1/255          R2
       BIM           100.00±0.00%     19.23±5.92%          77.33±15.89%     0.954±0.025
       B&B           100.00±0.00%     50.64±52.17%         81.20±10.68%     0.615±0.349
       C&W           99.89±0.09%      17.44±4.01%          84.82±8.51%      0.923±0.026
       Deepfool      100.00±0.00%     6.11±3.49%           95.06±4.81%      0.989±0.011
       FGSM          100.00±0.00%     31.80±11.12%         69.20±17.72%     0.847±0.123
       PGD           100.00±0.00%     20.18±6.56%          76.97±16.07%     0.947±0.031
       Uniform       99.85±0.26%      1617.74±390.50%      1.80±0.67%       0.853±0.068


          Table 26: Performance of pools without a specific attack for MNIST strong.

       Dropped Attack       Success Rate     Difference     < 1/255          R2
       None                 100.00±0.00%     4.09±2.02%     79.81±15.70%     0.992±0.005
       BIM                  100.00±0.00%     4.35±2.03%     79.02±15.62%     0.991±0.005
       B&B                  100.00±0.00%     6.76±3.31%     64.46±25.01%     0.990±0.005
       C&W                  100.00±0.00%     4.65±2.20%     77.70±16.02%     0.989±0.006
       Deepfool             100.00±0.00%     4.33±1.97%     79.04±15.75%     0.990±0.004
       FGSM                 100.00±0.00%     4.09±2.02%     79.81±15.70%     0.992±0.005
       PGD                  100.00±0.00%     4.26±1.99%     79.36±15.59%     0.991±0.004
       Uniform              100.00±0.00%     4.09±2.02%     79.81±15.70%     0.992±0.005


         Table 27: Performance of pools without a specific attack for MNIST balanced.

       Dropped Attack       Success Rate     Difference     < 1/255          R2
       None                 100.00±0.00%     4.65±2.16%     77.78±16.08%     0.990±0.006
       BIM                  100.00±0.00%     5.13±2.27%     76.14±15.98%     0.988±0.007
       B&B                  100.00±0.00%     7.93±3.69%     60.79±25.99%     0.987±0.006
       C&W                  100.00±0.00%     4.93±2.22%     77.05±15.96%     0.988±0.006
       Deepfool             100.00±0.00%     5.03±2.14%     76.34±16.36%     0.988±0.005
       FGSM                 100.00±0.00%     4.65±2.16%     77.78±16.08%     0.990±0.006
       PGD                  100.00±0.00%     4.85±2.10%     77.33±15.85%     0.989±0.005
       Uniform              100.00±0.00%     4.65±2.16%     77.78±16.08%     0.990±0.006


                                                49
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Table 28: Performance of pools without a specific attack for CIFAR10 strong.

        Dropped Attack      Success Rate      Difference     < 1/255          R2
        None                100.00±0.00%      2.21±1.16%     98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003
        BIM                 100.00±0.00%      2.21±1.16%     98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003
        B&B                 100.00±0.00%      2.54±1.30%     98.17±2.00%      0.996±0.006
        C&W                 100.00±0.00%      3.83±2.06%     96.84±3.12%      0.996±0.004
        Deepfool            100.00±0.00%      4.02±1.19%     95.65±3.10%      0.992±0.005
        FGSM                100.00±0.00%      2.21±1.16%     98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003
        PGD                 100.00±0.00%      2.50±1.48%     98.11±1.93%      0.995±0.005
        Uniform             100.00±0.00%      2.21±1.16%     98.40±1.63%      0.997±0.003


         Table 29: Performance of pools without a specific attack for CIFAR10 balanced.

        Dropped Attack      Success Rate      Difference     < 1/255          R2
        None                100.00±0.00%      2.04±1.13%     98.74±1.29%      0.998±0.002
        BIM                 100.00±0.00%      2.07±1.15%     98.72±1.31%      0.998±0.002
        B&B                 100.00±0.00%      4.08±1.95%     97.26±2.70%      0.996±0.006
        C&W                 100.00±0.00%      2.18±1.22%     98.54±1.50%      0.997±0.002
        Deepfool            100.00±0.00%      4.00±0.99%     95.89±3.13%      0.993±0.003
        FGSM                100.00±0.00%      2.04±1.13%     98.74±1.29%      0.998±0.002
        PGD                 100.00±0.00%      2.06±1.16%     98.73±1.32%      0.998±0.002
        Uniform             100.00±0.00%      2.04±1.13%     98.74±1.29%      0.998±0.002


distance in Figures 15 to 23, while we plot the R2 values in Figures 24 to 32. We do not study
the Brendel & Bethge and the Carlini & Wagner attacks due to the fact that the number of model
calls varies depending on how many inputs are attacked at the same time. Note that, for attacks
that do not have the a 100% success rate, the mean adversarial example distance can increase with
the number of steps as new adversarial examples (for inputs for which there were previously no
successful adversarial examples) are added.


L    R ESULTS FOR ATTACKS AGAINST CA



We report the parameters for the variant of our attack in Table 31, while we report its success rate
in Table 32. We set ε = ε′ equal to {0.025, 0.05, 0.1} for MNIST and {2/255, 4/255, 8/255} for
CIFAR10. Note that, since Deepfool is a deterministic attack, no measures against randomizations
were taken.


                                                50
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 30: Parameters for the Fast-100, Fast-1k and Fast-10k sets.

                                                           MNIST                       CIFAR10
             Attack          Parameter Name
                                                    100        1k      10k        100     1k      10k
                           Initial Search Factor                            N/A
                           Initial Search Steps                             N/A
                           Binary Search Steps      10         20      20         10     20       20
       BIM
                           Starting ε                           0.5                      0.1
                           #Iterations              10         50      500        10     50       500
                           Learning Rate            0.1        0.01    1e-3       0.01   1e-3     1e-3
                           #Iterations              100        500     500               500
                           Candidates                                      10
       Deepfool
                           Overshoot                0.1        1e-5    1e-5              1e-4
                           Loss                                          Logits
                           Initial Search Factor               0.75                      0.5
                           Initial Search Steps                 30                       10
       FGSM
                           Binary Search Steps                               20
                           Starting ε                           1                        0.1
                           Initial Search Factor    N/A        0.5     0.5    N/A        0.5      0.75
                           Initial Search Steps     N/A        10      10     N/A        10       30
                           Binary Search Steps                  10            10         10       20
       PGD                 Starting ε                           0.1           0.1        0.1      1
                           #Iterations              10         50      500 10            50       200
                           Learning Rate            0.1        0.01    1e-3 0.01         1e-3     1e-3
                           Random Initialization                          True
                           Initial Search Factor               0.75               0.75   0.75     0.25
                           Initial Search Steps                 30                30     30       5
       Uniform Noise       Binary Search Steps                  20                20     20       15
                           Starting ε                           1                 1      1        0.5
                           Runs                     200        500     200        10     50       500

                      Table 31: Parameters for the variant of the PGD attack.

                       Parameter                    Value
                       λ                            {10−4 , 10−2 , 1, 102 , 104 }
                       NES Estimation Samples       200
                       NES Estimation ε             10−4
                       PGD Iterations               400
                       PGD ε                        10−3

Table 32: Success rate of the pool composed of the anti-CA variant of PGD and uniform noise for the
A architectures.

                       ε′ Multiplier                                              ε′ Multiplier
      ε                                                    ε
                1x    2x       5x        10x                           1x     2x         5x       10x
      0.025     0%    23%      95%       100%              2/255       0%     34%        96%      100%
      0.05      3%    41%      97%       100%              4/255       1%     50%        100%     100%
      0.1       2%    50%      96%       100%              8/255       1%     58%        100%     100%
               (a) MNIST A Standard                                   (b) CIFAR10 A Standard


                                                   51
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                              100


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2
                                       −2
                                      10
                                                                                                                                       10−3

                                      10−3
                                                                                                                                       10−4


                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                (a) MNIST A Standard Fast-100                                                                    (b) CIFAR10 A Standard Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                              100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2
                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                       10−3

                                      10−3
                                                                                                                                       10−4


                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                  (c) MNIST A Standard Fast-1k                                                                   (d) CIFAR10 A Standard Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                                0
                                       10                                                                                               10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2
                                       −2
                                      10
                                                                                                                                       10−3

                                      10−3
                                                                                                                                       10−4


                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                (e) MNIST A Standard Fast-10k                                                                    (f) CIFAR10 A Standard Fast-10k

                                                              BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                             PGD         Uniform


Figure 15: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 A Standard. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                            52
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                                 100


                                                                                                    Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                          10−1
                                       −1
                                      10

                                                                                                                                          10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                          10−3


                                                                                                                                          10−4
                                      10−3
                                         102                       103               104                                                        102                     103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                   Calls to the Model

                                                (a) MNIST A Adversarial Fast-100                                                                (b) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                                 100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                    Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                          10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                          10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                          10−3


                                                                                                                                          10−4
                                      10−3
                                         102                       103               104                                                        102                     103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                   Calls to the Model

                                                (c) MNIST A Adversarial Fast-1k                                                                     (d) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                                   0
                                       10                                                                                                  10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                    Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                          10−1
                                       −1
                                      10

                                                                                                                                          10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                          10−3


                                                                                                                                          10−4
                                      10−3
                                         102                        3
                                                                   10                10   4
                                                                                                                                                102                     103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                   Calls to the Model

                                                (e) MNIST A Adversarial Fast-10k                                                                    (f) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Fast-10k

                                                              BIM         Deepfool            Fast Gradient                                               PGD         Uniform


Figure 16: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 A Adversarial. A dashed line means that the
attack found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line
means that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black
lines respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                               53
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                          100


                                                                                             Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                   10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                   10−2


                                                                                                                                   10−3
                                      10−2

                                                                                                                                   10−4

                                      10−3
                                         102                   103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                       Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                (a) MNIST A ReLU Fast-100                                                                      (b) CIFAR10 A ReLU Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                          100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                             Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                   10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                   10−2


                                                                                                                                   10−3
                                      10−2

                                                                                                                                   10−4

                                      10−3
                                         102                   103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                       Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                (c) MNIST A ReLU Fast-1k                                                                       (d) CIFAR10 A ReLU Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                            0
                                       10                                                                                           10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                             Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                   10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                   10−2


                                                                                                                                   10−3
                                      10−2

                                                                                                                                   10−4

                                      10−3
                                         102                   103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                       Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                (e) MNIST A ReLU Fast-10k                                                                      (f) CIFAR10 A ReLU Fast-10k

                                                          BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                              PGD         Uniform


Figure 17: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 A ReLU. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                        54
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                              100


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                       10−3


                                                                                                                                       10−4
                                      10−3

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                (a) MNIST B Standard Fast-100                                                                    (b) CIFAR10 B Standard Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                              100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                       10−3


                                                                                                                                       10−4
                                      10−3

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                  (c) MNIST B Standard Fast-1k                                                                   (d) CIFAR10 B Standard Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                                0
                                       10                                                                                               10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                       −1
                                      10

                                                                                                                                       10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                       10−3


                                                                                                                                       10−4
                                      10−3

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                (e) MNIST B Standard Fast-10k                                                                    (f) CIFAR10 B Standard Fast-10k

                                                              BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                             PGD         Uniform


Figure 18: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 B Standard. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                            55
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                              100


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                       10−2


                                                                                                                                       10−3
                                      10−2

                                                                                                                                       10−4

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                     103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                Calls to the Model

                                                (a) MNIST B Adversarial Fast-100                                                             (b) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                              100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                       10−2


                                                                                                                                       10−3
                                      10−2

                                                                                                                                       10−4

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                     103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                Calls to the Model

                                                (c) MNIST B Adversarial Fast-1k                                                                  (d) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                                0
                                       10                                                                                               10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                       10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                       10−2


                                                                                                                                       10−3
                                      10−2

                                                                                                                                       10−4

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                     103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                Calls to the Model

                                                (e) MNIST B Adversarial Fast-10k                                                                 (f) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Fast-10k

                                                              BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                               PGD         Uniform


Figure 19: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 B Adversarial. A dashed line means that the
attack found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line
means that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black
lines respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                            56
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                            100


                                                                                               Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                     10−1

                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                     10−2



                                      10−2                                                                                           10−3



                                            102                  103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                         Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                  (a) MNIST B ReLU Fast-100                                                                      (b) CIFAR10 B ReLU Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                            100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                               Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                     10−1

                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                     10−2



                                      10−2                                                                                           10−3



                                            102                  103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                         Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                  (c) MNIST B ReLU Fast-1k                                                                       (d) CIFAR10 B ReLU Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                              0
                                       10                                                                                             10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                               Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                     10−1

                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                     10−2



                                      10−2                                                                                           10−3



                                            102                  103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                         Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                  (e) MNIST B ReLU Fast-10k                                                                      (f) CIFAR10 B ReLU Fast-10k

                                                            BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                              PGD         Uniform


Figure 20: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 B ReLU. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                          57
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                              100


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                       10−3


                                      10−3                                                                                             10−4

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                (a) MNIST C Standard Fast-100                                                                    (b) CIFAR10 C Standard Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                              100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                       10−3


                                      10−3                                                                                             10−4

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                  (c) MNIST C Standard Fast-1k                                                                   (d) CIFAR10 C Standard Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                                0
                                       10                                                                                               10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                       10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                       10−2

                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                       10−3


                                      10−3                                                                                             10−4

                                            102                    103               104                                                     102                   103             104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                              Calls to the Model

                                                (e) MNIST C Standard Fast-10k                                                                    (f) CIFAR10 C Standard Fast-10k

                                                              BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                             PGD         Uniform


Figure 21: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 C Standard. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                            58
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                              100


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                       10−2



                                                                                                                                       10−3
                                      10−2


                                                                                                                                       10−4 2
                                            102                    103               104                                                  10                         103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                Calls to the Model

                                                (a) MNIST C Adversarial Fast-100                                                             (b) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                              100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                       10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                       10−2



                                                                                                                                       10−3
                                      10−2


                                                                                                                                       10−4 2
                                            102                    103               104                                                  10                         103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                Calls to the Model

                                                (c) MNIST C Adversarial Fast-1k                                                                  (d) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                                0
                                       10                                                                                               10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                 Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                       10−1

                                      10−1
                                                                                                                                       10−2



                                                                                                                                       10−3
                                      10−2


                                                                                                                                       10−4 2
                                            102                    103               104                                                  10                         103              104
                                                           Calls to the Model                                                                                Calls to the Model

                                                (e) MNIST C Adversarial Fast-10k                                                                 (f) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Fast-10k

                                                              BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                               PGD         Uniform


Figure 22: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 C Adversarial. A dashed line means that the
attack found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line
means that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black
lines respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                            59
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance    100                                                                                            100


                                                                                               Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance
                                                                                                                                     10−1
                                      10−1

                                                                                                                                     10−2


                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                     10−3



                                            102                  103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                         Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                  (a) MNIST C ReLU Fast-100                                                                      (b) CIFAR10 C ReLU Fast-100
                                       100                                                                                            100
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                               Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance   10−1
                                       −1
                                      10

                                                                                                                                     10−2


                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                     10−3



                                            102                  103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                         Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                  (c) MNIST C ReLU Fast-1k                                                                       (d) CIFAR10 C ReLU Fast-1k
                                            0                                                                                              0
                                       10                                                                                             10
Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                               Heuristic Distance - Exact Distance


                                                                                                                                     10−1
                                       −1
                                      10

                                                                                                                                     10−2


                                      10−2
                                                                                                                                     10−3



                                            102                  103               104                                                     102                    103          104
                                                         Calls to the Model                                                                               Calls to the Model

                                                  (e) MNIST C ReLU Fast-10k                                                                      (f) CIFAR10 C ReLU Fast-10k

                                                            BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient                                              PGD         Uniform


Figure 23: Mean difference between the distance of the closest adversarial examples and the exact
decision boundary distance for MNIST & CIFAR10 C ReLU. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. Both axes are logarithmic.


                                                                                          60
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2
     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (a) MNIST A Standard Fast-100                              (b) CIFAR10 A Standard Fast-100
      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2



     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST A Standard Fast-1k                               (d) CIFAR10 A Standard Fast-1k
      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2


     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (e) MNIST A Standard Fast-10k                              (f) CIFAR10 A Standard Fast-10k

                        BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient         PGD          Uniform


Figure 24: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision boundary
distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 A Standard. A dashed line means that the attack found adversarial
examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means that the attack did
not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines respectively represent
the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                      61
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2
     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
           (a) MNIST A Adversarial Fast-100                            (b) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Fast-100
      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2



     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST A Adversarial Fast-1k                            (d) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Fast-1k
      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2


     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
           (e) MNIST A Adversarial Fast-10k                            (f) CIFAR10 A Adversarial Fast-10k

                         BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient          PGD          Uniform


Figure 25: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision
boundary distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 A Adversarial. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                       62
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2
     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (a) MNIST A ReLU Fast-100                                 (b) CIFAR10 A ReLU Fast-100
      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2



     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST A ReLU Fast-1k                                  (d) CIFAR10 A ReLU Fast-1k
      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2


     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (e) MNIST A ReLU Fast-10k                                 (f) CIFAR10 A ReLU Fast-10k

                       BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient        PGD          Uniform


Figure 26: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision boundary
distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 A ReLU. A dashed line means that the attack found adversarial
examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means that the attack did
not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines respectively represent
the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                     63
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2
     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (a) MNIST B Standard Fast-100                              (b) CIFAR10 B Standard Fast-100
      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2



     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST B Standard Fast-1k                               (d) CIFAR10 B Standard Fast-1k
      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2


     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (e) MNIST B Standard Fast-10k                              (f) CIFAR10 B Standard Fast-10k

                        BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient         PGD          Uniform


Figure 27: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision boundary
distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 B Standard. A dashed line means that the attack found adversarial
examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means that the attack did
not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines respectively represent
the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                      64
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2
     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
           (a) MNIST B Adversarial Fast-100                            (b) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Fast-100
      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2



     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST B Adversarial Fast-1k                            (d) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Fast-1k
      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2


     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
           (e) MNIST B Adversarial Fast-10k                            (f) CIFAR10 B Adversarial Fast-10k

                         BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient          PGD          Uniform


Figure 28: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision
boundary distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 B Adversarial. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                       65
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2
     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (a) MNIST B ReLU Fast-100                                 (b) CIFAR10 B ReLU Fast-100
      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2



     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST B ReLU Fast-1k                                  (d) CIFAR10 B ReLU Fast-1k
      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2


     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (e) MNIST B ReLU Fast-10k                                 (f) CIFAR10 B ReLU Fast-10k

                       BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient        PGD          Uniform


Figure 29: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision boundary
distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 B ReLU. A dashed line means that the attack found adversarial
examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means that the attack did
not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines respectively represent
the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                     66
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2
     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (a) MNIST C Standard Fast-100                              (b) CIFAR10 C Standard Fast-100
      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2



     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST C Standard Fast-1k                               (d) CIFAR10 C Standard Fast-1k
      1                                                          1


     0.8                                                        0.8


     0.6                                                        0.6
R2


                                                           R2


     0.4                                                        0.4


     0.2                                                        0.2


      0 2                                                        0 2
      10                    103                104               10                      103             104
                    Calls to the Model                                           Calls to the Model
            (e) MNIST C Standard Fast-10k                              (f) CIFAR10 C Standard Fast-10k

                        BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient         PGD          Uniform


Figure 30: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision boundary
distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 C Standard. A dashed line means that the attack found adversarial
examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means that the attack did
not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines respectively represent
the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                      67
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2
     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
           (a) MNIST C Adversarial Fast-100                            (b) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Fast-100
      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2



     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST C Adversarial Fast-1k                            (d) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Fast-1k
      1                                                           1


     0.8                                                         0.8


     0.6                                                         0.6
R2


                                                            R2


     0.4                                                         0.4


     0.2                                                         0.2


      0 2                                                         0 2
      10                     103                104               10                       103              104
                     Calls to the Model                                            Calls to the Model
           (e) MNIST C Adversarial Fast-10k                            (f) CIFAR10 C Adversarial Fast-10k

                         BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient          PGD          Uniform


Figure 31: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision
boundary distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 C Adversarial. A dashed line means that the attack
found adversarial examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means
that the attack did not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines
respectively represent the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                       68
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2
     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (a) MNIST C ReLU Fast-100                                 (b) CIFAR10 C ReLU Fast-100
      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2



     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (c) MNIST C ReLU Fast-1k                                  (d) CIFAR10 C ReLU Fast-1k
      1                                                         1


     0.8                                                       0.8


     0.6                                                       0.6
R2


                                                          R2


     0.4                                                       0.4


     0.2                                                       0.2


      0 2                                                       0 2
      10                   103                104               10                     103          104
                   Calls to the Model                                          Calls to the Model
            (e) MNIST C ReLU Fast-10k                                 (f) CIFAR10 C ReLU Fast-10k

                       BIM         Deepfool         Fast Gradient        PGD          Uniform


Figure 32: R2 of linear model for the heuristic adversarial distances given the exact decision boundary
distances for MNIST & CIFAR10 C ReLU. A dashed line means that the attack found adversarial
examples (of any distance) for only some inputs, while the absence of a line means that the attack did
not find any adversarial examples. The loosely and densely dotted black lines respectively represent
the balanced and strong attack pools. The x axis is logarithmic.


                                                     69
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M     OVERVIEW OF C ERTIFIED D EFENSES
In order to put our defense into context, we provide a slightly more in-depth overview of common
approaches to certified robustness, as well as their strengths and weaknesses.
Initially, theoretical work focused on providing robustness bounds based on general properties. For
example, Szegedy et al. (2013) computed robustness bounds against L2 -bounded perturbations by
studying the upper Lipschitz constant of each layer, while Hein & Andriushchenko (2017) achieved
similar results for Lp -bounded perturbations by focusing on local Lipschitzness. While these studies
do not require any modifications to the network or distribution hypotheses, in practice the provided
bounds are too loose to be used in practice. For this reason, Weng et al. (2018b) derived stronger
bounds through a local Lipschitz constant estimation technique; however, finding this bound is
computationally expensive, which is why the authors also provide a heuristic to estimate it.
Similarly, solver-based approaches provide tight bounds but require expensive computations. For
example, Reluplex was used to verify networks of at most ∼300 ReLU nodes (Katz et al., 2017).
Tjeng et al. (2019) was able to use a MIP-based formulation to significantly speed up verification,
although large networks are still not feasible to verify. Solver-friendly training techniques can boost
the performance of verifiers (such as in (Xiao et al., 2019)); however, this increase in speed often
comes at the cost of accuracy (see Section 6).
Another solution to the trade-off between speed and bound tightness is to focus on specific (and
more tractable) threat models. For example, Han et al. (2021) provide robustness guarantees against
adversarial patches (Brown et al., 2017), while Jia et al. (2019) focus on adversarial word substitutions.
In the same vein, Raghunathan et al. (2018) provide robustness bounds for specific architectures (i.e.
1-layer and 2-layer neural networks), while Zhang et al. (2021) introduce custom neurons that, if
used in place of regular neurons, provide L∞ robustness guarantees. These techniques thus trade
generality for speed.
The most common approach, however, consists in providing statistical guarantees. For example,
Sinha et al. (2018) showed that using a custom loss can bound the adversarial risk. Similarly, Dan et al.
(2020) proved adversarial risk bounds for Gaussian mixture models depending on the "adversarial
Signal-to-Noise Ratio". Finally, Cohen et al. (2019) introduced a smoothing-based certified defense
that, due to its high computational cost, is replaced by a Monte Carlo estimate with a given probability
of being robust. This work was later expanded upon in (Salman et al., 2020) and (Carlini et al.,
2022). The main drawback of these techniques is the fact that they cannot be used in contexts where
statistical guarantees are not sufficient, such as safety-critical applications.
All of these certified defenses prioritize certain aspects (speed, strength, generality) over others. In
the context of this (simplified) framework, CA in its exact form can be thus considered a defense that
prioritizes strength and generality over speed, similarly to Katz et al. (2017) and Tjeng et al. (2019).


                                                   70
