Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNABLE B EHAVIOR C ONTROL : B REAKING ATARI
H UMAN W ORLD R ECORDS VIA S AMPLE -E FFICIENT B E -
HAVIOR S ELECTION

 Jiajun Fan1∗, Yuzheng Zhuang2 , Yuecheng Liu2 , Jianye Hao2 , Bin Wang2

 Jiangcheng Zhu3 , Hao Wang4 , Shutao Xia1 †
 1
   Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
 2
   Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Huawei Cloud, 4 Zhejiang University
 1
   fanjj21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, 4 haohaow@zju.edu.cn,
 2,3
     {zhuangyuzheng, liuyuecheng1, haojianye, wangbin158, zhujiangcheng}@huawei.com


                                                    A BSTRACT
              The exploration problem is one of the main challenges in deep reinforcement
              learning (RL). Recent promising works tried to handle the problem with population-
              based methods, which collect samples with diverse behaviors derived from a
              population of different exploratory policies. Adaptive policy selection has been
              adopted for behavior control. However, the behavior selection space is largely
              limited by the predefined policy population, which further limits behavior diversity.
              In this paper, we propose a general framework called Learnable Behavioral Control
              (LBC) to address the limitation, which a) enables a significantly enlarged behavior
              selection space via formulating a hybrid behavior mapping from all policies;
              b) constructs a unified learnable process for behavior selection. We introduce
              LBC into distributed off-policy actor-critic methods and achieve behavior control
              via optimizing the selection of the behavior mappings with bandit-based meta-
              controllers. Our agents have achieved 10077.52% mean human normalized score
              and surpassed 24 human world records within 1B training frames in the Arcade
              Learning Environment, which demonstrates our significant state-of-the-art (SOTA)
              performance without degrading the sample efficiency.
                                 LBC (Ours)              MEME (2022)                Agent57 (2020)
             25                    100                        20                        1011             100B
             20                     75                          15
             15                                                                         1010
                                    50                          10
             10
              5                     25                          5
                                                                                         109     1B 1B
              0                      0                          0
                      HWRB                    Mean HNS                 Median HNS               Number Samples

Figure 1: Performance on the 57 Atari games. Our method achieves the highest mean human normal-
ized scores (Badia et al., 2020a), is the first to breakthrough 24 human world records (Toromanoff
et al., 2019), and demands the least training data.

1        I NTRODUCTION
Reinforcement learning (RL) has led to tremendous progress in a variety of domains ranging from
video games (Mnih et al., 2015) to robotics (Schulman et al., 2015; 2017). However, efficient
exploration remains one of the significant challenges. Recent prominent works tried to address
the problem with population-based training (Jaderberg et al., 2017, PBT) wherein a population of
policies with different degrees of exploration is jointly trained to keep both the long-term and short-
term exploration capabilities throughout the learning process. A set of actors is created to acquire
     ∗
         Work done as a research intern at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
     †
         Corresponding authors.


                                                            1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Model Population                                                                                                                                                                Actors
                                                                           L
                                                                        ⋅⋅⋅                                                              Meta-controller         Hybrid Behavior
                                                                                                                                                                                       Actor L                                  Environment
                     Policy N
                                                                      3                                                                   ∗
                                                                                                                                         𝒫" = argmax𝒫! ℒ𝒫
                                                                                                                                          Meta-controller
                                                                                                                                                                       Policy
                                                                                                                                                                Hybrid Behavior         ⋅⋅⋅
                                                    Φ! (𝑠, 𝑎)                                                                                                                        Actor 4                                   Environment
                      ⋅⋅⋅                                       2                                                                         𝝍"∗ ∼ 𝒫#∗
                                                                                                                                          𝒫" = argmax𝒫! ℒ𝒫
                                                                                                                                        Meta-controller        Hybrid
                                                                                                                                                                     Policy
                                                                                                                                                                      Behavior
                                                                                                                                                                                    Actor 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      𝑎+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Environment
                                                                1                                                                         ∗∼
                                                                                                                                       𝝍𝒫"" Hybrid
                                                                                                                                             =𝒫#
                                                                                                                                                ∗    Behavior
                                                                                                                                                argmax 𝒫! ℒ 𝒫
                                                                                                                                                                    Policy                                      𝑠+ ,𝑎𝑟+ , 𝑠+,-
                    Policy 3                                                                                                          Meta-controller         Hybrid Behavior                                        +
                                                  Φ"(𝑠, 𝑎)                                                                                    Mapping ℱ𝝍!            𝜇" (𝑠, 𝑎)
                                                                                                                                                                  Policy            Actor
                                                                                                                                                                                       𝜇"1(𝑠, 𝑎)                           Environment
                                                                          Policy N
                                                                           ⋅⋅⋅                                                       𝝍𝒫"" Hybrid
                                                                                                                                         ∗∼ 𝒫 ∗
                                                                                                                                           =# argmaxBehavior
                                                                                                                                                      𝒫! ℒ 𝒫                                                 𝑠+ , 𝑟𝑎++, 𝑠+,-
                  Policy 2     hyper-parameter ℎ!                                                                                         Mapping ℱ𝝍!             𝜇" (𝑠, 𝑎)
                                                                         Policy 3


                                               Φ#(𝑠, 𝑎)
                                                                                                                                      𝝍Hybrid
                                                                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                                                       " ∼ 𝒫# Behavior                                𝜇" (𝑠, 𝑎)                  𝑎+
                                                                                                                                                                                                   𝜇$(𝑠, 𝑎) 𝑠+ , 𝑟+ , 𝑠+,-
                                                                      Policy 2           hyper-parameter ℎ!


                                                                                                                                        Mapping  ℱ𝝍!             𝜇" (𝑠, 𝑎)
                                                                                                                    Φ# (𝑠, 𝑎)



                Policy 1
                                                                                                                                      Hybrid Behavior
                                                                    Policy 1

                                                                                                                                                                                      𝜇" (𝑠, 𝑎)
                                                                                       hyper-parameter ℎ"



                                                                                                                                                                                                             𝑟+ , 𝑠+,-
                               hyper-parameter ℎ"𝑎)
                                            Φ$(𝑠,
                                                                                                                                       Mapping ℱ𝝍!
                                                                                    hyper-parameter ℎ#


                                                                                     𝐡! , 𝜽!
                                                                                                              Φ! (𝑠, 𝑎)                                         𝜇" (𝑠, 𝑎)            𝜇" (𝑠, 𝑎)
                             hyper-parameter ℎ#

                               𝐡$ , 𝜽$
                                                                                                                                Shared Replay Buffer

                                                    Model Training                                                                                                Data Collection


                                      Figure 2: A General Architecture of Our Algorithm.
diverse behaviors derived from the policy population (Badia et al., 2020b;a). Despite the significant
improvement in the performance, these methods suffer from the aggravated high sample complexity
due to the joint training on the whole population while keeping the diversity property. To acquire
diverse behaviors, NGU (Badia et al., 2020b) uniformly selects policies in the population regardless
of their contribution to the learning progress (Badia et al., 2020b). As an improvement, Agent57
adopts an adaptive policy selection mechanism that each behavior used for sampling is periodically
selected from the population according to a meta-controller (Badia et al., 2020a). Although Agent57
achieved significantly better results on the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) benchmark, it costs
tens of billions of environment interactions as much as NGU. To handle this drawback, GDI (Fan &
Xiao, 2022) adaptively combines multiple advantage functions learned from a single policy to obtain
an enlarged behavior space without increasing policy population size. However, the population-based
scenarios with more than one learned policy has not been widely explored yet. Taking a further
step from GDI, we try to enable a larger and non-degenerate behavior space by learning different
combinations across a population of different learned policies.
In this paper, we attempt to further improve the sample efficiency of population-based reinforcement
learning methods by taking a step towards a more challenging setting to control behaviors with
significantly enlarged behavior space with a population of different learned policies. Differing from
all of the existing works where each behavior is derived from a single selected learned policy, we
formulate the process of getting behaviors from all learned policies as hybrid behavior mapping, and
the behavior control problem is directly transformed into selecting appropriate mapping functions. By
combining all policies, the behavior selection space increases exponentially along with the population
size. As a special case that population size degrades to one, diverse behaviors can also be obtained by
choosing different behavior mappings. This two-fold mechanism enables tremendous larger space for
behavior selection. By properly parameterizing the mapping functions, our method enables a unified
learnable process, and we call this general framework Learnable Behavior Control.
We use the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE) to evaluate the performance of the proposed methods,
which is an important testing ground that requires a broad set of skills such as perception, exploration,
and control (Badia et al., 2020a). Previous works use the normalized human score to summarize the
performance on ALE and claim superhuman performance (Bellemare et al., 2013). However, the
human baseline is far from representative of the best human player, which greatly underestimates the
ability of humanity. In this paper, we introduce a more challenging baseline, i.e., the human world
records baseline (see Toromanoff et al. (2019); Hafner et al. (2021) for more information on Atari
human world records). We summarize the number of games that agents can outperform the human
world records (i.e., HWRB, see Figs. 1) to claim a real superhuman performance in these games,
inducing a more challenging and fair comparison with human intelligence. Experimental results show
that the sample efficiency of our method also outperforms the concurrent work MEME Kapturowski
et al. (2022), which is 200x faster than Agent57. In summary, our contributions are as follows:

      1. A data-efficient RL framework named LBC. We propose a general framework called
         Learnable Behavior Control (LBC), which enables a significantly enlarged behavior selec-
         tion space without increasing the policy population size via formulating a hybrid behavior
         mapping from all policies, and constructs a unified learnable process for behavior selection.
      2. A family of LBC-based RL algorithms. We provide a family of LBC-based algorithms
         by combining LBC with existing distributed off-policy RL algorithms, which shows the
         generality and scalability of the proposed method.
      3. The state-of-the-art performance with superior sample efficiency. From Figs. 1, our
         method has achieved 10077.52% mean human normalized score (HNS) and surpassed 24


                                                                                                                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         human world records within 1B training frames in the Arcade Learning Environment (ALE),
         which demonstrates our state-of-the-art (SOTA) sample efficiency.

2     BACKGROUND

2.1   R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

RL can be formulated as a Markov Decision Process (Howard, 1960, MDP) defined by
(S, A, p, r, γ, ρ0 ). Considering a discounted episodic MDP, the initial state s0 is sampled from
the initial distribution ρ0 (s) : S → P(S), where we use P to represent the probability distribution.
At each time t, the agent chooses an action at ∈ A according to the policy π(at |st ) : S → P(A)
at state st ∈ S. The environment receives at , produces the reward rt ∼ r(s, a) : S × A → R and
transfers to the next state st+1 according to the transition distribution p (s′ | s, a) : S × A → P(S).
The process continues until the agent reaches a terminal state or a maximum
                                                                         P∞        time step. Define the
discounted state visitation distribution as dπρ0 (s) = (1 − γ)Es0 ∼ρ0 [ t=0 γ t P(st = s|s0 )]. Define
                P∞
return Gt = k=0 γ k rt+k wherein γ ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. The goal of reinforcement
learning is to find the optimal policy π ∗ that maximizes
                                                      " the ∞ expected sum#of discounted rewards Gt :
                                                             X
                          π ∗ := argmaxEst ∼dπρ Eπ Gt =           γ k rt+k |st ,                      (1)
                                                 0
                                    π
                                                             k=0


2.2   B EHAVIOR C ONTROL F OR R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

In value-based methods, a behavior policy can be derived from a state-action value function Qπθ,h (s, a)
via ϵ-greedy. In policy-based methods, a behavior policy can be derived from the policy logits Φθ,h
(Li et al., 2018) via Boltzmann operator. For convenience, we define that a behavior policy can be
derived from the learned policy model Φθ,h via a behavior mapping, which normally maps a single
policy model to a behavior, e.g., ϵ-greedy(Φθ,h ). In PBT-based methods, there would be a set of
policy models {Φθ1 ,h1 , ..., ΦθN ,hN }, each of which is parameterized by θi and trained under its own
hyper-parameters hi , wherein θi ∈ Θ = {θ1 , ..., θN } and hi ∈ H = {h1 , ..., hN }.
The behavior control in population-based methods is normally achieved in two steps: i) select a
policy model Φθ,h from the population. ii) applying a behavior mapping to the selected policy
model. When the behavior mapping is rule-based for each actor (e.g., ϵ-greedy with rule-based
ϵ ), the behavior control can be transformed into the policy model selection (See Proposition 1).
Therefore, the optimization of the selection of the policy models becomes one of the critical problems
in achieving effective behavior control. Following the literature on PBRL, NGU adopts a uniform
selection, which is unoptimized and inefficient. Built upon NGU, Agent57 adopts a meta-controller to
adaptively selected a policy model from the population to generate the behavior for each actor, which
is implemented by a non-stationary multi-arm bandit algorithm. However, the policy model selection
requires maintaining a large number of different policy models, which is particularly data-consuming
since each policy model in the population holds heterogeneous training objectives.
To handle this problem, recent notable work GDI-H3 (Fan & Xiao, 2022) enables to obtain an enlarged
behavior space via adaptively controls the temperature of the softmax operation over the weighted
advantage functions. However, since the advantage functions are derived from the same target policy
under different reward scales, the distributions derived from them may tend to be similar (e.g., See
App. N), thus would lead to degradation of the behavior space. Differing from all of the existing
works where each behavior is derived from a single selected learned policy, in this paper, we try to
handle this problem via three-fold: i) we bridge the relationship between the learned policies and
each behavior via a hybrid behavior mapping, ii) we propose a general way to build a non-degenerate
large behavior space for population-based methods in Sec. 4.1, iii) we propose a way to optimize the
hybrid behavior mappings from a population of different learned models in Proposition. 2.

3     L EARNABLE B EHAVIOR C ONTROL

In this section, we first formulate the behavior control problem and decouple it into two sub-problems:
behavior space construction and behavior selection. Then, we discuss how to construct the behavior


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


space and select behaviors based on the formulation. By integrating both, we can obtain a general
framework to achieve behavior control in RL, called learnable behavior control (LBC).

3.1   B EHAVIOR C ONTROL F ORMULATION

Behavior Mapping Define behavior mapping F as a mapping from some policy model(s) to a
behavior. In previous works, a behavior policy is typically obtained using a single policy model.
In this paper, as a generalization, we define two kinds of F according to how many policy models
they take as input to get a behavior. The first one, individual behavior mapping, is defined as a
mapping from a single model to a behavior that is widely used in prior works, e.g., ϵ-greedy and
Boltzmann Strategy for discrete action space and Gaussian Strategy for continuous action space; And
the second one, hybrid behavior mapping, is defined to map all policy models to a single behavior,
i.e., F(Φθ1 ,h1 , ..., ΦθN ,hN ). The hybrid behavior mapping enables us to get a hybrid behavior by
combining all policies together, which provides a greater degree of freedom to acquire a larger
behavior space. For any behavior mapping Fψ parameterized by ψ, there exists a family of behavior
mappings FΨ = {Fψ |ψ ∈ Ψ} that hold the same parametrization form with Fψ , where Ψ ⊆ Rk is
a parameter set that contains all possible parameter ψ.

Behavior Formulation As described above, in our work, a behavior can be acquired by applying a
behavior mapping Fψ to some policy model(s). For the individual behavior mapping case, a behavior
can be formulated as µθ,h,ψ = Fψ (Φθ,h ), which is also the most used case in previous works. As
for the hybrid behavior mapping case, a behavior is formulated as µΘ,H,ψ = Fψ (ΦΘ,H ), wherein
ΦΘ,H = {Φθ1 ,h1 , ..., ΦθN ,hN } is a policy model set containing all policy models.

Behavior Control Formulation Behavior control can be decoupled into two sub-problems: 1)
which behaviors can be selected for each actor at each training time, namely the behavior space
construction. 2) how to select proper behaviors, namely the behavior selection. Based on the behavior
formulation, we can formulate these sub-problems:
Definition 3.1 (Behavior Space Construction). Considering the RL problem that behaviors µ are
generated from some policy model(s). We can acquire a family of realizable behaviors by applying a
family of behavior mappings FΨ to these policy model(s). Define the set that contains all of these
realizable behaviors as the behavior space, which can be formulated as:

                {µθ,h,ψ = Fψ (Φh )|θ ∈ Θ, h ∈ H, ψ ∈ Ψ}, for individual behavior mapping
 MΘ,H,Ψ =
                {µΘ,H,ψ = Fψ (ΦΘ,H )|ψ ∈ Ψ}, for hybrid behavior mapping
                                                                                                  (2)
Definition 3.2 (Behavior Selection). Behavior selection can be formulated as finding a optimal selec-
                   ∗
tion distribution PM Θ,H,Ψ
                            to select the behaviors µ from behavior space MΘ,H,Ψ and maximizing
some optimization target LP , wherein LP is the optimization target of behavior selection:
                                      ∗
                                     PM Θ,H,Ψ
                                              := argmax LP                                        (3)
                                                     PMΘ,H,Ψ


3.2   B EHAVIOR S PACE C ONSTRUCTION

In this section, we further simplify the equation 2, and discuss how to construct the behavior space.
Assumption 1. Assume all policy models share the same network structure, and hi can uniquely
index a policy model Φθi ,hi . Then, Φθ,h can be abbreviated as Φh .

Unless otherwise specified, in this paper, we assume Assumption 1 holds. Under Assumption 1, the
behavior space defined in equation 2 can be simplified as,

                  {µh,ψ = Fψ (Φh )|h ∈ H, ψ ∈ Ψ}, for individual behavior mapping
      MH,Ψ =                                                                                 (4)
                  {µH,ψ = Fψ (ΦH )|ψ ∈ Ψ}, for hybrid behavior mapping

According to equation 4, four core factors need to be considered when constructing a behavior
space: the network structure Φ, the form of behavior mapping F, the hyper-parameter set H and the
parameter set Ψ. Many notable representation learning approaches have explored how to design the


                                                 4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


network structure (Chen et al., 2021; Irie et al., 2021), but it is not the focus of our work. In this
paper, we do not make any assumptions about the model structure, which means it can be applied to
any model structure. Hence, there remains three factors, which will be discussed below.
For cases that behavior space is constructed with individual behavior mappings, there are two things
to be considered if one want to select a specific behavior from the behavior space: the policy model
Φh and behavior mapping Fψ . Prior methods have tried to realize behavior control via selecting a
policy model Φhi from the population {Φh1 , ..., ΦhN } (See Proposition 1). The main drawback of
this approach is that only one policy model is considered to generate behavior, leaving other policy
models in the population unused. In this paper, we argue that we can tackle this problem via hybrid
behavior mapping, wherein the hybrid behavior is generated based on all policy models.
In this paper, we only consider the case that all of the N policy models are used for behavior
generating, i.e., µH,ψ = Fψ (ΦH ). Now there is only one thing to be considered , i.e., the behavior
mapping function Fψ , and the behavior control problem will be transformed into the optimization of
the behavior mapping (See Proposition 2). We also do not make any assumptions about the form of
the mapping. As an example, one could acquire a hybrid behavior from all policy models via network
distillation, parameter fusion, mixture models, etc.

3.3   B EHAVIOR S ELECTION

According to equation 4, each behavior can be indexed by h and ψ for individual behavior mapping
cases, and when the ψ is not learned for each actor, the behavior selection can be cast to the selection
of h (see Proposition 1). As for the hybrid behavior mapping cases, since each behavior can be
indexed by ψ, the behavior selection can be cast into the selection of ψ (see Proposition 2). Moreover,
according to equation 3, there are two keys in behavior selection: 1) Optimization Target LP . 2) The
optimization algorithm to learn the selection distribution PMH,Ψ and maximize LP . In this section,
we will discuss them sequentially.

Optimization Target Two core factors have to be considered for the optimization target: the
diversity-based measurement VµTD (Eysenbach et al., 2019) and the value-based measurement
VµTV (Parker-Holder et al., 2020). By integrating both, the optimization target can be formulated as:
                                LP = Rµ∼PMH,Ψ + c · Dµ∼PMH,Ψ
                                                                                                    (5)
                                     = Eµ∼PMH,Ψ [VµTV + c · VµTD ],
wherein, Rµ∼PMH,Ψ and Dµ∼PMH,Ψ is the expectation of value and diversity of behavior µ over
the selection distribution PMH,Ψ . When Fψ is unlearned and deterministic for each actor, behavior
selection for each actor can be simplified into the selection of the policy model:
Proposition 1 (Policy Model Selection). When Fψ is a deterministic and individual behavior
mapping for each actor at each training step (wall-clock), e.g., Agent57, the behavior for each actor
can be uniquely indexed by h, so equation 5 can be simplified into
                                 LP = Eh∼PH VµTV        + c · VµTD

                                                     h           h
                                                                     ,                            (6)
where PH is a selection distribution of h ∈ H = {h1 , ..., hN }. For each actor, the behavior is
generated from a selected policy model Φhi with a pre-defined behavior mapping Fψ .
In Proposition 1, the behavior space size is controlled by the policy model population size (i.e., |H|).
However, maintaining a large population of different policy models is data-consuming. Hence, we try
to control behaviors via optimizing the selection of behavior mappings:
Proposition 2 (Behavior Mapping Optimization). When all the policy models are used to generate
each behavior, e.g., µψ = Fψ (Φθ,h ) for single policy model cases or µψ = Fψ (Φθ1 ,h1 , ..., ΦθN ,hN )
for N policy models cases, each behavior can be uniquely indexed by Fψ , and equation 5 can be
simplified into:                                 h                  i
                                 LP = Eψ∼PΨ VµTV      ψ
                                                         + c · V TD
                                                                 µψ   ,                              (7)
where PΨ is a selection distribution of ψ ∈ Ψ.
In Proposition 2, the behavior space is majorly controlled by |Ψ|, which could be a continuous
parameter space. Hence, a larger behavior space can be enabled.


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Selection Distribution Optimization Given the optimization target LP , we seek to find the optimal
behavior selection distribution Pµ∗ that maximizes LP :

                                 ∗                       (1)
                                PM H,Ψ
                                       := argmaxLP = argmaxLP
                                             PMH,Ψ              PH
                                                                                                       (8)
                                                         (2)
                                                          = argmaxLP ,
                                                                PΨ

where (1) and (2) hold because we have Proposition 1 and 2, respectively. This optimization problem
can be solved with existing optimizers, e.g., evolutionary algorithm (Jaderberg et al., 2017), multi-arm
bandits (MAB) (Badia et al., 2020a), etc.

4     LBC-BM: A B OLTZMANN M IXTURE BASED I MPLEMENTATION FOR LBC
In this section, we provide an example of improving the behavior control of off-policy actor-critic
methods (Espeholt et al., 2018) via optimizing the behavior mappings as Proposition 2. We provide a
practical design of hybrid behavior mapping, inducing an implementation of LBC, which we call
Boltzmann Mixture based LBC, namely LBC-BM. By choosing different H and Ψ, we can obtain
a family of implementations of LBC-BM with different behavior spaces (see Sec. 5.4).

4.1   B OLTZMANN M IXTURE BASED B EHAVIOR S PACE C ONSTRUCTION

In this section, we provide a general hybrid behavior mapping design including three sub-processes:

Generalized Policy Selection In Agent57, behavior control is achieved by selecting a single policy
from the policy population at each iteration. Following this idea, we generalize the method to the case
where multiple policies can be selected. More specifically, we introduce a importance weights vector
ω to describe how much each policy will contribute to the generated behavior, ω = [ω1 , ..., ωN ], ωi ≥
   PN
0, i=1 ωi = 1, where ωi represents the importance of ith policy in the population (i.e., Φhi ). In
particular, if ω is a one-hot vector, i.e., ∃i ∈ {1, 2, ..., N}, ωi = 1; ∀j ∈ {1, 2, ..., N} =
                                                                                             ̸ i, ωj = 0,
then the policy selection becomes a single policy selection as Proposition 1. Therefore, it can be seen
as a generalization of single policy selection, and we call this process generalized policy selection.

Policy-Wise Entropy Control In our work, we propose to use entropy control (which is typically
rule-based controlled in previous works) to make a better trade-off between exploration and exploita-
tion. For a policy model Φhi from the population, we will apply a entropy control function fτi (·), i.e.,
πhi ,τi = fτi (Φhi ), where πhi ,τi is the new policy after entropy control, and fτi (·) is parameterized
by τi . Here we should note that the entropy of all the policies from the population is controlled in a
policy-wise manner. Thus there would be a set of entropy control functions to be considered, which
is parameterized by τ = [τ1 , ..., τN ].

Behavior Distillation from Multiple Policies Different from previous methods where only one
policy is used to generate the behavior, in our approach, we combine N policies [πh1 ,τ1 , ..., πhN ,τN ],
together with their importance weights ω = [ω1 , ..., ωN ]. Specially, in order to make full use of
these policies according to their importance, we introduce a behavior distillation function g which
takes both the policies and importance weights as input, i.e., µH,τ ,ω = g(πh1 ,τ1 , ..., πhN ,τN , ω).
The distillation function g(·, ω) can be implemented in different ways, e.g., knowledge distillation
(supervised learning), parameters fusion, etc. In conclusion, the behavior space can be constructed as,
                     MH,Ψ = {g (fτ1 (Φh1 ), ..., fτN (ΦhN ), ω1 , ..., ωN ) |ψ ∈ Ψ}                    (9)
wherein Ψ = {ψ = (τ1 , ..., τN , ω1 , ..., ωN )}, H = {h1 , ..., hN }. Note that this is a general
approach which can be applied to different tasks and algorithms by simply selecting different entropy
control function fτi (·) and behavior distillation function g(·, ω). As an example, for Atari task, we
                                                                                               ′
model the policy as a Boltzmann distribution, i.e., πhi ,τi (a|s) = eτi Φhi (a|s) a′ eτi Φhi (a |s) , where
                                                                                 P
τi ∈ (0, ∞). The entropy can thus be controlled by controlling the temperature. As for the behavior
distillation function, we are inspired by the behavior design of GDI, which takes a weighted sum of
two softmax distributions derived from two advantage functions. We can further extend this approach


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                PN
to the case to do a combination across different policies, i.e., µH,τ ,ω (a|s) = i=1 ωi πhi ,τi (a|s).
This formula is actually a form of mixture model, where the importance weights play the role of
mixture weights of the mixture model. Then the behavior space becomes,

                                             N
                                             X
                        MH,Ψ = {µH,ψ =             ωi softmaxτi (Φhi )|ψ ∈ Ψ}                     (10)
                                             i=1


4.2     MAB BASED B EHAVIOR S ELECTION

According to Proposition 2, the behavior selection over behavior space 10 can be simplified to the
selection of ψ. In this paper, we use MAB-based meta-controller to select ψ ∈ Ψ. Since Ψ is a
continuous multidimensional space, we discretize Ψ into K regions {Ψ1 , ..., ΨK }, and each region
corresponds to an arm of MAB. At the beginning of a trajectory i, l-th actor will use MAB to sample
                                                                            ScoreΨ
a region Ψk indexed by arm k according to PΨ = softmax(ScoreΨk ) = Pe ScorekΨj . We adopt UCB
                                                                           j e
                               r
                                  log(1+ K
                                       P
                                         j̸=k NΨj )
score as ScoreΨk = VΨk + c ·           1+NΨk        to tackle the reward-diversity trade-off problem
in equation 7 (Garivier & Moulines, 2011). NΨk means the number of the visit of Ψk indexed by
arm k. VΨk is calculated by the expectation of the undiscounted episodic returns to measure the
value of each Ψk , and the UCB item is used to avoid selecting the same arm repeatedly and ensure
sufficient diverse behavior mappings can be selected to boost the behavior diversity. After an Ψk is
sampled, a ψ will be uniformly sampled from Ψk , corresponding to a behavior mapping Fψ . With
Fψ , we can obtain a behavior µψ according to equation 10. Then, the l-th actor acts µψ to obtain a
trajectory τi and the undiscounted episodic return Gi , then Gi is used to update the reward model
VΨk of region Ψk indexed by arm k. As for the nonstationary problem, we are inspired from GDI,
which ensembles several MAB with different learning rates and discretization accuracy. We can
extend to handle the nonstationary problem by jointly training a population of bandits from very
exploratory to purely exploitative (i.e., different c of the UCB item, similar to the policy population
of Agent57). Moreover, we will periodically replace the members of the MAB population to ease the
nonstationary problem further. More details of implementations of MAB can be found in App. E.
Moreover, the mechanism of the UCB item for behavior control has not been widely studied in prior
works, and we will demonstrate how it boosts behavior diversity in App. K.3.

5     E XPERIMENT
In this section, we design our experiment to answer the following questions:

        • Whether our methods can outperform prior SOTA RL algorithms in both sample efficiency
          and final performance in Atari 1B Benchmarks (See Sec. 5.2 and Figs. 3)?
        • Can our methods adaptively adjust the exploration-exploration trade-off (See Figs. 4)?
        • How to enlarge or narrow down the behavior space? What is the performance of methods
          with different behavior spaces (See Sec. 5.4)?
        • How much performance will be degraded without proper behavior selection (See Figs. 5)?

5.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

5.1.1    E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS
We conduct our experiments in ALE (Bellemare et al., 2013). The standard pre-processing settings
of Atari are identical to those of Agent57 (Badia et al., 2020a), and related parameters have been
concluded in App. I. We employ a separate evaluation process to record scores continuously. We
record the undiscounted episodic returns averaged over five seeds using a windowed mean over 32
episodes. To avoid any issues that aggregated metrics may have, App. J provides full learning curves
for all games and detailed comparison tables of raw and normalized scores. Apart from the mean and
median HNS, we also report how many human worlds records our agents have broken to emphasize
the superhuman performance of our methods. For more experimental details, see App. H.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                  Human World Records Breakthrough                            Mean Human Normalized Score                          Median Human Normalized Score
                  25                                           10000.0%                                                  2000.0%
                  20                                            8000.0%                                                  1500.0%
                  15                                            6000.0%
                                                                                                                         1000.0%
                  10                                            4000.0%
                   5                                            2000.0%                                                   500.0%
                   0                                                0.0%                                                    0.0%
                        0.0   0.2     0.4    0.6   0.8   1.0                  0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1.0                  0.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                         1e9                                                   1e9                                                1e9
                                                   Ours@1B                          Muzero@20B(2020)                 Agent57@100B(2019)
                                                   MEME@1B(2022)                    GDI-H3@200M(2022)                Go-Explore@10B(2021)

Figure 3: The learning curves in Atari. Curves are smoothed with a moving average over 5 points.
                                     DemonAttack         1e5                               Jamesbond           1e5                              Phoenix           1e6
                                                                                                                     6       2.5                                        1.0
                  2.5                                          8        2.5
                                                                                                                             2.0                                        0.8
                  2.0                                          6        2.0                                          4                                                  0.6
        Entropy


                                                               Scores
                                                                        1.5                                                  1.5
                  1.5                                          4                                                                                                        0.4
                                                                        1.0                                          2       1.0
                                                               2                                                                                                        0.2
                  1.0
                                                               0        0.5                                          0       0.5                                        0.0
                        0.0    0.2     0.4   0.6   0.81.0                     0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6   0.8   1.0                 0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
                              Training Scale (Frames) 1e9                                                      1e9                                                1e9
                                                                                      Scores             Entropy
Figure 4: Behavior entropy and scores curve across training for different games where we achieved
unprecedented performance. The names of the axes are the same as that of the leftmost figure.

5.1.2     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
We jointly train three polices, and each policy can be indexed by the hyper-parameters hi =
(γi , RS i ), wherein RS i is a reward shaping method (Badia et al., 2020a), and γi is the discounted
factor. Each policy model Φhi adopts the dueling network structure (Wang et al., 2016), where
Φhi = Ahi = Qhi − Vhi . More details of the network structure can be found in App. L. To
correct for harmful discrepancy of off-policy learning, we adopt V-Trace (Espeholt et al., 2018)
and ReTrace (Munos et al., 2016) to learn Vhi and Qhi , respectively. The policy is learned by
policy gradient (Schulman et al., 2017). Based on equation 10, we could build a behavior space with
                                                P3
a hybrid mapping as MH,Ψ = {µH,ψ = i=1 ωi softmaxτi (Φhi )}, wherein H = {h1 , h2 , h3 },
                                                       P3
Ψ = {ψ = (τ1 , ω1 , τ2 , ω2 , τ3 , ω3 )|τi ∈ (0, τ + ), j=1 ωj = 1}. The behavior selection is achieved
by MAB described in Sec. 4.2, and more details can see App. E. Finally, we could obtain an
implementation of LBC-BM, which is our main algorithm. The target policy for Aπ1 and Aπ2 in
GDI-H3 is the same, while in our work the target policy for Aπi i is πi = softmax(Ai ).

5.2     S UMMARY OF R ESULTS

Results on Atari Benchmark The aggregated results across games are reported in Figs. 3. Among
the algorithms with superb final performance, our agents achieve the best mean HNS and surpass the
most human world records across 57 games of the Atari benchmark with relatively minimal training
frames, leading to the best learning efficiency. Noting that Agent57 reported the maximum scores
across training as the final score, and if we report our performance in the same manner, our median is
1934%, which is higher than Agent57 and demonstrates our superior performance.

Discussion of Results With LBC, we can understand the mechanisms underlying the performance
of GDI-H3 more clearly: i) GDI-H3 has a high-capacity behavior space and a meta-controller to
optimize the behavior selection ii) only a single target policy is learned, which enables stable learning
and fast converge (See the case study of KL divergence in App. N). Compared to GDI-H3 , to ensure
the behavior space will not degenerate, LBC maintains a population of diverse policies and, as a price,
sacrifices some sample efficiency. Nevertheless, LBC can continuously maintain a significantly larger
behavior space with hybrid behavior mapping, which enables RL agents to continuously explore and
get improvement.

5.3     C ASE S TUDY: B EHAVIOR C ONTROL

To further explore the mechanisms underlying the success of behavior control of our method, we
adopt a case study to showcase our control process of behaviors. As shown in Figs. 4, in most tasks,


                                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                             Scaled Mean HNS         Scaled Median HNS
                        120.0%                                                                                                               120.0%

                        100.0%                                                                                                               100.0%
                                                  19% Ablate Ablate 28%                Ablate Ablate                 Ablate Ablate


                                                                                                                                                    Scaled Median HNS
      Scaled Mean HNS
                                                        H      H               31%      H, H,                         MAB MAB
                         80.0%                                                                                                               80.0%
                                                                                                       59%
                         60.0%                                                                               80.3%                   81.5%   60.0%

                         40.0%                                                                                                               40.0%

                         20.0%                                                                                                               20.0%

                          0.0%                                                                                                               0.0%
                                 Main Algorithm         Reducing H                   Reducing H and             Random Selection
Figure 5: Ablation Results. All the results are scaled by the main algorithm to improve readability.
our agents prefer exploratory behaviors first (i.e., high stochasticity policies with high entropy), and,
as training progresses, the agents shift into producing experience from more exploitative behaviors.
On the verge of peaking, the entropy of the behaviors could be maintained at a certain level (task-wise)
instead of collapsing swiftly to zero to avoid converging prematurely to sub-optimal policies.

5.4   A BLATION S TUDY

In this section, we investigate several properties of our method. For more details, see App. K.

Behavior Space Decomposition To explore the effect of different behavior spaces, we decompose
the behavior space of our main algorithm via reducing H and Ψ:
1) Reducing H. When we set all the policy models of our main algorithm the same, the behavior
space transforms from F(Φh1 , Φh2 , Φh3 ) into F(Φh1 , Φh1 , Φh1 ). H degenerates from {h1 , h2 , h3 }
into {h1 }. We can obtain a control group with a smaller behavior space by reducing H.
2)Reducing H and Ψ. Based on the control group reducing H, we can further reduce Ψ to further
narrow down the behavior space. Specially, we can directly adopt a individual behavior mapping
to build the behavior space as MH,Ψ = {µψ = softmaxτ (Φh1 )}, where Ψ degenerates from
{ω1 , ω2 , ω3 , τ1 , τ2 , τ3 } to {τ } and H = {h1 }. Then, we can obtain a control group with the smallest
behavior space by reducing H and Ψ.
The performance of these methods is illustrated in Figs. 5, and from left to right, the behavior space
of the first three algorithms decreases in turn (According to Corollary 4 in App. C). It is evident that
narrowing the behavior space via reducing H or Ψ will degrade the performance. On the contrary,
the performance can be boosted by enlarging the behavior space, which could be a promising way to
improve the performance of existing methods.

Behavior Selection To highlight the importance of an appropriate behavior selection, we replace
the meta-controller of our main algorithm with a random selection. The ablation results are illustrated
in Figs. 5, from which it is evident that, with the same behavior space, not learning an appropriate
selection distribution of behaviors will significantly degrade the performance. We conduct a t-SNE
analysis in App. K.3 to demonstrate that our methods can acquire more diverse behaviors than the
control group with pre-defined behavior mapping. Another ablation study that removed the UCB
item has been conducted in App. K.3 to demonstrate the behavior diversity may be boosted by the
UCB item, which can encourage the agents to select more different behavior mappings.


6     C ONCLUSION

We present the first deep reinforcement learning agent to break 24 human world records in Atari
using only 1B training frames. To achieve this, we propose a general framework called LBC, which
enables a significantly enlarged behavior selection space via formulating a hybrid behavior mapping
from all policies, and constructs a unified learnable process for behavior selection. We introduced
LBC into off-policy actor-critic methods and obtained a family of implementations. A large number
of experiments on Atari have been conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of our methods
empirically. Apart from the full results, we do detailed ablation studies to examine the effectiveness
of the proposed components. While there are many improvements and extensions to be explored
going forward, we believe that the ability of LBC to enhance the control process of behaviors results
in a powerful platform to propel future research.


                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is majorly supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant Number
2021ZD0110400). In addition, this work is partly supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62171248, and the R&D Program of Shenzhen under Grant
JCYJ20220818101012025.
We are very grateful for the careful reading and insightful reviews of meta-reviewers and reviewers.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
Open-sourced code will be implemented with Mindspore (MS, 2022) and released on our website.

R EFERENCES
Mindspore, 2022.    URL https://www.mindspore.cn/.                       Software available from
 https://www.mindspore.cn/.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
  In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2020, 13-18
 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 507–517.
  PMLR, 2020a. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/badia20a.html.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Zhaohan Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot,
  Steven Kapturowski, Olivier Tieleman, Martín Arjovsky, Alexander Pritzel, Andrew Bolt, and
  Charles Blundell. Never give up: Learning directed exploration strategies. In 8th International
 Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020.
  OpenReview.net, 2020b. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Sye57xStvB.
Marc G. Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning envi-
 ronment: An evaluation platform for general agents. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 47:253–279, 2013. doi:
 10.1613/jair.3912. URL https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.3912.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Rémi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Volodymyr Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, Shane Legg, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. IMPALA:
  scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner architectures. In Jennifer G.
  Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80
  of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1406–1415. PMLR, 2018. URL http:
  //proceedings.mlr.press/v80/espeholt18a.html.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you
  need: Learning skills without a reward function. In 7th International Conference on Learning
  Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=SJx63jRqFm.
Jiajun Fan and Changnan Xiao. Generalized data distribution iteration. In Kamalika Chaudhuri,
   Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International
   Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA,
   volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 6103–6184. PMLR, 2022. URL
   https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/fan22c.html.
Aurélien Garivier and Eric Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit
  problems. In Jyrki Kivinen, Csaba Szepesvári, Esko Ukkonen, and Thomas Zeugmann (eds.),
 Algorithmic Learning Theory - 22nd International Conference, ALT 2011, Espoo, Finland, Oc-
  tober 5-7, 2011. Proceedings, volume 6925 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pp. 174–188.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Springer, 2011. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-24412-4\_16. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  978-3-642-24412-4_16.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021,
 Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=0oabwyZbOu.
Matteo Hessel, Joseph Modayil, Hado van Hasselt, Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Will Dabney,
 Dan Horgan, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, and David Silver. Rainbow: Combining
 improvements in deep reinforcement learning. In Sheila A. McIlraith and Kilian Q. Weinberger
 (eds.), Proceedings of the Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (AAAI-18),
 the 30th innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence (IAAI-18), and the 8th AAAI Symposium
 on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence (EAAI-18), New Orleans, Louisiana, USA,
 February 2-7, 2018, pp. 3215–3222. AAAI Press, 2018. URL https://www.aaai.org/
 ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI18/paper/view/17204.
Ronald A Howard. Dynamic programming and markov processes. John Wiley, 1960.
Kazuki Irie, Imanol Schlag, Róbert Csordás, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Going beyond linear trans-
  formers with recurrent fast weight programmers. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:7703–7717, 2021.
Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard, Simon Osindero, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Jeff Donahue, Ali
 Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dunning, Karen Simonyan, Chrisantha Fernando, and
 Koray Kavukcuoglu. Population based training of neural networks. CoRR, abs/1711.09846, 2017.
 URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1711.09846.
Steven Kapturowski, Georg Ostrovski, John Quan, Rémi Munos, and Will Dabney. Recurrent
  experience replay in distributed reinforcement learning. In 7th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net,
  2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1lyTjAqYX.
Steven Kapturowski, Víctor Campos, Ray Jiang, Nemanja Rakićević, Hado van Hasselt, Charles
  Blundell, and Adrià Puigdomènech Badia. Human-level atari 200x faster. CoRR, abs/2209.07550,
  2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.07550.
Jinke Li, Ruonan Rao, and Jun Shi. Learning to trade with deep actor critic methods. In 2018 11th
   International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID), volume 2, pp. 66–71.
   IEEE, 2018.
Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew J. Hausknecht, and
 Michael Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open
 problems for general agents. J. Artif. Intell. Res., 61:523–562, 2018. doi: 10.1613/jair.5699. URL
 https://doi.org/10.1613/jair.5699.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G.
  Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Pe-
  tersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran,
  Daan Wierstra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep re-
  inforcement learning. Nat., 518(7540):529–533, 2015. doi: 10.1038/nature14236. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236.
Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc G. Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-
  policy reinforcement learning. In Daniel D. Lee, Masashi Sugiyama, Ulrike von Luxburg, Isabelle
  Guyon, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona,
  Spain, pp. 1046–1054, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/
  hash/c3992e9a68c5ae12bd18488bc579b30d-Abstract.html.
Jack Parker-Holder, Aldo Pacchiano, Krzysztof Marcin Choromanski, and Stephen J.
  Roberts.   Effective diversity in population based reinforcement learning. In Hugo


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien
  Lin (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: Annual Confer-
  ence on Neural Information Processing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12,
  2020, virtual, 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  d1dc3a8270a6f9394f88847d7f0050cf-Abstract.html.
Sepp Hochreiter; Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation., 1997.
Simon Schmitt, Matteo Hessel, and Karen Simonyan. Off-policy actor-critic with shared experi-
  ence replay. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML
  2020, 13-18 July 2020, Virtual Event, volume 119 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-
  search, pp. 8545–8554. PMLR, 2020. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/
  schmitt20a.html.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael I. Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In Francis R. Bach and David M. Blei (eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015,
  volume 37 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pp. 1889–1897. JMLR.org, 2015.
  URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v37/schulman15.html.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1707.06347.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning - an introduction. Adaptive
  computation and machine learning. MIT Press, 1998. ISBN 978-0-262-19398-6. URL https:
  //www.worldcat.org/oclc/37293240.
Marin Toromanoff, Émilie Wirbel, and Fabien Moutarde. Is deep reinforcement learning really
 superhuman on atari? CoRR, abs/1908.04683, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.
 04683.
Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hessel, Hado van Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando de Freitas.
  Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement learning. In Maria-Florina Balcan and
  Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of the 33nd International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2016, New York City, NY, USA, June 19-24, 2016, volume 48 of JMLR Workshop
  and Conference Proceedings, pp. 1995–2003. JMLR.org, 2016. URL http://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v48/wangf16.html.
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Mach. Learn., 8:229–256, 1992. doi: 10.1007/BF00992696. URL https://doi.
  org/10.1007/BF00992696.


                                                12
