Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C AUSAL B ENCH : A L ARGE - SCALE B ENCHMARK FOR
N ETWORK I NFERENCE FROM S INGLE - CELL P ERTUR -
BATION DATA

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Mapping biological mechanisms in cellular systems is a fundamental step in early-
         stage drug discovery that serves to generate hypotheses on what disease-relevant
         molecular targets may effectively be modulated by pharmacological interventions.
         With the advent of high-throughput methods for measuring single-cell gene ex-
         pression under genetic perturbations, we now have effective means for generating
         evidence for causal gene-gene interactions at scale. However, inferring graphi-
         cal networks of the size typically encountered in real-world gene-gene interaction
         networks is difficult in terms of both achieving and evaluating faithfulness to the
         true underlying causal graph. Moreover, standardised benchmarks for comparing
         methods for causal discovery in perturbational single-cell data do not yet exist.
         Here, we introduce CausalBench - a comprehensive benchmark suite for eval-
         uating network inference methods on large-scale perturbational single-cell gene
         expression data. CausalBench introduces several biologically meaningful perfor-
         mance metrics and operates on two large, curated and openly available benchmark
         data sets for evaluating methods on the inference of gene regulatory networks from
         single-cell data generated under perturbations. With real-world datasets consisting
         of over 200 000 training samples under interventions, CausalBench could poten-
         tially help facilitate advances in causal network inference by providing what is
         - to the best of our knowledge - the largest openly available test bed for causal
         discovery from real-world perturbation data to date.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Studying causality in real-world environments is often challenging because uncovering causal rela-
tionships generally either requires the ability to intervene and observe outcomes under both inter-
ventional and control conditions, or a reliance on strong and untestable assumptions that can not
be verified from observational data alone (Stone (1993); Pearl (2009); Schwab et al. (2020); Peters
et al. (2017)). In biology, a domain characterised by enormous complexity of the systems studied,
establishing causality frequently involves experimentation in controlled in-vitro lab conditions us-
ing appropriate technologies to observe response to intervention, such as for example high-content
microscopy (Bray et al. (2016)) and multivariate omics measurements (Bock et al. (2016)). High-
throughput single-cell methods for observing whole transcriptomics measurements in individual
cells under genetic perturbations (Dixit et al. (2016); Datlinger et al. (2017; 2021)) has recently
emerged as a promising technology that could theoretically support performing causal inference in
cellular systems at the scale of thousands of perturbations per experiment, and therefore holds enor-
mous promise in potentially enabling researchers to uncover the intricate wiring diagrams of cellular
biology (Yu et al. (2004); Chai et al. (2014); Akers & Murali (2021); Hu et al. (2020)).
However, while the combination of single-cell perturbational experiments with machine learning
holds great promise for causal discovery, making effective use of such datasets is to date still a
challenging endeavour due to the general paucity of real-world data under interventions, and the
difficulty of establishing causal ground truth datasets to evaluate and compare graphical network
inference methods (Neal et al. (2020); Shimoni et al. (2018); Parikh et al. (2022)). In order to
progress the causal machine learning field beyond reductionist (semi-)synthetic experiments towards
potential utility in impactful real-world applications, it is imperative that the causal machine learning


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Observational                                    Interventional                            Reconstructed Causal Graph
                        10 000+ samples                         100 000+ samples, 500+ interventions                      10 000+ edges´

                            Gene A                              Gene A                       Gene A                                Gene A


               Gene B                     Gene C   Gene B                    Gene C                        Gene C                        Gene C
                                                     XB
                                                                                                                    Gene B
                                                                  0
                                                                                Gene B
                                                            0                                          0
                                                                                                                                      Gene D



                            Gene D                          Gene D                                Gene D                 Network Inference
                                                                                                                            Algorithms


                    observational samples                                interventional samples


Figure 1: An overview of causal gene-gene network inference in mixed observational and per-
turbational single-cell data. The causal generative process in its unperturbed form is observed in
the observational data (left; 10 000+ samples in CausalBench) while data under genetic interven-
tions (e.g., CRISPR knockouts) are observed in the interventional data (right; 200 000+ samples
in CausalBench. Either observational or interventional plus observational data that were sampled
from the true causal generative process (bottom distributions) can be used by network inference
algorithms (bottom right) to infer a reconstructed causal graph (top right) that should as closely as
possible recapitulate the original underlying functional gene-gene interactions.


research community develop and maintain suitable benchmarks for objectively comparing methods
that aim to advance the causal interpretation of real-world interventional datasets.
To facilitate the advancement of machine learning methods in this challenging domain, we in-
troduce CausalBench - a comprehensive benchmark suite for evaluating network inference meth-
ods on perturbational single-cell RNA sequencing data that is - to the best of our knowledge
- the largest openly available test bed for causal discovery from real-world perturbation data to
date (Figure 1). CausalBench contains meaningful biologically-motivated performance metrics, a
curated set of two large-scale perturbational single-cell RNA sequencing experiments with over
200 000 interventional samples each that are openly available, and integrates numerous baseline
implementations of state-of-the-art methods for network inference from single-cell perturbational
data. Similar to benchmarks in other domains, e.g. ImageNet in computer vision (Deng et al.
(2009)), we hope CausalBench can help accelerate progress on large-scale real-world causal graph
inference, and that the methods developed against CausalBench could eventually lead to new
therapeutics and a deeper understanding of human health through enabling the reconstruction of
the functional gene-gene interactome. The source code for CausalBench is openly available at
https://github.com/ananymous-43213123/causalbench.



Contributions. Our contributions are as follows:

      • We introduce CausalBench - a comprehensive benchmark suite for evaluating network in-
        ference methods on perturbational single-cell RNA sequencing data consisting of two cu-
        rated, openly available benchmark datasets with over 200 000 interventional samples each.
        We introduce a set of meaningful benchmark metrics for evaluating performance including
        a novel statistical metric that leverages single cell perturbational data to measure perfor-
        mance against a larger set of putative gene regulatory relationships than would be possible
        using observational data alone.
      • Using CausalBench, we conduct a comprehensive experimental evaluation of the perfor-
        mance of state-of-the-art network inference algorithms in recovering graphical relation-
        ships for mixed observational and interventional scRNAseq data. We implement relevant
        state-of-the-art methods as baselines for network inference from observational and inter-
        ventional single-cell data.
      • In addition, we evaluate the performance and scaling characteristics of network inference
        methods under varying numbers of available training samples and intervention set sizes to
        establish whether state-of-the-art network inference algorithms are able to effective use of
        different scales of intervention and training sample set sizes.


                                                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2   R ELATED W ORK

Background. Given an observational data distribution, several different causal networks or di-
rected acyclic graphs (DAG) could be shown to have generated the data. The causal networks that
could equally represent the generative process of an observational data distribution are collectively
referred to as the Markov Equivalence Class (MEC) of that DAG (Huang et al. (2018)). Interven-
tional data offers an important tool for limiting the size of the MEC to improve the identifiability
of the true underlying causal DAG. In the case of gene expression data, modern gene editing tools
such as CRISPR offer a powerful mechanism for performing interventional experiments at scale by
altering the expression of specific genes for hundreds of genes at once and observing the resulting
interventional distribution across the entire transcriptome (Dixit et al. (2016); Datlinger et al. (2017;
2021)). The ability to leverage such interventional experiment data at scale could significantly im-
prove our ability to uncover underlying causal functional relationships between genes and thereby
strengthen our quantitative understanding of biology. Establishing causal links between genes can
help implicate genes in biological processes causally involved in disease states and thereby open up
new opportunities for therapeutic development (Mehrjou et al. (2022); Shifrut et al. (2018)).

Network inference in mixed observational and interventional data. Learning network struc-
ture from both observational and interventional data presents significant potential in reducing the
search space over all possible causal graphs. Traditionally this network inference problem has been
solved using discrete methods such as permutation-based approaches (Wang et al. (2017); Hauser &
Bühlmann (2012). Recently, several new models have been proposed that can differentiably learn
causal structure (Schölkopf et al. (2021)). However, most of them focus on observational datasets
alone. Ke et al. (2019) presented the first differentiable causal learning approach using both obser-
vational and interventional data. Lopez et al. (2022) improved the scalability of differentiable causal
network discovery for large, high-dimensional datasets by using factor graphs to restrict the search
space, and Scherrer et al. (2021) introduced an active learning strategy for selecting interventions to
optimize differentiable graph inference.

Gene-regulatory network inference. The problem of gene regulatory network inference has been
studied extensively in the bioinformatics literature in the case of observational datasets. Early work
modeled this problem using a Bayesian network trained on bulk gene expression data (Friedman
et al. (2000)). Subsequent papers approached this as a feature ranking problem where machine
learning methods such as linear regression (Kamimoto et al. (2020)) or random forests (Huynh-
Thu et al. (2010); Aibar et al. (2017)) are used to predict the expression of any one gene using the
expression of all other genes. However, Pratapa et al. (2020) showed that most gene regulatory
network inference methods for observational data perform quite poorly when applied to single-
cell datasets due to the large size and noisiness of the data. In the case of constructing networks
using interventional data, there is relatively much lesser work given the recent development of this
experimental technology. Dixit et al. (2016) were the first to apply network inference methods to
single-cell interventional datasets using linear regression.
In contrast to existing works, we exhaustively test several different network inference approaches
for this task using a combination of both observational and interventional data. We present the first
standardized benchmark for single-cell causal inference that enables a direct comparison of state-
of-the-art machine learning methods using a set of quantitative metrics with both biological and
statistical motivation. Our contribution is also unique in the significantly larger size of the employed
dataset both in terms of number of samples and number of interventions than previous work.


3   M ETHODOLOGY

In the next section, we briefly introduce the formal framework of SCMs in order to serve as a causal
language with which to describe methods, limitations and assumptions in this setting in a formal way,
as well as to motivate the quantitative metrics presented subsequently. The pertubational nature of
the data necessitate a formal statistical language that goes beyond associations and correlations, thus
we present and use the causal view as was introduced by Pearl (2009). We will utilise this language
to refer back to the setting throughout the rest of the paper.


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Structural Causal Models (SCMs). In this work, we rely on the language of SCMs to describe
causal properties (Peters et al. (2017)). Formally, a SCM M consists of a 4-tuple (U, X, F, P (u)),
where U is a set of unobserved (latent) variables and X is the set of observed (measured) variables.
F is a set of function such that for each Xi ∈ X, Xi ← fi (P ai , Ui ), Ui ∈ U and P ai ∈ X \ Xi . The
SCM induces a distribution over the observed variables P (x), where the uncertainty stems from the
distribution on the unobserved variables P (u). The variable-parent relationships can be represented
in a directed graph, where each Xi is a node in the graph, and there is a directed edge between
all P ai to Xi . The task of causal discovery can then be described as learning this graph over the
variables. The language of causality and in particular the formalism of SCM allows to precisely
describe the notion of an intervention in a system. In the most general sense, an intervention on
a variable Xi can be thought as uniformly replacing its structural assignment with a new function
Xi ← f˜(XPfai , Ũi ). For simplicity, we often consider only simple new functional assignment, such
as atomic (constant function) and stochastic (the function only depends on Ũi ). In this work, we
only consider such atomic or stochastic intervention and denote an intervention on Xi as σ(Xi ). We
can then describe the interventional distribution, denoted P σ(Xi ) (x), as the distribution entailed by
the modified SCM, where only the assignment for Xi is changed and the other assignment are kept
similar to the observational distribution. For consistency, we denote the observational distribution
as both P ∅ (x) and P (x).
For the rest of this paper, we will utilise the SCM framework to describe methods, assumptions and
setting.

Problem Setting. We consider the setting where we are given a dataset of vector samples x ∈ Rd ,
where xi represents the measured expression of gene i in a given cell. Modern gene editing tech-
nology (e.g., CRISPR) performs direct interventions on individual genes to bring their expression
towards 0 in case of full on-target efficacy. Given the stochastic nature of cell biology, it is not
guaranteed that this results in a 0 expression, i.e, the interventions are stochastic even though they
are close to atomic at level 0. The goal of a causal model is to learn a causal DAG G, where each
node is a single gene. The causal DAG G induces a distribution over observed sample P (x), such
that:                                            Y
                                        P (x) =       p(xi |P ai )                                  (1)

The datasets we consider for the benchmark can be thought as consisting of data sampled from
P ∅ (x), as well as P σ(Xi ) (x) for various i. We artificially create different training conditions,
namely observational, partially interventional and interventional. The observational setting is re-
stricted to samples x ∼ P ∅ (x). The interventional settings contains the observational settings, as
well as interventional data x ∼ P σ(Xi ) (x) for all variables i. The partial interventional setting is
a middle ground between the above two, where only a fraction of the variables have interventional
data associated to them, i.e, where they are the target of the intervention.

Assumptions and challenges. Single-cell data presents idiosyncratic challenges that may break
the common assumptions of many existing methods. Apart from the high-dimensionality in terms of
number of variables and large sample size, the distribution of the gene expression present a challenge
as it is highly tailed at 0 for some genes (Tracy et al. (2019)). Regarding the underlying true causal
graph, biological feedback loops may break the acyclicity assumption underlying the use of DAGs.
In addition, different cells sampled from the same batch may not be truly independent as the cells
may have interacted and influenced their states. Lastly, cells in scRNAseq experiments are measured
at a fixed point in time and may therefore have been sampled at various points in their developmental
trajectory or cell cycle (Kowalczyk et al. (2015)) - making sampling time a potential confounding
factor in any analysis of scRNAseq data.

Network inference methods. The benchmarked methods are given data, either only observational
or also interventional - depending on the setting - consisting of the expression of each gene in
each cell. For interventional data, the target gene in each cell is also given as input. We do not
enforce that the methods need to learn a graph on all the variables, and further preprocessing and
variables selection is permitted. The only expected output is a list of gene pairs that represent
directed edges. No properties of the output network, such as for example acyclicity, are enforced

                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


either. As such, even though in this first version of the benchmark, we mainly evaluate causal
methods, our benchmark can be used to evaluate any graph outputs without restrictions.

Evaluating inferred networks. Contrary to other benchmarks where the true underlying graph is
either known, or the data is sampled from a simulated graph, given the nature of inferring causal
graphs from real-world experimental data, the true causal graph is unknown in CausalBench as
the data is collected from a complex biological process. The lack of a gold standard ground truth
network brings about unique challenges in establishing a weight of evidence that supports the use of
one method over another: In this setting, there is no certitude regarding the existence of a universal
causal graph, that would hold across time points, conditions as well as cell types. To address this
challenge, we aim at developing a collection of synergistic metrics for which a higher performance
across their set can be assumed to correlate with how close the outputted network is to a true graph.
To this end, we implement two types of evaluation: a biologically-motivated and a quantitative
statistical evaluation of inferred networks.

Biologically-motivated evaluation. The biologically-motivated evaluation in CausalBench is
based on biological databases of known putatively causal gene-gene interactions. Using these
databases of domain knowledge, we can construct putatively true undirected subnetworks to evalu-
ate the output networks in the understanding that the discovered edges that are not present in those
databases are not necessarily false positives, and undirected edges may not necessarily be direct edge
connections in a causal graph, i.e, a functional interaction between two genes may be mediated by
one or more other genes. The underlying assumption behind the biologically-motivated evaluation
approach is that methods that are better will, on average across experimental settings, recall more
known gene-gene interactions than those that are worse.

Quantitative statistical evaluation. In contrast to the biologically-motivated evaluation, the quan-
titative statistical evaluation in CausalBench is fully data-driven, cell-specific and prior free. It’s also
a novel form of network evaluation that is unique to single-cell perturbational data and presents a
new approach for approximating ground truth to augment the information contatined in biological
databases. To conduct the statistical evaluation, we rely on the interventional data at our disposal
in perturbational scRNAseq data to evaluate edges in the output networks. The main assumption
for this evaluation is that if the discovered edge from A to B is a true edge denoting a functional
interaction between the two genes, then perturbing A should have a statistically significant effect on
the distribution P σ(XA ) (xB ) of values that gene B takes in the transcription profile given enough
observed samples, compared to its observational distribution P ∅ (xB ) (i.e, compared to control sam-
ples where no gene was perturbed). The significance of this change in distribution can be tested with
statistical test as well as with distributional distances. One of the challenges in using a statistical ap-
proach is that the interventional data may be limited in size in practice, which means that some signal
may not be significantly detectable with finite data. Lastly, the quantitative statistical approach can-
not differentiate between causal effects from direct edges or from causal paths in the graph. Despite
those limitations, this quantitative evaluation complements the biologically-motivated evaluation, by
extending the covered metric set with metrics that are directly derived from the observed data, mak-
ing this evaluation data-driven, cell-specific and prior free. Moreover, it presents a novel approach
for estimating ground-truth gene regulatory interactions that is uniquely made possible through the
size and interventional nature of single-cell perturbational datasets. Full descriptions of both the
biologically-motivated and quantitative statistical evaluations are presented in Section 4.

4    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION
Datasets. For the experimental evaluation in CausalBench, we rely on the recently published large-
scale scRNAseq dataset by Replogle et al. (2022). Replogle et al. (2022) performed a genome-
scale perturb-seq screen, targeting all expressed genes across millions of human cells with CRISPR
perturbations. They generated three datasets, one genome-scale pertubational dataset consisting
of 2.5 million K562 cells, and two smaller ones, on the K562 (Andersson et al. (1979)) and the
RPE1 cell lines, targeting only DepMap essential genes (Tsherniak et al. (2017)). We utilize the last
two smaller datasets, as they focus on putatively important genes, and they allow to fairly compare
performance on two distinct cell types. To stabilize evaluation and training, we additionally filter
out genes for which there are less than 100 perturbed cells, and we hold out 20% of the data for


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 dataset                            total samples       # observational samples    # gene interventions
 (Replogle et al., 2022) K562             310 385                       10 691                     1 158
 (Replogle et al., 2022) RPE1             247 914                       11 485                       651

Table 1: High-level description of the two large-scale datasets utilised in CausalBench - charac-
terised by their high numbers of samples and of intervened-upon variables. Of those samples, after
stratification by intervention target (including no target), 20% were kept has held-out data.


evaluation, stratified by intervention target. A summary of the resulting two datasets can be found
in Table 1.

Metrics. To implement the biologically-motivated evaluation, we extract network data from two
widely used open biological databases: CORUM (Giurgiu et al., 2019) and STRING (Von Mering
et al., 2005; Snel et al., 2000; Von Mering et al., 2007; Jensen et al., 2009; Mering et al., 2003; Szklar-
czyk et al., 2010; 2015; 2016; 2019; 2021; Franceschini et al., 2012; 2016). CORUM is a repository
of experimentally characterized protein complexes from mammalian organisms. The complexes are
extracted from individual experimental publications, and exclude results from high-throughput ex-
periments. We extract the human protein complexes from the CORUM repository and aggregate
them to form a network of genes. STRING is a repository of known and predicted protein-protein
interactions. STRING contains both physical (direct) interactions and indirect (functional) inter-
actions that we use to create two evaluation networks from STRING: protein-protein interactions
(network) and protein-protein interactions (physical). protein-protein interactions (physical) con-
tains only physical interactions, whereas protein-protein interactions (network) contains all types of
know and predicted interactions. STRING, and in particular string-network, can contain less reliable
links, as the content of the database is pulled from a variety of evidence, such as high-throughput
lab experiments, (conserved) co-expression, and text-mining of the literature.
To implement the quantitative evaluation, we leverage the hold out observational and interventional
data and compute one statistical test and one distribution distance. For each edge A to B, we extract
the observational samples for B, and the interventional samples for B where A was targeted. We
then perform a two-sided Mann-Whitney U rank test (Mann & Whitney, 1947; Bucchianico, 1999)
using the SciPy package (Virtanen et al., 2020) to test the null hyptothesis that the two distributions
are equal. We count an edge as true positive if the null hypothesis of the statistical test is rejected. To
improve statistical power, given that the distribution are heavy tailed towards 0.0 expression, we trim
90% of the 0.0 values of the observational distribution, and the same fraction of the smallest values
of the interventional samples. For the distributional distance, we compute a Wasserstein distance
(Ramdas et al., 2017) between the two empirical distributions. We then return the mean Wasserstein
distance of all the inferred edges. We do not normalize the computed distance, but we expect this
to not have a significant effect as the samples always have more or less the same size (exactly
the same for the observational samples, and similar for interventional, and at least 20 by design),
The advantage compared to a statistical test is that we obtain a continuous metric that correlate
with the strength of causal effect of parent nodes on children nodes and does not need choosing
a hyperparameter such as the p-value threshold. A higher mean Wasserstein distance would then
indicate better performance.

Baselines. We implement a representative set of existing state-of-the-art methods for the task
of causal discovery from single-cell observation and mixed perturbational data. For the observa-
tional setting, we implement PC (named after the inventors, Peter and Clark; a constraint-based
method) (Spirtes et al., 2000), Greedy Equivalence Search (GES; a score-based method) (Chick-
ering, 2002), and NOTEARS variants NOTEARS (Linear), NOTEARS (Linear,L1), NOTEARS
(MLP) and NOTEARS (MLP,L1) (Zheng et al., 2018; 2020). In the interventional setting, we in-
cluded Greedy Interventional Equivalence Search (GIES, a score-based method and extension to
GES) (Hauser & Bühlmann, 2012), and the Differentiable Causal Discovery from Interventional
Data (DCDI) variants DCDI-G and DCDI-DSF (continuous optimization based) (Brouillard et al.,
2020). GES and GIES greedily add and remove edges until a score on the graph is maximized.
NOTEARS and DCDI enforce acyclicity via a continuously differentiable constraint, making them
suitable for deep learning. We provide a broad overview of method classes included below:
PC is one of the most widely used methods in causal inference from observational data that assumes
there are no confounders and calculates conditional independence to give asymptotically correct


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


results. It outputs the equivalence class of graphs that conform with the results of the conditional
independence tests.
Greedy Equivalence Search (GES) implements a two-phase procedure (Forward and Backward
phases that adds and removes edges from the graph) to calculate a score to choose within an equiv-
alence class. While GES leverages only observational data, its extension, Greedy Interventional
Equivalence Search (GIES), enhances GES by adding a turning phase to allow for the inclusion of
interventional data.
NOTEARS formulates the DAG inference problem as a continuous optimization over real-valued
matrices that avoids the combinatorial search over acyclic graphs. This is achieved by constructing
a smooth function with computable derivatives over the adjacent matrices that vanishes only when
the associated graph is acyclic. Various versions of NOTEARS refer to which function approximator
is employed (either a MLP or Linear) or which regularity term is added to the loss function (e.g., L1
for the sparsity constraint.)
Differentiable Causal Discovery from Interventional Data (DCDI) (Brouillard et al., 2020) lever-
ages various types of interventions (perfect, imperfect, unknown), and uses a neural network model
to capture conditional densities. DCDI encodes the DAG using a binary adjacency matrix. The
intervention matrix is also modeled as a binary mask that determines which nodes are the target of
intervention. A likelihood-based differentiable objective function is formed by using this param-
eterization, and subsequently maximized by gradient-based methods to infer the underlying DAG.
DCDI-G assumes Gaussian conditional distributions while DCDI-DSF lifts this assumption by using
normalizing flows to capture flexible distributions.
GRNBoost (Aibar et al., 2017) is a GRN specific Gradient Boosting tree method, where for every
gene, candidate parent gene are ranked based on their predictive power toward the expression profile
of the downstream gene. As such, it acts as a feature selection method toward learning the graph.
GRNBoost was identified as one of the best performing GRN method in previous observational data
based benchmarks (Pratapa et al., 2020).
Random (k) is the simplest baseline which outputs a graph from which k nodes are selected at
uniformly random without replacement. In the experiments, we tested k = 100, 1000, and 10000.
Unfortunately, all of the above-mentioned methods, with the exception of NOTEARS and GRN-
Boost, do not computationally scale to graphs of the size typically encountered in transcriptome-
wide gene regulatory network inference. To nonetheless enable a meaningful comparison, we pro-
pose to partition the variables into smaller subsets and run the above-mentioned methods on each
subset independently with the final output network being the union of the subnetworks. Acyclicity
is guaranteed if each subnetwork is acyclic. The proposed approach breaks the no-latent-confounder
assumption that some methods may make, and it also does not fully leverage the available informa-
tion potentially in the data. Methods that do scale to the full graph in a single optimization loop are
therefore expected to perform better.
For all the above state-of-the-art methods, we use publicly available implementations and we imple-
ment interfaces between our benchmark suite and the open-source packages. We use causal-learn
(Zhang et al., 2022) for PC and GES, the official implementation of the authors for DCDI (Brouillard
et al., 2022), a public python implementation for GIES (Gamella, 2022), and the official implemen-
tation of the authors for NOTEARS (Zheng et al., 2018; 2020).


5    R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS

Network inference. We here summarize the experimental results of our baselines in both observa-
tional and interventional settings, on the quantitative evaluation (statistical test) and the biologically-
motivated evaluations (corum, string-network and string-physical). All results are obtained by train-
ing on the full dataset three times with different random seeds. We highlight the trade-off between
true positives count and true positive rate precision. Indeed, we expect methods to optimize for these
two goals, as we want to obtain a high true positive rate precision while maximizing the number of
discovered interactions. In the observational setting, we observed this trade-off, as some methods
can achieve very high true positive rates precision, but with very small output graphs (Figure 2).
Also, methods that regularize for sparsity, such as NOTEARS (Linear,L1) and (MLP,L1), have


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                             RPE1 (observational)                                                                                   K562 (observational)
                         100                                                                                                    100
                                Statistical Edge Test          Protein Complexes                                                       Statistical Edge Test         Protein Complexes

True Positive Rate [%]


                                                                                                       True Positive Rate [%]
                         75                                                  GES                                                75                                                 GES
                                                                             NOTEARS (Linear)                                                                                      NOTEARS (Linear)
                                                                             NOTEARS (Linear,L1)                                                                                   NOTEARS (Linear,L1)
                         50                                                  NOTEARS (MLP)
                                                                             NOTEARS (MLP,L1)
                                                                                                                                50                                                 NOTEARS (MLP)
                                                                                                                                                                                   NOTEARS (MLP,L1)
                                                                             PC                                                                                                    PC
                         25                                                  Random (k=100)
                                                                                                                                25                                                 Random (k=100)



                           0                                                                                                      0
                         100                                                                                                    100
                                   Protein-protein            Protein-protein                                                             Protein-protein              Protein-protein
True Positive Rate [%]


                                                                                                       True Positive Rate [%]
                         75    interactions (network)      interactions (physical)                                              75    interactions (network)        interactions (physical)
                         50                                                                                                     50
                         25                                                                                                     25
                          0                                                                                                      0
                               101 102 103 104             101 102 103 104                                                             101          103       105    101          103       105
                                 True Positives [count]      True Positives [count]                                                    True Positives [count]        True Positives [count]
                                            RPE1 (interventional)                                                                                  K562 (interventional)
                         100                                                                                                    100
                                Statistical Edge Test         Protein Complexes                                                        Statistical Edge Test         Protein Complexes
True Positive Rate [%]


                                                                                                       True Positive Rate [%]
                         75                                                   DCDI-DSF
                                                                                                                                75                                                    DCDI-DSF
                                                                              DCDI-G                                                                                                  DCDI-G
                         50                                                   GIES
                                                                              Random (k=100)                                    50                                                    GIES
                                                                                                                                                                                      Random (k=100)
                                                                              Random (k=1000)                                                                                         Random (k=1000)
                                                                              Random (k=10000)                                                                                        Random (k=10000)
                         25                                                                                                     25
                           0                                                                                                      0
                         100                                                                                                    100
                                   Protein-protein            Protein-protein                                                             Protein-protein              Protein-protein
True Positive Rate [%]


                         75    interactions (network)      interactions (physical)                     True Positive Rate [%]   75    interactions (network)        interactions (physical)
                         50                                                                                                     50
                         25                                                                                                     25
                          0                                                                                                      0
                                101       102       103      101       102       103                                                  101      102        103       101      102        103
                                 True Positives [count]       True Positives [count]                                                   True Positives [count]        True Positives [count]

Figure 2: Performance comparison in terms of True Positive Rate (TPR, in %; y-axis) Precision and
True Positives (TP, in counts; x-axis) in correctly identifying edges substantiated by four different
biological interaction databases, Statistical Edge Test (ours; top left), protein complexes (CORUM,
Giurgiu et al. (2019); top right), protein-protein interactions from networked sources (STRING Szk-
larczyk et al. (2021); bottom left), and protein-protein interactions from physical assays (STRING
Szklarczyk et al. (2021); bottom right), between 7 different methods (see legend in top row) using
observational (top row) and 6 different methods (see legend in bottom row) using interventional data
data (bottom row) in RPE1 (left column) and K562 (right column) cell lines. For each method, we
report the results for three independently calculated runs with new random seeds to assess uncer-
tainty. Dashed lines in the same color as the markers indicate the median performance observed
across all randomly seeded runs.



higher true positive rates precision in general, which suggests the importance of sparsity when deal-
ing with noisy data. Regarding the quantitative statistical test, satisfactory results are only obtained
on the RPE1 dataset high precision (around 75%) is only achieved on the RPE1 dataset as compared
to around 50% on the K562 dataset. This could be explained in part by the interventions having
greater effects in this cell line, as reported also by Replogle et al. (2022). In the interventional set-
ting, results are similar to the observational setting, but with most methods outputting larger graphs
with smaller true positive rates precision. Surprisingly, the difference to the observational setting
is not large, especially in the statistical test where access to some of the interventional data should
theoretically help. This highlights an opportunity for further method development for causal graph
inference in order to be able to fully leverage more interventional data in the future. To offer a more
principled way to compare the models across all these metrics, we propose a simple and unbiased
way to compute a ranked scoreboard in Appendix C


Computational performance. All methods were given the same computational resources, which
consists of 30 CPU’s with 64GB of memory per each. We additionally assign a GPU for the DCDI
methods. The hyperparameters of each method, such as partition sizes, are chosen such that the
running time remains below 30 hours. Partition sizes for each model can be found in Appendix B.


                                                                                                   8
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

                                                                                            0.30
                         0.8         K562 (observational - varying dataset size)                         RPE1 (observational - varying dataset size)
                                                                                            0.25


   Mean Wasserstein
   Distance [unitless]
                                                                                                                                                       GES
                         0.6                                                                                                                           NOTEARS (Linear)
                                                                                            0.20                                                       NOTEARS (Linear,L1)
                                                                                                                                                       NOTEARS (MLP)
                         0.4                                                                                                                           NOTEARS (MLP,L1)
                                                                                            0.15                                                       PC
                                                                                                                                                       Random (k=100)

                         0.2                                                                0.10
                      0.16                                                                  0.20
                                     K562 (interventional - varying dataset size)                        RPE1 (interventional - varying dataset size)
                                                                                            0.17
Mean Wasserstein
Distance [unitless]


                      0.14
                                                                                            0.15
                      0.12
                                                                                            0.12                                                        DCDI-DSF
                                                                                                                                                        DCDI-G
                      0.10                                                                  0.10
                                                                                                                                                        GIES
                                                                                                                                                        Random (k=100)
                                                                                                                                                        Random (k=1000)
                                                                                                                                                        Random (k=10000)

                               0        20          40           60          80       100          0        20          40           60          80                    100
                                                 Fraction of Dataset [%]                                             Fraction of Dataset [%]
                      0.16                                                                  0.20
                                   K562 (interventional - varying intervention set)                    RPE1 (interventional - varying intervention set)
Mean Wasserstein
Distance [unitless]


                      0.14                                                                  0.17
                                                                                            0.15
                      0.12
                                                                                            0.12
                                                                                                                                                        DCDI-DSF
                                                                                                                                                        DCDI-G
                                                                                                                                                        GIES
                      0.10                                                                  0.10                                                        Random (k=100)
                                                                                                                                                        Random (k=1000)
                                                                                                                                                        Random (k=10000)

                               0        20          40            60          80      100          0        20          40            60          80                   100
                                             Fraction of Intervention Set [%]                                    Fraction of Intervention Set [%]

   Figure 3: Performance comparison in terms of Mean Wasserstein Distance (unitless; y-axis) of
   7 methods for causal graph inference on observational data (top row; (see legend top right) and
   6 methods on interventional scRNAseq data (centre row; see legend centre right) when varying the
   fraction of the full dataset size available for inference (in %; x-axis), and 6 methods on interventional
   data (bottom row; see legend bottom right) when varying the fraction of the full intervention set used
   (in %, x-axis). Markers indicate the values observed when running the respective algorithms with
   one of three random seeds, and colored lines indicate the median value observed across all tested
   random seeds for a method.
   Performance as a function of sample size. We additionally studied the effect of sample size on
   the performance of the evaluated state-of-the-art models. We randomly subset the data at different
   fractions and report the mean Wasserstein distance as explained in the quantitative evaluations part
   of Section 3 and shown in Figure 3. In the observational setting, the sample size does not seem
   to have a significant effect on performance for most methods, indeed having a slightly negative
   effect for some methods. This suggest that the ability to effectively leverage a large sample size
   of perturbational data is also an open challenge that needs to be addressed for high performance.
   In the interventional setting, a positive impact for larger sample size is observable, especially for
   the methods that rely on deep networks and gradient-based learning such as DCDI, whereas GIES
   seems to suffer in a large sample setting.

   Performance by the fraction of perturbations. Beyond the size of the training set, we also stud-
   ied the partial interventional setting - where only a subset of the possible genes to perturb are ex-
   perimentally targeted. We adapt the fraction of randomly targeted genes from 5% (low ratio of
   interventions) to 100% (fully interventional). We randomly subset the genes at different fractions,
   using three different random seeds for each method, and report the mean Wasserstein distance as a
   measure of quantitative evaluation. We would expect a larger fraction of intervened genes to lead to
   higher performance, as this should facilitate the identification of the true causal graph. We indeed
   observe a better performance for DCDI as we increase the fraction of intervened genes. For GIES,
   we again observe a negative effect of having more data, probably mainly due to the fact that higher
   fraction of intervened genes implies a larger number of training samples in total.

   Limitations. Openly available benchmarks for causal models for large-scale single cell data could
   potentially accelerate the development of new and effective approaches for uncovering gene reg-
   ulatory relationships. However, some limitations to this approach remain: firstly, the biological
   networks used for evaluation do not fully capture ground truth gene regulatory networks, and the
   reported connection are often biased towards more well studied systems and pathways (Gillis et al.
   (2014)). True ground truth validation would require prospective and exhaustive interventional wet-
   lab experiments. However, at present, experiments at the scale necessary to exhaustively map gene-
   gene interactions across the genome are cost prohibitive for all possible edges even for the largest
   research institutes in the world and even when not considering cell heterogeneity and the confound-


                                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ing factor of time. We expect more publicly available experimental validation data to aggregate
over time, and are looking to incorporate these data into the benchmark in the future. Beyond
limitations in data sources used, there are limitations with some of the assumptions in the utilised
state-of-the-art models: For instance, feedback loops between genes are a well-known phenomenon
in gene regulation (Carthew (2006); Levine & Davidson (2005)) that unfortunately presently cannot
be represented by existing causal network inference methods.


6   C ONCLUSION

We introduced CausalBench - a comprehensive open benchmark for evaluating algorithms for dis-
covering gene regulatory networks using a large-scale CRISPR-based interventional scRNAseq
dataset. CausalBench introduces a set of biologically meaningful performance metrics to compare
the graphs proposed by causal inference methods quantitatively using statistical tests, and accord-
ing to existing biological knowledge bases on protein-protein interactions and protein complexes.
In addition, CausalBench contains implementations of a range of state-of-the-art causal discovery
algorithms from those that rely on independence tests (e.g., the PC algorithm), score-based methods
(e.g., GIES) and the more recently introduced continuous optimization-based methods (e.g., differ-
ent versions of NOTEARS). CausalBench was designed to lower the barrier of entry for developing a
causal discovery algorithm for scRNAseq data by fixing non-model-related components of the eval-
uation pipeline and allow users to focus on the advancement of causal network discovery methods.
With benchmark sample sizes of more than 200 000 interventional samples, CausalBench is built on
one of the largest open real-world interventional datasets (Replogle et al. (2022)) - ushering in an
era in which the community of causal machine learning researchers has ready access to real-world
large-scale interventional datasets for developing and evaluating causal discovery methods.


R EFERENCES
Sara Aibar, Carmen Bravo González-Blas, Thomas Moerman, Vân Anh Huynh-Thu, Hana Imri-
  chova, Gert Hulselmans, Florian Rambow, Jean-Christophe Marine, Pierre Geurts, Jan Aerts,
  et al. Scenic: single-cell regulatory network inference and clustering. Nature methods, 14(11):
  1083–1086, 2017.

Kyle Akers and TM Murali. Gene regulatory network inference in single-cell biology. Current
  Opinion in Systems Biology, 26:87–97, 2021.

Leif C Andersson, Kenneth Nilsson, and Carl G Gahmberg. K562—a human erythroleukemic cell
  line. International journal of cancer, 23(2):143–147, 1979.

Christoph Bock, Matthias Farlik, and Nathan C Sheffield. Multi-omics of single cells: strategies and
  applications. Trends in biotechnology, 34(8):605–608, 2016.

Mark-Anthony Bray, Shantanu Singh, Han Han, Chadwick T Davis, Blake Borgeson, Cathy Hart-
 land, Maria Kost-Alimova, Sigrun M Gustafsdottir, Christopher C Gibson, and Anne E Carpenter.
 Cell painting, a high-content image-based assay for morphological profiling using multiplexed
 fluorescent dyes. Nature protocols, 11(9):1757–1774, 2016.

Philippe Brouillard, Sébastien Lachapelle, Alexandre Lacoste, Simon Lacoste-Julien, and Alexandre
  Drouin. Differentiable causal discovery from interventional data. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 33:21865–21877, 2020.

Philippe Brouillard, Alexandre Drouin, and Sébastien Lachapelle. Dcdi python package, 2022. URL
  hhttps://github.com/slachapelle/dcdi.

A Di Bucchianico. Combinatorics, computer algebra, and the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test”. Jour-
  nal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 79:349–364, 1999.

Richard W Carthew. Gene regulation by micrornas. Current opinion in genetics & development, 16
  (2):203–208, 2006.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lian En Chai, Swee Kuan Loh, Swee Thing Low, Mohd Saberi Mohamad, Safaai Deris, and
  Zalmiyah Zakaria. A review on the computational approaches for gene regulatory network con-
  struction. Computers in biology and medicine, 48:55–65, 2014.
David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of machine
  learning research, 3(Nov):507–554, 2002.
Paul Datlinger, André F Rendeiro, Christian Schmidl, Thomas Krausgruber, Peter Traxler, Johanna
  Klughammer, Linda C Schuster, Amelie Kuchler, Donat Alpar, and Christoph Bock. Pooled crispr
  screening with single-cell transcriptome readout. Nature methods, 14(3):297–301, 2017.
Paul Datlinger, André F Rendeiro, Thorina Boenke, Martin Senekowitsch, Thomas Krausgruber,
  Daniele Barreca, and Christoph Bock. Ultra-high-throughput single-cell rna sequencing and per-
  turbation screening with combinatorial fluidic indexing. Nature methods, 18(6):635–642, 2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hi-
   erarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Atray Dixit, Oren Parnas, Biyu Li, Jenny Chen, Charles P Fulco, Livnat Jerby-Arnon, Nemanja D
  Marjanovic, Danielle Dionne, Tyler Burks, Raktima Raychowdhury, et al. Perturb-seq: dissecting
  molecular circuits with scalable single-cell rna profiling of pooled genetic screens. cell, 167(7):
  1853–1866, 2016.
Andrea Franceschini, Damian Szklarczyk, Sune Frankild, Michael Kuhn, Milan Simonovic, Alexan-
  der Roth, Jianyi Lin, Pablo Minguez, Peer Bork, Christian Von Mering, et al. String v9. 1: protein-
  protein interaction networks, with increased coverage and integration. Nucleic acids research, 41
  (D1):D808–D815, 2012.
Andrea Franceschini, Jianyi Lin, Christian von Mering, and Lars Juhl Jensen. Svd-phy: improved
  prediction of protein functional associations through singular value decomposition of phyloge-
  netic profiles. Bioinformatics, 32(7):1085–1087, 2016.
Nir Friedman, Michal Linial, Iftach Nachman, and Dana Pe’er. Using bayesian networks to analyze
  expression data. Journal of computational biology, 7(3-4):601–620, 2000.
Juan L. Gamella. gies python package, 2022. URL https://github.com/juangamella/
  gies.
Jesse Gillis, Sara Ballouz, and Paul Pavlidis. Bias tradeoffs in the creation and analysis of protein–
  protein interaction networks. Journal of proteomics, 100:44–54, 2014.
Madalina Giurgiu, Julian Reinhard, Barbara Brauner, Irmtraud Dunger-Kaltenbach, Gisela Fobo,
 Goar Frishman, Corinna Montrone, and Andreas Ruepp. Corum: the comprehensive resource of
 mammalian protein complexes—2019. Nucleic acids research, 47(D1):D559–D563, 2019.
Alain Hauser and Peter Bühlmann. Characterization and greedy learning of interventional markov
  equivalence classes of directed acyclic graphs. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13
  (1):2409–2464, 2012.
Xinlin Hu, Yaohua Hu, Fanjie Wu, Ricky Wai Tak Leung, and Jing Qin. Integration of single-cell
  multi-omics for gene regulatory network inference. Computational and Structural Biotechnology
  Journal, 18:1925–1938, 2020.
Biwei Huang, Kun Zhang, Yizhu Lin, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Clark Glymour. Generalized score
  functions for causal discovery. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference
  on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp. 1551–1560, 2018.
Vân Anh Huynh-Thu, Alexandre Irrthum, Louis Wehenkel, and Pierre Geurts. Inferring regulatory
  networks from expression data using tree-based methods. PloS one, 5(9):e12776, 2010.
Lars J Jensen, Michael Kuhn, Manuel Stark, Samuel Chaffron, Chris Creevey, Jean Muller, Tobias
  Doerks, Philippe Julien, Alexander Roth, Milan Simonovic, et al. String 8—a global view on
  proteins and their functional interactions in 630 organisms. Nucleic acids research, 37(suppl 1):
  D412–D416, 2009.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kenji Kamimoto, Christy M Hoffmann, and Samantha A Morris. Celloracle: Dissecting cell identity
  via network inference and in silico gene perturbation. BioRxiv, 2020.
Nan Rosemary Ke, Olexa Bilaniuk, Anirudh Goyal, Stefan Bauer, Hugo Larochelle, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, Michael C Mozer, Chris Pal, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning neural causal models
  from unknown interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01075, 2019.
Monika S Kowalczyk, Itay Tirosh, Dirk Heckl, Tata Nageswara Rao, Atray Dixit, Brian J Haas,
 Rebekka K Schneider, Amy J Wagers, Benjamin L Ebert, and Aviv Regev. Single-cell rna-seq
 reveals changes in cell cycle and differentiation programs upon aging of hematopoietic stem cells.
 Genome research, 25(12):1860–1872, 2015.
Michael Levine and Eric H Davidson. Gene regulatory networks for development. Proceedings of
 the National Academy of Sciences, 102(14):4936–4942, 2005.
Romain Lopez, Jan-Christian Hütter, Jonathan K Pritchard, and Aviv Regev. Large-scale differen-
  tiable causal discovery of factor graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07824, 2022.
Henry B Mann and Donald R Whitney. On a test of whether one of two random variables is stochas-
  tically larger than the other. The annals of mathematical statistics, pp. 50–60, 1947.
Arash Mehrjou, Ashkan Soleymani, Andrew Jesson, Pascal Notin, Yarin Gal, Stefan Bauer, and
  Patrick Schwab. GeneDisco: A Benchmark for Experimental Design in Drug Discovery. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Christian von Mering, Martijn Huynen, Daniel Jaeggi, Steffen Schmidt, Peer Bork, and Berend Snel.
  String: a database of predicted functional associations between proteins. Nucleic acids research,
  31(1):258–261, 2003.
Brady Neal, Chin-Wei Huang, and Sunand Raghupathi. Realcause: Realistic causal inference bench-
  marking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.15007, 2020.
Harsh Parikh, Carlos Varjao, Louise Xu, and Eric Tchetgen. Validating causal inference methods.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 17346–17358. PMLR, 2022.
Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference: foundations
  and learning algorithms. The MIT Press, 2017.
Aditya Pratapa, Amogh P Jalihal, Jeffrey N Law, Aditya Bharadwaj, and TM Murali. Benchmarking
  algorithms for gene regulatory network inference from single-cell transcriptomic data. Nature
  methods, 17(2):147–154, 2020.
Aaditya Ramdas, Nicolás Garcı́a Trillos, and Marco Cuturi. On wasserstein two-sample testing and
  related families of nonparametric tests. Entropy, 19(2):47, 2017.
Joseph M Replogle, Reuben A Saunders, Angela N Pogson, Jeffrey A Hussmann, Alexander Lenail,
  Alina Guna, Lauren Mascibroda, Eric J Wagner, Karen Adelman, Gila Lithwick-Yanai, et al.
  Mapping information-rich genotype-phenotype landscapes with genome-scale perturb-seq. Cell,
  2022.
Nino Scherrer, Olexa Bilaniuk, Yashas Annadani, Anirudh Goyal, Patrick Schwab, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, Michael C Mozer, Yoshua Bengio, Stefan Bauer, and Nan Rosemary Ke. Learning
  neural causal models with active interventions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.02429, 2021.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Nan Rosemary Ke, Nal Kalchbrenner,
  Anirudh Goyal, and Yoshua Bengio. Toward causal representation learning. Proceedings of
  the IEEE, 109(5):612–634, 2021.
Patrick Schwab, Lorenz Linhardt, Stefan Bauer, Joachim M Buhmann, and Walter Karlen. Learn-
  ing Counterfactual Representations for Estimating Individual Dose-Response Curves. In AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Eric Shifrut, Julia Carnevale, Victoria Tobin, Theodore L Roth, Jonathan M Woo, Christina T Bui,
  P Jonathan Li, Morgan E Diolaiti, Alan Ashworth, and Alexander Marson. Genome-wide crispr
  screens in primary human t cells reveal key regulators of immune function. Cell, 175(7):1958–
  1971, 2018.
Yishai Shimoni, Chen Yanover, Ehud Karavani, and Yaara Goldschmnidt. Benchmarking framework
  for performance-evaluation of causal inference analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05046, 2018.
Berend Snel, Gerrit Lehmann, Peer Bork, and Martijn A Huynen. String: a web-server to retrieve
  and display the repeatedly occurring neighbourhood of a gene. Nucleic acids research, 28(18):
  3442–3444, 2000.
Peter Spirtes, Clark N Glymour, Richard Scheines, and David Heckerman. Causation, prediction,
  and search. MIT press, 2000.
Richard Stone. The assumptions on which causal inferences rest. Journal of the Royal Statistical
  Society: Series B (Methodological), 55(2):455–466, 1993.
Damian Szklarczyk, Andrea Franceschini, Michael Kuhn, Milan Simonovic, Alexander Roth, Pablo
  Minguez, Tobias Doerks, Manuel Stark, Jean Muller, Peer Bork, et al. The string database in
  2011: functional interaction networks of proteins, globally integrated and scored. Nucleic acids
  research, 39(suppl 1):D561–D568, 2010.
Damian Szklarczyk, Andrea Franceschini, Stefan Wyder, Kristoffer Forslund, Davide Heller, Jaime
  Huerta-Cepas, Milan Simonovic, Alexander Roth, Alberto Santos, Kalliopi P Tsafou, et al. String
  v10: protein–protein interaction networks, integrated over the tree of life. Nucleic acids research,
  43(D1):D447–D452, 2015.
Damian Szklarczyk, John H Morris, Helen Cook, Michael Kuhn, Stefan Wyder, Milan Simonovic,
  Alberto Santos, Nadezhda T Doncheva, Alexander Roth, Peer Bork, et al. The string database in
  2017: quality-controlled protein–protein association networks, made broadly accessible. Nucleic
  acids research, pp. gkw937, 2016.
Damian Szklarczyk, Annika L Gable, David Lyon, Alexander Junge, Stefan Wyder, Jaime Huerta-
  Cepas, Milan Simonovic, Nadezhda T Doncheva, John H Morris, Peer Bork, et al. String v11:
  protein–protein association networks with increased coverage, supporting functional discovery in
  genome-wide experimental datasets. Nucleic acids research, 47(D1):D607–D613, 2019.
Damian Szklarczyk, Annika L Gable, Katerina C Nastou, David Lyon, Rebecca Kirsch, Sampo
  Pyysalo, Nadezhda T Doncheva, Marc Legeay, Tao Fang, Peer Bork, et al. The string database in
  2021: customizable protein–protein networks, and functional characterization of user-uploaded
  gene/measurement sets. Nucleic acids research, 49(D1):D605–D612, 2021.
Sam Tracy, Guo-Cheng Yuan, and Ruben Dries. Rescue: imputing dropout events in single-cell
  rna-sequencing data. BMC bioinformatics, 20(1):1–11, 2019.
Aviad Tsherniak, Francisca Vazquez, Phil G Montgomery, Barbara A Weir, Gregory Kryukov,
  Glenn S Cowley, Stanley Gill, William F Harrington, Sasha Pantel, John M Krill-Burger, et al.
  Defining a cancer dependency map. Cell, 170(3):564–576, 2017.
Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E. Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Courna-
  peau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, Stéfan J. van der
  Walt, Matthew Brett, Joshua Wilson, K. Jarrod Millman, Nikolay Mayorov, Andrew R. J. Nel-
  son, Eric Jones, Robert Kern, Eric Larson, C J Carey, İlhan Polat, Yu Feng, Eric W. Moore,
  Jake VanderPlas, Denis Laxalde, Josef Perktold, Robert Cimrman, Ian Henriksen, E. A. Quintero,
  Charles R. Harris, Anne M. Archibald, Antônio H. Ribeiro, Fabian Pedregosa, Paul van Mul-
  bregt, and SciPy 1.0 Contributors. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing
  in Python. Nature Methods, 17:261–272, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
Christian Von Mering, Lars J Jensen, Berend Snel, Sean D Hooper, Markus Krupp, Mathilde
  Foglierini, Nelly Jouffre, Martijn A Huynen, and Peer Bork. String: known and predicted protein–
  protein associations, integrated and transferred across organisms. Nucleic acids research, 33
  (suppl 1):D433–D437, 2005.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christian Von Mering, Lars J Jensen, Michael Kuhn, Samuel Chaffron, Tobias Doerks, Beate Krüger,
  Berend Snel, and Peer Bork. String 7—recent developments in the integration and prediction of
  protein interactions. Nucleic acids research, 35(suppl 1):D358–D362, 2007.
Yuhao Wang, Liam Solus, Karren Yang, and Caroline Uhler. Permutation-based causal inference
  algorithms with interventions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Jing Yu, V Anne Smith, Paul P Wang, Alexander J Hartemink, and Erich D Jarvis. Advances to
   bayesian network inference for generating causal networks from observational biological data.
   Bioinformatics, 20(18):3594–3603, 2004.
K. Zhang, J. Ramsey, M. Gong, R. Cai, S. Shimizu, P. Spirtes, and C.Glymour. causal-learn python
  package, 2022. URL https://github.com/cmu-phil/causal-learn.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric P. Xing. DAGs with NO TEARS: Con-
  tinuous Optimization for Structure Learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
  tems, 2018.
Xun Zheng, Chen Dan, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric P. Xing. Learning sparse
  nonparametric DAGs. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.


A     B ENCHMARK PACKAGE
A.1    I NSTALL REQUIREMENTS

The necessary python package requirements to run the benchmark can be found in the
requirements.txt file. They can be installed by running the following command:

      pip install -r requirements.txt

A.2    RUNNING THE BENCHMARK

Here is an example of a command to run a model on the k562 dataset in the observational regime:

      python3 causalscbench/apps/main_app.py \
      --dataset_name weissmann_k562 \
      --output_directory /path/to/output/ \
      --data_directory /path/to/data/storage \
      --training_regime observational \
      --model_name model \
      --subset_data 1.0 \
      --model_seed 0

Results are written to the folder at /path/to/output/, and processed datasets will be cached
at /path/to/data/storage. See the MainApp class for more hyperparameter options, espe-
cially in the (partial) interventional setting.

A.3    A DDING A MODEL

New models can be easily added to the benchmark suite. The only contract for a model is to im-
plement the [AbstractInferenceModel] class. Here is a simple example where the model
returns a fully connected gene-gene graph:
from c a u s a l s c b e n c h . m o d e l s . a b s t r a c t m o d e l import A b s t r a c t I n f e r e n c e M o d e l

class FullyConnected ( AbstractInferenceModel ) :
    def   init      ( s e l f ) −> None :
        super ( ) .     init     ()

       def       call       (


                                                        14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Model name                  partition size
                              PC                               30
                              GES                              30
                              GIES                             30
                              NOTEARS (Linear)                 -1
                              NOTEARS (Linear, L1)             -1
                              NOTEARS (MLP)                    -1
                              NOTEARS (MLP, L1)                -1
                              DCDI-DSF                         50
                              DCDI-G                           50

    Table 2: Partition sizes used for each model. −1 means that the graph was not partitioned.


          self ,
          e x p r e s s i o n m a t r i x : np . a r r a y ,
          interventions : List [ str ] ,
          gene names : L i s t [ s t r ] ,
          t r a i n i n g r e g i m e : TrainingRegime ,
          seed : int = 0 ,
      ) −> L i s t [ T u p l e ] :
          random . s e e d ( s e e d )
          edges = s e t ( )
          f o r i i n range ( l e n ( g e n e n a m e s ) ) :
                   a = gene names [ i ]
                   f o r j i n range ( i + 1 , l e n ( g e n e n a m e s ) ) :
                          b = gene names [ j ]
                          e d g e s . add ( ( a , b ) )
                          e d g e s . add ( ( b , a ) )
          return l i s t ( edges )

The new model then only needs to be included in the MainApp model registry.

B    PARTITION SIZES
We here recapitulate the partition sizes used to be able to run each methods in Table 2.

C    M ODEL RANKING
We here present a simple unbiased way of ranking the different models based on all the implemented
evaluation metrics. We separate the rankings per cell type. First, we create a preliminary ranking
for each evaluation metrics. For metrics based on precision-recall, we compute a score by taking
the mean of precision and recall (for Statistical, Protein Complexes, PPI network, PPI physical and
CHIP-seq network evaluations). The weighting may be modulated, for example depending on the
downstream application. Finally, for each model, we take their average rank across the evaluation
specific rankings. This ranking thus gives the same weight to each evaluation method. Results are
summarized in Table 3 for the K562 cell line and in Table 4 for the RPE1 cell line. As can be
observed, methods able to scale to the full graph (GRNBoost and NOTEARS) perform the best.

D    RUN TIME
We here present the average run time for each method in Table 5 for the K562 cell line and in Table 6
for the RPE1 cell line


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Model                     Average rank
                           Random (k = 100)              10.83
                           Random (k = 1000)             10.5
                           Random (k = 10000)            8.66
                           PC                             6.66
                           DCDI-DSF                        6.5
                           NOTEARS (MLP, L1)               6.0
                           DCDI-G                          5.5
                           GES                            5.16
                           GIES                           4.83
                           NOTEARS (Linear)               4.16
                           NOTEARS (Linear, L1)          3.66
                           NOTEARS (MLP)                  3.33
                           GRNBoost                      2.16

Table 3: Ranking of the methods on the K562 cell line. Methods able to scale to the full graph
(GRNBoost and NOTEARS) perform the best.


                           Model                     Average rank
                           Random (k = 100)              10.5
                           Random (k = 1000)             9.99
                           Random (k = 10000)            8.66
                           GIES                          8.33
                           PC                            7.66
                           GES                           6.33
                           NOTEARS (MLP, L1)             5.16
                           NOTEARS (Linear)               5.0
                           DCDI-DSF                      4.16
                           NOTEARS (Linear, L1)          3.83
                           DCDI-G                        3.66
                           NOTEARS (MLP)                 2.83
                           GRNBoost                      1.83

Table 4: Ranking of the methods on the RPE1 cell line. Methods able to scale to the full graph
(GRNBoost and NOTEARS), as well as the DCDI methods, perform the best.


                          Model                    Run time (hours)
                          DCDI-DSF                       60.15
                          DCDI-G                         30.49
                          NOTEARS (MLP)                  27.78
                          NOTEARS (Linear)               14.89
                          PC                              9.58
                          GES                             5.79
                          GIES                            3.97
                          NOTEARS (Linear, L1)            2.15
                          NOTEARS (MLP, L1)               0.82
                          GRNBoost                         0.3
                          Random (k = 10000)              0.0
                          Random (k = 1000)                0.0
                          Random (k = 100)                 0.0

Table 5: Run time in hours for each method on the K562 cell line. GRNBoost was run on the
observational data only.



                                             16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Model                    Run time (hours)
                         DCDI-DSF                      37.52
                         DCDI-G                        19.68
                         PC                            13.18
                         NOTEARS (MLP)                  10.9
                         NOTEARS (Linear)                3.7
                         GES                            3.22
                         NOTEARS (Linear, L1)          0.96
                         NOTEARS (MLP, L1)              0.62
                         GIES                           0.58
                         GRNBoost                       0.09
                         Random (k = 10000)             0.0
                         Random (k = 1000)               0.0
                         Random (k = 100)                0.0

Table 6: Run time in hours for each method on the RPE1 cell line. GRNBoost was run on the
observational data only.


                                             17
