Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


SAAL: S HARPNESS -AWARE ACTIVE L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         While modern deep neural networks play significant roles in many research areas,
         they are also prone to overfitting problems under limited data instances. Partic-
         ularly, this overfitting, or generalization issue, could be a problem in the frame-
         work of active learning because it selects a few data instances for learning over
         time. To consider the generalization, this paper introduces the first active learning
         method to incorporate the sharpness of loss space in the design of the acquisition
         function, inspired by sharpness-aware minimization (SAM). SAM intends to max-
         imally perturb the training dataset, so the optimization can be led to a flat minima,
         which is known to have better generalization ability. Specifically, our active learn-
         ing, Sharpness-Aware Active Learning (SAAL), constructs its acquisition function
         by selecting unlabeled instances whose perturbed loss becomes maximum. Over
         the adaptation of SAM into SAAL, we design a pseudo labeling mechanism to
         look forward to the perturbed loss w.r.t. the ground-truth label. Furthermore, we
         present a theoretic analysis between SAAL and recent active learning methods, so
         the recent works could be reduced to SAAL under a specific condition. We con-
         duct experiments on various benchmark datasets for vision-based tasks in image
         classification and object detection. The experimental results confirm that SAAL
         outperforms the baselines by selecting instances that have the potentially maximal
         perturbation on the loss.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recently, deep learning is widely utilized in many research areas, such as computer vision, natural
language processing, recommender systems, etc., but its success deeply depends on the large-scale
labeled dataset for training the deep neural networks. The importance of the dataset is related to the
generalization issue in deep learning, which refers that the model learned with the training dataset
suffers from the degradation of performance when the unseen test dataset is encountered for deploy-
ment. This degradation results from the neural networks that are prone to overfitting under the lack
of the training dataset (Keskar et al., 2016; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Kawaguchi et al., 2017).
The dependency on the dataset also invokes an adaptive data selection by acquisition functions, or
active learning, which aims at the efficient use of the limited budget for annotations from oracle
(Cohn et al., 1996; Tong, 2001; Settles, 2009). Recently, various methods for active learning have
been proposed; but the model trained with a small number of data from the adaptive selection is
often difficult to be generalized (Dasgupta & Hsu, 2008). Although there exist some prior works
that deal with the generalization issue in active learning; those methods solve the problem by either
proposing a new risk function (Farquhar et al., 2020) or adopting a new classifier network (Wan
et al., 2021), rather than by inventing a new acquisition function that considers the generalization.
In this paper, we propose a new active learning algorithm, named Sharpness-Aware Active Learning
(SAAL), that connects active learning and generalization ability to construct the acquisition function.
Specifically, we are inspired by Sharpness-Aware Minimization, or SAM (Foret et al., 2020), which
minimizes the maximally perturbed loss of training dataset, leading to minimizing the loss sharpness
as well as the task loss, itself. Such optimization leads to a flat minima of the loss landscape, which
is shown to have a strong correlation with the generalization performance (Jiang et al., 2019). Hence,
SAAL adopts the maximally perturbed loss as the acquisition score.
When calculating the acquisition score for SAAL, we cannot observe the labels for the unlabeled
instances, so it is infeasible to compute the perturbed loss. To overcome this challenge, we utilize


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


pseudo labels predicted by the current model, and we theoretically show that our proposed pseudo
labeling conservatively estimates the maximally perturbed loss w.r.t. ground-truth label. Also, we
theoretically derive the upper bound of the acquisition score of SAAL, which includes the loss,
the norm of gradients, and the first eigenvalue of loss Hessian. Among the three terms of the up-
per bound, the loss and gradient terms are widely used metrics for active learning, which captures
the model change by acquiring the instance (Yoo & Kweon, 2019; Ash et al., 2020; Settles et al.,
2007). Meanwhile, the first eigenvalue, which is newly considered by SAAL, is connected to the
loss sharpness (Keskar et al., 2017). Therefore, the selected instances by SAAL might contribute to
the generalization of the model.
We summarize our contributions in three points. First, we propose Sharpness-Aware Active Learn-
ing (SAAL), which considers the loss sharpness for constructing the acquisition function. The loss
sharpness is related to the generalization of model, so selecting instances with a high value of loss
sharpness might lead to a model with a better generalization performance. Second, we theoretically
derive the upper bound of the acquisition score of SAAL and show the connection with the recent
active learning methods. Specifically, we find that the upper bound also contains the first eigenvalue
of loss Hessian, which is related to the generalization ability. Third, we empirically show that SAAL
outperforms the baselines in various vision-based tasks on the benchmark dataset.

2     P RELIMINARIES
2.1   N OTATIONS

Throughout this paper, we assume a classification problem and we represent our current deep learn-
ing model parameterized by θ as fθ : Rd → R|Y | ; where d is the dimension of data instance, x,
and Y is the set of candidate classes that x can have. There are two datasets: a dataset with labels,
XL , and the other unlabeled dataset, XU . We denote the acquisition function of active learning as
facq : Rd → R, where facq receives a data instance as input, and calculates the informativeness, or
the acquisition score, of the instance as output. The loss of a data instance, x, w.r.t. the given label
y is represented as l(x, y; θ) := lCE (σ(fθ (x)), y), where σ(·) is a softmax function. The total loss
                                                PN
of a dataset, S, is represented as LS (θ) = N1 i=1 l(xi , yi ; θ), where S = {(xi , yi )|i = 1, ..., N }.
Lastly, we define the pseudo label, ŷ = argmaxj∈Y σ(fθ (x))j ; and we denote the ground-truth
label as ȳ.

2.2   ACTIVE L EARNING

There are several active learning scenarios that differ by the setting of data accessibility; which
include membership-query synthesis (Angluin, 1988; 2004), stream-based active learning (Atlas
et al., 1989; Cohn et al., 1994), and pool-based active learning (Lewis & Gale, 1994). In this paper,
we focus on pool-based active learning, where the unlabeled data instances are provided as a large
set of data pool, and the active learner sequentially selects the informative instances by a certain
criterion.
Pool-based active learning is categorized by the definition of informativeness, which includes the
uncertainty, diversity, and hybrid-based methods. Uncertainty-based active learning adopts the
acquisition function, facq , to calculate the uncertainty of each unlabeled instance with regard to the
current deep learning model, and an oracle provides the ground-truth label of the selected unlabeled
instances with the highest uncertainty. Since the acquisition score is usually calculated for an unla-
beled instance, xu ∈ XU , w.r.t. the current model, fθ , it is expanded as facq (xu ; fθ ), resulting in
the selection rule as the below.
                                                    X
                                   XS = argmax            facq (xu ; fθ )                            (1)
                                           ′
                                         XS ⊂XU         ′
                                                  xu ∈XS

                                 Ent
                                                                 P
Entropy, which is denoted as facq    (xu ; fθ ) = H[fθ (xu )] = − j σ(fθ (xu ))j log2 σ(fθ (xu ))j , or
                                      V ar
variation ratio, which is denoted as facq   = 1−maxj σ(fθ (xu ))j , are the most widely used methods
for calculating uncertainty (Shannon, 1948; Freeman, 1965). These days, additional networks are
used to approximate the uncertainty of each instance. Learning Loss for Active Learning (LL4AL)
(Yoo & Kweon, 2019) trains the loss prediction module, fLP M , which takes the hidden feature maps


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


as input and predicts the expected loss as output. Then, LL4AL constructs the acquisition functions
  LL4AL
facq     (xu ) = fLP M (fθk (xu )|k=1,...,K ), where fθk is the k-th hidden feature map. Variational
Adversarial Active Learning (VAAL) (Sinha et al., 2019) trains a discriminator, fdis , which takes a
data instance as input and discriminates whether the instance belongs to the labeled dataset or the
unlabeled dataset. Then, VAAL calculates the probability of xu belonging to the unlabeled dataset,
XU , as the acquisition score, i.e., facq
                                        V AAL
                                              (xu ) = fdis (xu ). Diversity-based active learning, such
as Coreset approach (Sener & Savarese, 2018), selects instances that represent the whole distribution
of unlabeled instances, by solving a mixed integer programming. Recently, to make use of both
uncertainty and diversity methods, Hybrid-based active learning is proposed to select the uncertain
instances in a diverse way. In BADGE (Ash et al., 2020), the acquisition function is calculated as
the gradient embedding of xu w.r.t. the parameter of the last fully connected layer, θout , that is
  BADGE
facq      (xu ) = ∂θ∂out l(xu , ŷu ; θ), where ŷu is the pseudo label of xu . Then, this embedding
becomes an input to the k-means++ seeding algorithm (Arthur & Vassilvitskii, 2006).
Recently, pool-based active learning has been developed to deal with certain problematic scenarios.
Such development includes using random round-robin sampling to efficiently apply active learn-
ing in large-batch setting (Citovsky et al., 2021); actively selecting test samples to query (Kossen
et al., 2021); improving conventional active learning algorithm for high dimensional observational
data (Jesson et al., 2021); etc. Compared to those researches, our proposed SAAL deals with a
conventional scenario and focuses on how the proposed acquisition function selects the informative
instances.

2.3   S HARPNESS -AWARE M INIMIZATION (SAM)

As an independent research direction from active learning, there is an increasing investigation on the
flatness or sharpness of loss response surfaces, and their corresponding optimization. The flat min-
ima of loss landscape is analyzed in various research areas and is confirmed to have deep connection
to generalization of neural networks. A recent broad study on the various measures of generaliza-
tion has confirmed that sharpness-based measure has the strongest correlation to the generalization
(Jiang et al., 2019). Hence, the flat minima is utilized in various research areas where generalization
is important, such as domain generalization (Cha et al., 2021), adversarial robustness (Stutz et al.,
2021), or domain adversarial training (Rangwani et al., 2022).
Having said that, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) is an optimizer for training the deep neural
network (Foret et al., 2020) to weigh the importance of flat minima. Denoting the loss on the dataset
S w.r.t. the current parameter θ as LS (θ), the optimization objective of SAM is to minimize the
maximally perturbed loss with the regularization on the parameter, as below.
                                   min max LS (θ + ϵ) + γ∥θ∥22                                     (2)
                                     θ   ∥ϵ∥≤ρ

Here, γ is a hyperparameter that controls the magnitude of the effect of regularization, ϵ is the
perturbation to the parameter, and ρ defines the size of the perturbation.
The maximally perturbed loss can be decomposed as max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LS (θ + ϵ) = (max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LS (θ +
ϵ) − LS (θ)) + LS (θ), which is interpreted as the sharpness term (first term of the RHS) and the
classification loss term (second term of the RHS). Hence, SAM minimizes the sharpness of the loss
as well as the classification loss value, itself; that is SAM aims at seeking the flat minima among
the local minimas. This optimization is a max-min problem, which solves max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LS (θ + ϵ)
first than solves minθ max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LS (θ + ϵ). The inner maximization problem is solved by finding
ϵ∗ = argmax∥ϵ∥≤ρ LS (θ + ϵ). By deriving Taylor expansion of LS (θ + ϵ) w.r.t. θ around 0, and by
introducing a dual norm problem, the ϵ∗ is approximated as the follow, with p1 + 1q = 1.

                                                          |∇θ LS (θ)|q−1
                             ϵ∗ ≈ ρ · sign(∇θ LS (θ))                                              (3)
                                                        (∥∇θ LS (θ)∥qq )1/p
After solving the inner maximization using ϵ∗ , the minimization problem is solved by obtaining the
gradient, while excluding the Hessian term, as the below.
                               ∇θ max LS (θ + ϵ) ≈ ∇θ LS (θ)|θ+ϵ∗                                  (4)
                                   ∥ϵ∥≤ρ


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     M ETHOD
3.1    M OTIVATION

According to SAM (Foret et al., 2020), the loss of the population dataset, D, is upper bounded by
the maximally perturbed loss of the training dataset, X . From the perspective of active learning,
the training dataset is decomposed into the labeled dataset, XL , and the unlabeled dataset, XU , i.e.,
X = XL ∪ XU . Hence, the upper bound can be decomposed as the below, with πL = |X              L|
                                                                                             |X | and
πU = |X U|
      |X | .

    LD (θ) ≤ max LX (θ + ϵ) ≤ πL · max LXL (θ + ϵ) + πU · max LXU (θ + ϵ) =: LSAAL
                                                                              X                    (5)
               ∥ϵ∥≤ρ                   ∥ϵ∥≤ρ                      ∥ϵ∥≤ρ

Since the population loss, LD (θ), is never accessible; we instead access the rightmost upper bound
denoted in Eq. 5, which is represented as LSAAL  X       , and train our network to minimize the upper
bound. Among the two terms of LSAALX     , the first term,  πL ·max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LXL (θ+ϵ), will be minimized
if we use SAM optimizer. Then, the remaining second term, πU · max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LXU (θ + ϵ), becomes
the key component for our optimization in the sharpness-aware active learning scenario. During the
active learning iterations, we suppose that we select unlabeled instances, xu ∈ XU , with high values
of maximally perturbed loss. In other words, we query the label of such unlabeled instances, so that
the remaining XU consists of unlabeled instances whose maximally perturbed loss value is small.
Then, it leads to minimizing two terms of LSAALX       simultaneously; which contributes to minimizing
the generalization error, LD (θ).
Comparison to Semi-Supervised Learning Our proposed active learning algorithm is not the
only way for decreasing the loss of unlabeled dataset, XU ; because traditional semi-supervised
learning (SSL) is another way that utilizes LXU (θ) while training the model. However, it should
be noted that SSL does not guarantee to minimize the rightmost upper bound, LSAAL  X     . SSL mini-
mizes the average of unlabeled dataset loss instead of the maximum perturbed loss. Hence, it is hard
to guarantee that SSL will contribute to minimizing the generalization error without prior knowl-
edge on label distribution (Ben-David et al., 2008). We can categorize the SSL approach as three
ways (Berthelot et al., 2019; Zhu, 2005), which are consistency regularization (Laine & Aila, 2016;
Sajjadi et al., 2016), entropy minimization (Cireşan et al., 2010; Lee et al., 2013), and traditional
regularization, such as weight decay (Zhang et al., 2018a;b). First, consistency regularization and
entropy minimization completely depend on the pseudo-label, and an incorrect pseudo-label might
increase the generalization error. Second, the worst-case or hardest instances might have incorrect
pseudo-label. In other words, SSL, training the model with an incorrect pseudo-label, might fail
to model the maximum perturbed loss. Third, the minimization of maximum perturbed loss is an
independent approach to the previous semi-supervised learning methods, such as traditional regular-
ization as well as consistency and entropy minimization. They are potentially compatible with our
active learning algorithm.

3.2    S HARPNESS -AWARE ACTIVE L EARNING

Motivated by the Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM), our active learning algorithm selects in-
stances with a high perturbed loss under some perturbation on the model parameters, θ. Hence, our
acquisition function is as follows:
                               SAAL
                              facq  (xu ; fθ ) = max l(xu , ŷu ; θ + ϵ),                          (6)
                                                 ∥ϵ∥≤ρ

where l is the cross-entropy loss function for the model, and θ is the current parameter of the model.
Algorithm 1 describes the overall process of our Sharpness-Aware Active Learning. Since our ac-
quisition function is calculated for the unlabeled instances, there comes a problem when calculating
the maximally perturbed loss function, which requires label. Hence, we use a pseudo label, ŷu ,
for the loss calculation. To provide the validity of utilizing pseudo label, we first provide Theorem
3.1, which explains the relation between the maximally perturbed losses which are calculated with
pseudo label and with ground-truth label, respectively.
Theorem 3.1. (Proof in Appendix A.2.1) For a data instance x, let ŷ be the pseudo label predicted by
the network fθ and ȳ be the ground-truth label. Then, the maximally perturbed loss calculated with


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Sharpness-Aware Active Learning
Input: Labeled dataset XL0 , Unlabeled dataset XU0 , Classifier fθ
 1: Initially train fθ by the cross-entropy loss of XL0
 2: for j = 0, 1, 2, . . . do                                                       ▷ active learning
 3:     Randomly sample XUpool ⊂ XUj
 4:     for xu ∈ XUpool do
                           SAAL
 5:          Calculate facq     (xu ; fθ ) as Eq. 6
 6:     end for
        Select XS = argmaxX ′ ⊂X pool xu ∈X ′ facq    SAAL
                                              P
 7:                                                        (xu ; fθ )
                                  S      U          S
 8:     Query the label of XS to oracle
 9:     Update the labeled dataset, XLj+1 = XLj ∪ XS
10:     Update the unlabeled dataset, XUj+1 = XUj \ XS
11:     Train fθ by the cross-entropy loss of XLj+1
12: end for


(x, ŷ) is a lower bound of the maximally perturbed loss calculated with (x, ȳ); with a non-negative
margin, δx , as the below:
                           max l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ) ≤ max l(x, ȳ; θ + ϵ) + δx .                        (7)
                           ∥ϵ∥≤ρ                  ∥ϵ∥≤ρ


Next, Proposition 3.2 shows that the inequality 7 has zero margin under a mild condition.
Proposition 3.2. (Proof in Appendix A.2.2) For a data instance x and the corresponding pseudo
label ŷ, let ϵ̂ be the maximal perturbation over the parameters w.r.t. the loss l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ). If
the perturbed network, fθ+ϵ̂ , keeps the predicted label as the same as the label predicted from the
original network, fθ ; then the maximally perturbed loss calculated with (x, ŷ) is a lower bound of
the maximally perturbed loss calculated with (x, ȳ), as the below:
                              max l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ) ≤ max l(x, ȳ; θ + ϵ).                           (8)
                             ∥ϵ∥≤ρ                    ∥ϵ∥≤ρ


Theorem 3.1 and Proposition 3.2 provide that the selected instances by acquisition score of SAAL
with pseudo label would also have high scores w.r.t. the ground-truth label. It indicates that we
conservatively estimate the maximally perturbed loss for the acquisition score.

3.3   C ONNECTION TO R ECENT ACTIVE L EARNING A LGORITHMS

Here, we theoretically derive the upper bound of the acquisition score of SAAL, and show the
connection to the recent active learning algorithms as well as the generalization ability. To begin
with, we provide Theorem 3.3 as below.
                                                                            SAAL
Theorem 3.3. (Proof in Appendix A.2.3) The acquisition function, facq            , of Eq. 6 is upper
                                       1 2                        2 3
bounded by l(θ) + ρ∥∇θ l(θ)∥2 + 2 ρ λ1 + max∥v∥≤1 O(ρ v ); where l(θ) abbreviates the loss
of a data pair, (x, y), and λ1 is the first eigenvalue of the loss Hessian.

Theorem 3.3 derives the upper bound of the acquisition score of SAAL, which consists of the task
loss, the gradient norm, and the first eigenvalue of loss Hessian. Since we are selecting instances
                             SAAL
which have high value of facq       , the selection refers that we are also selecting instances which
have high values of the loss, l(θ), and the magnitude of the gradient embedding, ∥∇θ l(θ)∥2 ; which
are connected to LL4AL (Yoo & Kweon, 2019) and BADGE (Ash et al., 2020), respectively. Fur-
thermore, SAAL considers the first eigenvalue of the loss Hessian w.r.t. the current model, denoted
as λ1 . The importance of the first eigenvalue for generalization is widely studied, that is the first
eigenvalue is used as the indicator of the sharpness of the loss surface (Keskar et al., 2017; Zhuang
et al., 2022; Kaur et al., 2022). Hence, the selected instances by SAAL might contribute to the
generalization of the model.
                                                                                         SAAL
Figure 1a shows that there exists a positive correlation between our acquisition score, facq  , and
the three terms of upper bound. It should be noted that the upper bound is not our optimization


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


objective, because we use the acquisition score for ranking the instances with top values of the
score. Hence, the correlation between the acquisition score and the upper bound is of our interest.
                                                                                              SAAL
Having said that, by selecting the instances with the high acquisition score of SAAL, facq          , we
are selecting instances that have high values of the loss, gradient norm, and the first eigenvalue.
Also, Figure 1b shows the value of the three terms of upper bound. Interestingly, as the acquisition
iterations proceed, not only the loss and the gradient value, but the first eigenvalue gets smaller. The
change of the value of the first eigenvalue is more noticeable in Figure 1c, which plots the value
of λ1 without the scaling term of 12 ρ2 . This indicates that SAAL leads the model to a flat minima,
which results in better generalization performance.


                             SAAL
    (a) Correlation between facq            (b) Magnitude of                 (c) Detailed view of
         and upper bound terms           the upper bound terms             the first eigenvalue, λ1

                     Figure 1: Correlation and magnitude of upper bound terms


4     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
We examined the performance of SAAL in two vision-based tasks; which are image classification
and object detection. Specifically, for image classification, we quantitatively compared the test
accuracies among various active learning algorithms; and qualitatively analyzed the performance of
SAAL by examining the upper bound of population loss. Also, we analyze the effect of ρ, which
defines the size of the perturbation, ϵ.

4.1    I MAGE C LASSIFICATION

Experiment Setting We conduct our experiment on Fashion-MNIST (Fashion) (Xiao et al.,
2017), SVHN (Netzer et al., 2011), CIFAR-10, and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) dataset.
We adopt the ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) network for our classifier, and we train the network for
50 epochs after each acquisition step, using Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learn-
ing rate of 1e-3; and SAM optimizer (Foret et al., 2020) with a learning rate of 1e-3 for Fashion,
SVHN, CIFAR-10 and 1e-1 for CIFAR-100. To simulate an experiment scenario with bad general-
ization cases, we followed the settings of the prior works (Kim et al., 2021), which assumes a very
low amount of allowed budget. For Fashion, SVHN, and CIFAR-10, we construct the initial labeled
dataset with 20 instances, which are random but balanced; and we select 10 additional instances with
the highest acquisition score among the randomly selected 2,000 unlabeled instances. For CIFAR-
100, the initial labeled dataset consists of 1,000 instances, and we select 100 additional instances for
100 repeated iterations. We repeat the acquisition for 100 iterations, and we report the results with
three repeated trials. Here, SAAL introduces the perturbation size, ρ, of the perturbation, ϵ, in Eq.
6, and we set the value of ρ as 0.05 for all the datasets.
Baselines We compared the performance of SAAL with Random, Entropy (Shannon, 1948),
Coreset (Sener & Savarese, 2018), Learning Loss for Active Learning (LL4AL) (Yoo & Kweon,
2019), Variational Adversarial Active Learning (VAAL) (Sinha et al., 2019), and BADGE (Ash
et al., 2020). Since our most relevant algorithm, BADGE, adopts k-means++ seeding algorithm to
introduce diversity on the acquisition; we also provide an experimental result with diversity follow-
ing the same practice from BADGE. Specifically, after calculating our acquisition function using
Eq. 6, we implement k-means++ seeding algorithm with the acquisition score as input.
Quantitative Analysis Table 1 indicates that SAAL outperforms the baselines in seven out of
eight combinations of experiments. The advantage of SAAL becomes obvious when we use the
Adam optimizer, rather than the SAM optimizer. We conjecture that this gain for Adam optimizer


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


originates from Eq. 5, which motivates SAAL in modeling the expected flat local minima after
acquisitions. Recall that our inaccessible goal, LD (θ), is upper bounded by πL · max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LXL (θ +
ϵ) + πU · max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LXU (θ + ϵ), as we discussed in Section 3.1. When using Adam optimizer, the
first term, max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LXL (θ + ϵ), in the upper bound is weakly optimized compared to using SAM
optimizer, which we will present qualitative analyses in the next section; because SAM optimizer
directly minimizes max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LXL (θ + ϵ). Hence, the importance of the second term in the upper
bound, max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LXU (θ + ϵ), becomes more significant for Adam optimizer.
We also provide the test accuracy along the acquisition iterations in Figure 6 of Appendix A.1. The
figures show that SAAL achieves higher accuracy more quickly than baselines in most cases, see
Figure 6a, 6d, or 6g.

Table 1: Comparison of test accuracy (%) using Adam optimizer and SAM optimizer. The best
performance is indicated as boldface. The results are replicated by three times.
                               Adam optimizer                                     SAM optimizer
 Method
               Fashion       SVHN     CIFAR-10     CIFAR-100     Fashion       SVHN     CIFAR-10     CIFAR-100
 Random       81.2 ± 0.5   72.4 ± 0.9 50.7 ± 1.5   43.3 ± 0.3   83.7 ± 0.3   78.1 ± 1.1 52.6 ± 2.8   44.0 ± 0.7
 Entropy      81.5 ± 1.4   73.1 ± 1.0 51.9 ± 1.8   44.4 ± 0.7   84.1 ± 0.2   77.5 ± 3.2 54.6 ± 0.4   44.1 ± 1.0
  Coreset     83.8 ± 0.7   75.3 ± 5.8 51.7 ± 1.0   44.4 ± 0.5   84.4 ± 0.6   78.9 ± 1.3 53.9 ± 1.3   47.6 ± 1.4
 LL4AL 1      83.5 ± 1.8   75.1 ± 1.7 51.7 ± 0.4   43.9 ± 0.3   83.2 ± 1.4   72.2 ± 0.2 50.2 ± 1.1   35.7 ± .01
  VAAL        83.4 ± 0.1   73.4 ± 1.3 52.0 ± 0.9   44.8 ± 0.3   84.1 ± 0.6   77.1 ± 0.8 53.1 ± 0.9   45.5 ± 0.4
 BADGE        85.4 ± 0.6   74.9 ± 1.1 52.3 ± 2.2   45.7 ± 0.6   86.2 ± 0.2   78.8 ± 0.9 56.8 ± 1.9   47.4 ± 0.7
  SAAL        85.8 ± 0.8   76.8 ± 0.7 54.4 ± 0.9   47.6 ± 0.9   86.3 ± 0.5   78.8 ± 1.0 57.0 ± 1.1   48.4 ± 0.9


Next, we compare the time complexity of SAAL and
baselines. We used the CIFAR-10 dataset and measured
the time for a single iteration of acquisition and training.
Figure 2 shows the time in seconds with a log scale. The
results of Random acquisition show that the SAM opti-
mizer takes twice longer time than the Adam optimizer,
because it takes two steps of gradient calculation. How-
ever, the gap between Adam and SAM becomes mere
when using other active learning algorithms, indicating
that the time for calculating acquisition score is the largest
bottleneck. SAAL calculates the perturbation, ϵ, for every
single unlabeled instance, instead of batch-wise calcula-
tion; so it takes longer than most of the other baselines.          Figure 2: Comparison of time complex-
The time complexity of SAAL can be reduced if we adopt              ity, in log-scale
the improved SAM models (Du et al., 2021; 2022) that
have been proposed for an efficient calculation.
Qualitative Analysis Figure 3 supports the conjecture for the advantage of SAAL by anticipating
the flat local minima in the acquisition process. Figure 3 measures the maximally perturbed loss for
the labeled dataset, XL ; the unlabeled dataset, XU ; and the total dataset, XL ∪ XU . We compare
the results between the models trained with either SAM optimizer or Adam optimizer. Since it is
computationally hard to calculate the corresponding perturbation for every single unlabeled instance,
xu ∈ XU , we uniformly sample 2,000 unlabeled instances from XU at each iteration; and we report
the averaged results for three independently repeated trials.
Figure 3a shows the maximally perturbed loss of XU when using SAM optimizer. If we compare
the result of SAAL with the results of baselines, SAAL shows the lowest value of the maximally
perturbed loss, because SAAL selected the instances with high values of perturbed loss; and because
SAAL removes such instances by passing those instances to the labeled dataset. Figure 3b shows the
maximally perturbed loss of XL when using SAM optimizer. This loss also indicates the flatness of
the model; the lower value of the maximally perturbed loss of XL indicates that the model does not
change the result even if the parameter is changed in a small range, which refers to the flat model
(Keskar et al., 2016; Neyshabur et al., 2017; Kawaguchi et al., 2017). Hence, SAAL results in a flat
network compared to the baselines. We conjecture that the flat model attained by SAAL is explained
   1
       For LL4AL, we failed to reproduce the performance when using SAM optimizer.


                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by the look-ahead concept (Roy & McCallum, 2001; Konyushkova et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2021).
If we are planning to minimize max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LX (θ + ϵ) by SAM optimizer, SAAL looks ahead the
high values of the max∥ϵ∥≤ρ LX (θ + ϵ) from unlabeled instances, and SAAL actively selects such
unlabeled instances to flatten the future response surface.
Finally, Figure 3c shows the maximally perturbed loss of the total dataset, which is equivalent to
the upper bound in Eq. 5. As confirmed in the figure, SAAL achieves the lowest upper bound,
which indicates that the model trained with SAAL is more likely to achieve a lower population loss,
which is our ultimate goal of minimization objective. When comparing the results of SAM (Figure
3a - Figure 3c) and the results of Adam (Figure 3d - Figure 3f), the gap between SAAL and other
baselines becomes clearer in Adam optimizer.


    (a) Maximally perturbed loss of   (b) Maximally perturbed loss of   (c) Maximally perturbed loss of
           XU with SAM                       XL with SAM                     XL ∪ XU with SAM


    (d) Maximally perturbed loss of   (e) Maximally perturbed loss of   (f) Maximally perturbed loss of
           XU with Adam                      XL with Adam                    XL ∪ XU with Adam

Figure 3: Maximally perturbed loss of the labeled dataset, unlabeled dataset, and total dataset during
the active learning iterations. (a) - (c) are the results of the model trained by SAM optimizer. (d) -
(f) are the results of the model trained by Adam optimizer.

Sensitivity Analysis on ρ SAAL introduces a hyperparameter, ρ, which represents the size of the
perturbation, ϵ. Hence, we conduct the sensitivity analysis on ρ with the CIFAR-10 dataset, and we
set the candidate values for ρ as 0.01, 0.05, and 0.10.
First, we examined the validity of Theorem 3.1 by investigating if the network with the max-
imally perturbed parameters keeps the predicted label as same as the original network. Fig-
ure 4a shows the proportion of unlabeled data instances whose predicted labels are remained
       P by the perturbed network during the active learning iterations; that is ψ(ρ) :=
the same
   1
|XU |     x∈XU 1argmaxj fθ+ϵ̂ (x)j =ŷ , where 1A is the indicator function that returns 1 if the condi-
tion A is satisfied. When the size, ρ, of the perturbation, ϵ, is zero, that is if we do not perturb the
network; then the inequality of Eq. 8 is satisfied for all instances, by the definition of the pseudo la-
bel, ŷ. As we increase the value of ρ, some instances fail to keep the predicted label as the same as ŷ,
because the parameter of the model changes drastically so that the model loses the prediction ability
that it has learned so far. Also, we examined the validity of Proposition 3.2 by investigating the value
of the margin, δx , for the unlabeled data instances in Figure 4b. It should be noted that δx is not our
hyperparameter, but a dependent variable subject to change by ρ. We only investigate δx to reveal the
characteristics of ρ, not for the hyperparameter optimizations. To show how the value of the margin,
δx , affects the inequality, we measure the relative value of the margin,P   δx , compared to the maxi-
mally perturbed loss, max∥ϵ∥≤ρ l(x, ȳ; θ + ϵ); that is r(ρ, δx ) := |X1U | x∈XU max∥ϵ∥≤ρδxl(x,ȳ;θ+ϵ) .
From the analyses of Figure 4a and 4b, we adopted ρ = 0.05, because this value 1) keeps the pre-
dicted label of data instance from the original network with high probability and 2) keeps the value
of the margin relatively small compared to the max perturbed loss w.r.t. the ground-truth label; while
ρ = 0.05 is confirmed to perturb the parameters of the network effectively (Foret et al., 2020).


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The proper selection of ρ also affects the test accuracy, as shown in Figure 4c. If we select ρ with a
too small value, that is ρ = 0.01, the parameter of the model is not perturbed enough to measure the
sharpness, so SAAL cannot catch the informative instances. If we select ρ with a too large value,
that is ρ = 0.10, the maximally perturbed loss 1) does not satisfy Proposition 3.2, as confirmed in
Figure 4a, and 2) have too large value of margin, as confirmed in Figure 4b. Meanwhile, a proper
value of ρ = 0.05 for the perturbation, ϵ, shows the best performance.


      (a) Proportion of unlabeled    (b) Averaged value of the margin,      (c) Test accuracy;
 instances satisfying the assumption     δx , in Theorm 3.1 for the           with varying ρ
  in Proposition 3.2; with varying ρ unlabeled dataset; with varying ρ

                                  Figure 4: Sensitivity analysis on ρ


4.2   O BJECT D ETECTION

To show the effectiveness of SAAL in a complex task, we
conduct an object detection task. Object detection returns
the locations of semantic objects and the corresponding
labels for a given input image, x. Hence, the loss for
training detection model consists of the bounding box re-
gression loss and the classification loss. We experiment
with PASCAL VOC 2007 and 2012 dataset (Everingham
et al., 2010), which contains 5,011 images and 4,952 im-
ages with 20 object classes, respectively. We adopt Single
Shot Multibox Detector (SSD) (Liu et al., 2016) as the
detection model. To apply SAAL for object detection,
we perturb the parameters to maximize the classification
loss; and use the summation of the perturbed loss from
every corresponding detection box in the image, x, as the
acquisition score for x. Afterward, we select the images
with the highest scores. We construct the initial labeled
dataset with 1,000 randomly selected images, and we se-
lect additional 1,000 instances at every acquisition itera-
tions, so that we attain 10,000 final instances with nine
repeated acquisitions. We train the model for 300 epochs
with a batch size of 32. Figure 5 reports the mean av- Figure 5: mAP of object detection task
erage precision (mAP) for three repeated trials of SAAL with PASCAL VOC 2007+2012
and baselines. As shown in the figure, SAAL achieves
high performance at the earlier iterations and shows the highest mAP of 0.7541 at the last iteration;
while BADGE, Entropy, and Random show 0.7493, 0.7518, and 0.7403, respectively.

5     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORKS

We propose a new active learning method named Sharpness-Aware Active Learning, or SAAL.
SAAL considers the loss sharpness of data instances, which is strongly related to the generalization
performance of deep learning. Furthermore, we derive the upper bound of SAAL acquisition score
and find the connection to the recent active learning methods; as well as the connection to the first
eigenvalue of loss Hessian which is widely used as the indicator of loss sharpness. By various
experiments with benchmark datasets, SAAL shows better performance than baselines. As a future
work, we will improve the time complexity of SAAL by adopting recent SAM models.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Dana Angluin. Queries and concept learning. Machine learning, 2(4):319–342, 1988.
Dana Angluin. Queries revisited. Theoretical Computer Science, 313(2):175–194, 2004.
David Arthur and Sergei Vassilvitskii. k-means++: The advantages of careful seeding. Technical
  report, Stanford, 2006.
Jordan T Ash, Chicheng Zhang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, John Langford, and Alekh Agarwal. Deep
  batch active learning by diverse, uncertain gradient lower bounds. In ICLR, 2020.
Les Atlas, David Cohn, and Richard Ladner. Training connectionist networks with queries and
  selective sampling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2, 1989.
Shai Ben-David, Tyler Lu, and Dávid Pál. Does unlabeled data provably help? worst-case analysis
  of the sample complexity of semi-supervised learning. In COLT, pp. 33–44, 2008.
David Berthelot, Nicholas Carlini, Ian Goodfellow, Nicolas Papernot, Avital Oliver, and Colin A
  Raffel. Mixmatch: A holistic approach to semi-supervised learning. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 32, 2019.
Junbum Cha, Sanghyuk Chun, Kyungjae Lee, Han-Cheol Cho, Seunghyun Park, Yunsung Lee, and
  Sungrae Park. Swad: Domain generalization by seeking flat minima. Advances in Neural Infor-
  mation Processing Systems, 34:22405–22418, 2021.
Dan Claudiu Cireşan, Ueli Meier, Luca Maria Gambardella, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Deep, big,
  simple neural nets for handwritten digit recognition. Neural computation, 22(12):3207–3220,
  2010.
Gui Citovsky, Giulia DeSalvo, Claudio Gentile, Lazaros Karydas, Anand Rajagopalan, Afshin Ros-
  tamizadeh, and Sanjiv Kumar. Batch active learning at scale. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:11933–11944, 2021.
David Cohn, Les Atlas, and Richard Ladner. Improving generalization with active learning. Machine
  learning, 15(2):201–221, 1994.
David A Cohn, Zoubin Ghahramani, and Michael I Jordan. Active learning with statistical models.
  Journal of artificial intelligence research, 4:129–145, 1996.
Sanjoy Dasgupta and Daniel Hsu. Hierarchical sampling for active learning. In Proceedings of the
  25th international conference on Machine learning, pp. 208–215, 2008.
Jiawei Du, Hanshu Yan, Jiashi Feng, Joey Tianyi Zhou, Liangli Zhen, Rick Siow Mong Goh, and
   Vincent Tan. Efficient sharpness-aware minimization for improved training of neural networks.
   In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jiawei Du, Daquan Zhou, Jiashi Feng, Vincent YF Tan, and Joey Tianyi Zhou. Sharpness-aware
   training for free. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14083, 2022.
Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman.
 The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. International journal of computer vision, 88(2):
 303–338, 2010.
Sebastian Farquhar, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. On statistical bias in active learning: How and
  when to fix it. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Pierre Foret, Ariel Kleiner, Hossein Mobahi, and Behnam Neyshabur. Sharpness-aware minimiza-
  tion for efficiently improving generalization. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2020.
L.C. Freeman. Elementary applied statistics: for students in behavioral science. Wiley, 1965. URL
  https://books.google.co.kr/books?id=r4VRAAAAMAAJ.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
  770–778, 2016.
Andrew Jesson, Panagiotis Tigas, Joost van Amersfoort, Andreas Kirsch, Uri Shalit, and Yarin
  Gal. Causal-bald: Deep bayesian active learning of outcomes to infer treatment-effects from
  observational data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:30465–30478, 2021.
Yiding Jiang, Behnam Neyshabur, Hossein Mobahi, Dilip Krishnan, and Samy Bengio. Fantas-
  tic generalization measures and where to find them. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019.
Simran Kaur, Jeremy Cohen, and Zachary C Lipton. On the maximum hessian eigenvalue and
  generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10654, 2022.
Kenji Kawaguchi, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Yoshua Bengio. Generalization in deep learning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05468, 2017.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Jorge Nocedal, Mikhail Smelyanskiy, and Ping Tak Pe-
  ter Tang. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1609.04836, 2016.
Nitish Shirish Keskar, Jorge Nocedal, Ping Tak Peter Tang, Dheevatsa Mudigere, and Mikhail
  Smelyanskiy. On large-batch training for deep learning: Generalization gap and sharp minima.
  In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, 2017.
Yoon-Yeong Kim, Kyungwoo Song, JoonHo Jang, and Il-Chul Moon. Lada: Look-ahead data
  acquisition via augmentation for deep active learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:22919–22930, 2021.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In Yoshua
  Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
  2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. URL http:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Ksenia Konyushkova, Raphael Sznitman, and Pascal Fua. Learning active learning from data. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1703.03365, 2017.
Jannik Kossen, Sebastian Farquhar, Yarin Gal, and Tom Rainforth. Active testing: Sample-efficient
  model evaluation. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5753–5763. PMLR,
  2021.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images.
  2009.
Samuli Laine and Timo Aila. Temporal ensembling for semi-supervised learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1610.02242, 2016.
Dong-Hyun Lee et al. Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for
  deep neural networks. In Workshop on challenges in representation learning, ICML, volume 3,
  pp. 896, 2013.
David D Lewis and William A Gale. A sequential algorithm for training text classifiers. In SIGIR’94,
  pp. 3–12. Springer, 1994.
Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed, Cheng-Yang Fu, and
 Alexander C Berg. Ssd: Single shot multibox detector. In European conference on computer
 vision, pp. 21–37. Springer, 2016.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. 2011.
Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, David McAllester, and Nati Srebro. Exploring general-
  ization in deep learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Harsh Rangwani, Sumukh K Aithal, Mayank Mishra, Arihant Jain, and Venkatesh Babu Radhakr-
  ishnan. A closer look at smoothness in domain adversarial training. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 18378–18399. PMLR, 2022.
Nicholas Roy and Andrew McCallum. Toward optimal active learning through monte carlo estima-
  tion of error reduction. ICML, Williamstown, 2:441–448, 2001.
Mehdi Sajjadi, Mehran Javanmardi, and Tolga Tasdizen. Regularization with stochastic transfor-
 mations and perturbations for deep semi-supervised learning. Advances in neural information
 processing systems, 29, 2016.
Ozan Sener and Silvio Savarese. Active learning for convolutional neural networks: A core-set
  approach. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Burr Settles. Active learning literature survey. Technical report, University of Wisconsin-Madison
  Department of Computer Sciences, 2009.
Burr Settles, Mark Craven, and Soumya Ray. Multiple-instance active learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 20, 2007.
Claude E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst. Tech. J., 27(3):379–423,
  1948.
Samarth Sinha, Sayna Ebrahimi, and Trevor Darrell. Variational adversarial active learning. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 5972–5981, 2019.
David Stutz, Matthias Hein, and Bernt Schiele. Relating adversarially robust generalization to flat
  minima. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
  7807–7817, 2021.
Simon Tong. Active learning: theory and applications, volume 1. Stanford University USA, 2001.
Fang Wan, Tianning Yuan, Mengying Fu, Xiangyang Ji, Qingming Huang, and Qixiang Ye. Nearest
  neighbor classifier embedded network for active learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
  on Artificial Intelligence, volume 35, pp. 10041–10048, 2021.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Donggeun Yoo and In So Kweon. Learning loss for active learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 93–102, 2019.
Guodong Zhang, Chaoqi Wang, Bowen Xu, and Roger Grosse. Three mechanisms of weight decay
  regularization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12281, 2018a.
Hongyi Zhang, Moustapha Cisse, Yann N Dauphin, and David Lopez-Paz. mixup: Beyond empirical
  risk minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018b.
Xiaojin Jerry Zhu. Semi-supervised learning literature survey. 2005.
Juntang Zhuang, Boqing Gong, Liangzhe Yuan, Yin Cui, Hartwig Adam, Nicha Dvornek, Sekhar
  Tatikonda, James Duncan, and Ting Liu. Surrogate gap minimization improves sharpness-aware
  training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08065, 2022.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX

A.1     T EST ACCURACY

We provide the learning curve of SAAL and baselines along the acquisition iterations.


    (a) Test accuracy on       (b) Test accuracy on         (c) Test accuracy on      (d) Test accuracy on
    Fashion, with Adam          SVHN, with Adam            CIFAR-10, with Adam       CIFAR-100, with Adam


    (e) Test accuracy on       (f) Test accuracy on          (g) Test accuracy on      (h) Test accuracy on
    Fashion, with SAM           SVHN, with SAM              CIFAR-10, with SAM        CIFAR-100, with SAM
       Figure 6: Test accuracy along the acquisition iteration; with Adam and SAM optimizers



A.2     P ROOF D ETAILS

A.2.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

Theorem A.1. For a data instance x, let ŷ be the pseudo label predicted by the network fθ and
ȳ be the ground-truth label. Then, the maximally perturbed loss calculated with (x, ŷ) is a lower
bound of the maximally perturbed loss calculated with (x, ȳ); with a non-negative margin, δx , as
the below:
                              max l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ) ≤ max l(x, ȳ; θ + ϵ) + δx .
                              ∥ϵ∥≤ρ                      ∥ϵ∥≤ρ


Proof. The cross-entropy loss, l(x, y; θ), is represented with the logit vector fθ (x) ∈ R|Y | as the
below:
                                              exp(fθ (x)y )
                           l(x, y; θ) = − ln P
                                               j exp(fθ (x)j )
                                                                      X
                                      = − ln (exp(fθ (x)y )) + ln          exp(fθ (x)j )
                                                                       j
                                             X
                                      = ln        exp(fθ (x)j ) − fθ (x)y .
                                             j


Then, the maximally perturbed loss of a data pair (x, y) is represented as the below:
                                                          X
                    max l(x, y; θ + ϵ) = max (ln               exp(fθ+ϵ (x)j ) − fθ+ϵ (x)y ).
                    ∥ϵ∥≤ρ                        ∥ϵ∥≤ρ
                                                           j


Since the pseudo label, ŷ, satisfies ŷ = argmaxj∈Y fθ (x)j by the definition, it holds that fθ (x)ŷ ≥
fθ (x)j for all j ∈ Y . Let ϵ̂ = argmax∥ϵ∥≤ρ l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ). Define the margin, δx , as δx :=


                                                         13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


[maxj {fθ+ϵ̂ (x)j − fθ+ϵ̂ (x)ŷ }]+ where [·]+ = max{·, 0}. Then, the following holds.
                                        X
               max l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ) = ln      exp(fθ+ϵ̂ (x)j ) − fθ+ϵ̂ (x)ŷ
              ∥ϵ∥≤ρ
                                            j
                                           X
                                    ≤ ln         exp(fθ+ϵ̂ (x)j ) − fθ+ϵ̂ (x)ȳ + δx
                                            j
                                                                                       
                                                       X
                                    ≤ max ln                exp(fθ+ϵ (x)j ) − fθ+ϵ (x)ȳ  + δx
                                        ∥ϵ∥≤ρ
                                                         j

                                    = max l(x, ȳ; θ + ϵ) + δx
                                        ∥ϵ∥≤ρ


A.2.2    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3.2
Proposition A.2. For a data instance x and the corresponding pseudo label ŷ, let ϵ̂ be the maximal
perturbation over the parameters w.r.t. the loss l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ). If the perturbed network, fθ+ϵ̂ ,
keeps the predicted label as the same as the label predicted from the original network, fθ ; then the
maximally perturbed loss calculated with (x, ŷ) is a lower bound of the maximally perturbed loss
calculated with (x, ȳ), as the below:
                                max l(x, ŷ; θ + ϵ) ≤ max l(x, ȳ; θ + ϵ).
                                ∥ϵ∥≤ρ                          ∥ϵ∥≤ρ


Proof. Since the perturbed network, fθ+ϵ̂ , keeps the predicted label as the same as the label pre-
dicted from the original network, fθ ; it holds that argmax fθ+ϵ̂ (x) = argmax fθ (x) = ŷ and
accordingly fθ+ϵ̂ (x)j ≤ fθ+ϵ̂ (x)ŷ for all j. Hence, maxj {fθ+ϵ̂ (x)j − fθ+ϵ̂ (x)ŷ } ≤ 0. Thus, by the
definition of the margin in Theorem 3.1, δx becomes zero.



A.2.3    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.3
                                             SAAL
Theorem A.3. The acquisition function, facq       , of Eq. 6 is upper bounded by l(θ) + ρ∥∇θ l(θ)∥2 +
1 2                        2 3
2 ρ  λ 1 + max ∥v∥≤1  O(ρ   v  ); where l(θ) abbreviates the loss of a data pair, (x, y), and λ1 is the
first eigenvalue of the loss Hessian.

                                                      SAAL
Proof. Recall that our acquisition function is facq          = max∥ϵ∥≤ρ l(xu , ŷu ; θ + ϵ). Since we
limit the size of the perturbation as ∥ϵ∥ ≤ ρ, we can write ϵ = ρv with ∥v∥ ≤ 1, and
max∥ϵ∥≤ρ l(xu , ŷu ; θ + ϵ) = max∥ρv∥≤ρ l(xu , ŷu ; θ + ρv) = max∥v∥≤1 l(xu , ŷu ; θ + ρv). Then, by
Taylor expansion of l(xu , ŷu ; θ + ρv) w.r.t. θ, the below holds, where we abbreviate l(xu , ŷu ; θ) as
l(θ).
    SAAL
   facq  (xu ; fθ ) = max l(θ + ϵ) = max l(θ + ρv)
                        ∥ϵ∥≤ρ               ∥v∥≤1
                                                     1
                      = max {l(θ) + (ρv)T ∇θ l(θ) + (ρv)T ∇2θ l(θ)(ρv) + O((ρv)3 )}
                        ∥v∥≤1                        2
                                                     1
                      = l(θ) + max {(ρv)T ∇θ l(θ) + (ρv)T ∇2θ l(θ)(ρv) + O((ρv)3 )}
                               ∥v∥≤1                 2
                                                         1
                      ≤ l(θ) + max (ρv)T ∇θ l(θ) + max (ρv)T ∇2θ l(θ)(ρv) + max O((ρv)3 )
                               ∥v∥≤1               ∥v∥≤1 2                   ∥v∥≤1
                                               1 2
                      = l(θ) + ρ∥∇θ l(θ)∥2 +     ρ λ1 + max O((ρv)3 )
                        |{z} |     {z    }     2         ∥v∥≤1
                        Loss     Gradient Norm
                                              | {z }
                                                     1st Eigenvalue


                                                          14
