Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


G ENERAL P OLICY E VALUATION AND I MPROVEMENT
BY L EARNING TO I DENTIFY F EW B UT C RUCIAL S TATES

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Learning to evaluate and improve policies is a core problem of Reinforcement
         Learning (RL). Traditional RL algorithms learn a value function defined for a
         single policy. A recently explored competitive alternative is to learn a single
         value function for many policies. Here we combine the actor-critic architecture of
         Parameter-Based Value Functions and the policy embedding of Policy Evaluation
         Networks to learn a single map from policy parameters to expected return that
         evaluates (and thus helps to improve) any policy represented by a deep neural
         network (NN). The method yields competitive experimental results. In continuous
         control problems with infinitely many states, our value function minimizes its
         prediction error by simultaneously learning a small set of ‘probing states’ and
         a mapping from actions produced in probing states to the policy’s return. The
         method extracts crucial abstract knowledge about the environment in form of
         very few states sufficient to fully specify the behavior of many policies. A policy
         improves solely by changing actions in probing states, following the gradient of
         the value function’s predictions. Surprisingly, it is possible to clone the behavior
         of a near-optimal policy in Swimmer-v3 and Hopper-v3 environments only by
         knowing how to act in 3 and 5 such learned states, respectively. Remarkably, our
         value function trained to evaluate NN policies is also invariant to changes of the
         policy architecture: we show that it allows for zero-shot learning of linear policies
         competitive with the best policy seen during training.


1    I NTRODUCTION

Policy Evaluation and Policy Improvement are arguably the most studied problems in Reinforcement
Learning. They are at the root of actor-critic methods (Konda and Tsitsiklis, 2001; Sutton, 1984; Peters
and Schaal, 2008), which alternate between these two steps to iteratively estimate the performance of
a policy and using this estimate to learn a better policy. In the last few years, they received a lot of
attention because they have proven to be effective in visual domains (Mnih et al., 2016; Wu et al.,
2017), continuous control problems (Lillicrap et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018; Fujimoto et al.,
2018), and applications such as robotics (Kober et al., 2013). Several ways to estimate value functions
have been proposed, ranging from Monte Carlo approaches, to Temporal Difference methods (Sutton,
1984), including the challenging off-policy scenario where the value of a policy is estimated without
observing its behavior (Precup et al., 2001). A limiting feature of value functions is that they are
defined for a single policy. When the policy is updated, they need to keep track of it, potentially
losing useful information about old policies. By doing so, value functions typically do not capture
any structure over the policy parameter space. While off-policy methods learn a single value function
using data from different policies, they have no specific mechanism to generalize across policies and
usually suffer for large variance (Cortes et al., 2010).
Parameter Based Value Functions (PBVFs)(Faccio et al., 2021) are a promising approach to design
value functions that overcome this limitation and generalize over multiple policies. A crucial problem
in the application of such value functions is choosing a suitable representation of the policy. Flattening
the policy parameters as done in vanilla PBVFs is difficult to scale to larger policies. Here we present
an approach that connects PBVFs and a policy embedding method called "fingerprint mechanism"
by Harb et al. (2020). Using policy fingerprinting allows us to scale PBVFs to handle larger NN
policies and also achieve invariance with respect to the policy architecture. Policy fingerprinting was


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


introduced to learn maps from policy parameters to expected return offline and prior to this work was
never applied to the online RL setting.
We show in visual classification tasks and in continuous control problems that our approach can
identify a small number of critical "probing states" that are highly informative of the policies
performance. Our learned value function generalizes across many NN-based policies. It combines
the behavior of many bad policies to learn a better policy, and is able to zero-shot learn policies with
a different architecture. We compare our approach with strong baselines in continuous control tasks:
our method is competitive with DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015) and evolutionary approaches.

2    BACKGROUND
We consider an agent interacting with a Markov Decision Process (MDP) Stratonovich (1960);
Puterman (2014) M = (S, A, P, R, γ, µ0 ). The state space S ⊂ RnS and the action space A ⊂ RnA
are assumed to be compact sub-spaces. In the MDP framework, at each time-step t, the agent
observes a state st ∈ S, chooses an action at ∈ A, transitions into state st+1 with probability
P (st+1 |st , at ), and receives a reward rt = R(st , at ). The initial state is chosen with probability
µ0 (s). The agent’s behavior is represented by its policy π : S → ∆A: a function assigning for each
state s a probability distribution over the action space. A policy is deterministic when for each state
there exists an action a such that a is selected with probability one. Here we consider parametrized
policies of the form πθ , where θ ∈ Θ ⊂ Rnθ are the policy parameters.
                                                                   P∞        The return Rt is defined as
the cumulative discounted reward from time-step t, e.g. Rt = k=0 γ k R(st+k+1 , at+k+1 ), where
γ ∈ (0, 1] is the discount factor. The agent’s performance is measured by the expected return (i.e.
the cumulative expected discounted reward) from the initial state: J(θ) = Eπθ [R0 ]. The state-value
function V πθ (s) = Eπθ [Rt |st = s] of a policy πθ is defined as the expected return for being in a
state s and following πθ . Similarly, the action-value function Qπθ (s, a) = Eπθ [Rt |st = s, at = a] of
a policy πθ is defined as the expected return for being in a state
                                                                R s, taking action a and then following
πθ . State and action value functions are related by V πθ (s) = A πθ (a|s)Qπθ (s, a) da. The expected
return can be expressed in terms of the state and action value functions by integration over the initial
state distribution:
                           Z                      Z         Z
                                      πθ
                    J(θ) =    µ0 (s)V (s) ds =       µ0 (s)    πθ (a|s)Qπθ (s, a) da ds.             (1)
                          S                       S         A
The goal of a RL agent is to find the policy parameters θ that maximize the expected return. Instead
of learning a single value function for a target policy, here we try to estimate the value function of
any policy and maximize it over the set of initial states.

3    G ENERAL P OLICY E VALUATION
Recent work focused on extending value functions to allow them to receive the policy parameters as
input. This can potentially result in single value functions defined for any policy and methods that can
perform direct search in the policy parameters. We begin by extending the state-value function, and
define the parameter-based state-value function (PSVF) (Faccio et al., 2021) as the expected return
for being in state s and following policy πθR: V (s, θ) = E[Rt |st = s, θ]. Using this new definition,
we can rewrite the RL objective as J(θ) = S µ0 (s)V (s, θ) ds. Instead of learning V (s, θ) for each
state, we focus here on the policy evaluation problem over the set of the initial states of the agent.
This is equivalent to trying to model J(θ) directly as a differentiable function V (θ), which is the
expectation of V (s, θ) over the initial states:
                                                      Z
                     V (θ) := Es∼µ0 (s) [V (s, θ)] =     µ0 (s)V (s, θ) ds = J(πθ ).                  (2)
                                                       S

V (θ) is a parameter-based start-state value function (PSSVF). We consider the undiscounted case
in our setting, so γ is set to 1 throughout the paper. Once V (θ) is learned, direct policy search can
be performed by following the gradient ∇θ V (θ) to update the policy parameters. This learning
procedure can naturally be implemented in the actor-critic framework, where a critic value function—
the PSSVF—iteratively uses the collected data to evaluate the policies seen so far, and the actor
follows the critic’s direction of improvement to update itself. As in vanilla PSSVF, we inject noise in
the policy parameters for exploration. The PSSVF actor-critic framework is reported in Algorithm1.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Actor-critic with PSSVF for V (θ)
    Input: Differentiable critic Vw : Θ → R with parameters w; deterministic or stochastic actor πθ
with parameters θ; empty replay buffer D
    Output : Learned Vw ≈ V (θ)∀θ, learned πθ ≈ πθ∗
  Initialize critic and actor weights w, θ
  repeat:
      Perturb policy: θ′ = θ + ϵ, with ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 I)
      Generate an episode s0 , a0 , r1 , s1 , a1 , r2 , . . . , sT −1 , aT −1 , rT with policy πθ′
                              PT
      Compute return r = k=1 rk
      Store (θ′ , r) in the replay buffer D
      for many steps do:
           Sample a batch B = {(r, θ′ )} from D
           Update critic by stochastic gradient descent: ∇w E(r,θ′ )∈B [(r − Vw (θ′ ))2 ]
      end for
      for many steps do:
           Update actor by gradient ascent: ∇θ Vw (θ)
      end for
  until convergence


Policy fingerprinting (Harb et al., 2020) While the algorithm described above is straightforward
and easy to implement, feeding the policy parameters as inputs to the value function remains a
challenge. Recently Harb et al. (2020) showed that a form of policy embedding can be suitable for
this task. Their policy fingerprinting creates a lower-dimensional policy representation. It learns a set
of K ‘probing states’ {s̃k }Kk=1 and an evaluation function U —like the PSSVF. To evaluate a policy
πθ , they first compute the ‘probing actions’ ãk that the policy produces in the probing states. Then
the concatenated vector of these actions is given as input to U : RK×nA → R. While the learned
probing states remain fixed when evaluating multiple policies, the probing actions in such states
depend on the policy we are evaluating. The parameters of the value function V are the probing states
AND the weights of the MLP Uϕ that maps the ‘probing actions’ to the return. When the policy πθ
is deterministic, the probing actions for such policy are the deterministic actions {ãk = πθ (s̃k )}
produced in the probing states 1 .
This mechanism has an intuitive interpretation: to evaluate the behavior of an agent, the PSSVF
with policy fingerprinting learns a set of situations (or states), observes how the agent acts in those
situations, and then maps the agent’s actions to a score. Arguably, this is also how a teacher would
evaluate multiple different students by simultaneously learning which questions to ask the students
and how to score the student’s answers.
Therefore the parameters of the value function (probing states and evaluator function) can be learned
by minimizing MSE loss LV between the prediction of the value function and the observed return.
Setting w = {ϕ, s̃1 , . . . s̃K }, we retrieve the common notation of Vw (θ) for the PSSVF with finger-
print mechanism. Given a batch B of data (πθ , r) ∈ B, the value function optimization problem
is:
 min LV := min          E        [(Vw (θ)−r)2 ] =     min           E         [(Uϕ ([πθ (s̃1 ), . . . , πθ (s̃K )])−r)2 ] (3)
   w             w   (πθ ,r)∈B                      ϕ,s̃1 ,...s̃K (πθ ,r)∈B

If the prediction of the value function is accurate, policy improvement can be achieved by changing
the way a policy acts in the learned probing states in order to maximize the prediction of the value
function, like in the original PSSVF.
This process connects to the same interpretation as before: a student (the policy) observes which
questions the teacher asks and how the teacher evaluates the student’s answers, and subsequently tries
to improve in such a way to maximize the score predicted by the teacher. This iterative method is
depicted in Figure 1. Note that Algorithm1 applies directly to this setting. The only distinction is that
the probing states are part of the learned value function. Throughout this work, with the exception of
the MNIST experiments, we consider deterministic policies.
   1
     If the policy is stochastic, the probing actions are the parameters of the output distribution of the policy in
such states (the vector of probability distribution if the action space is discrete)


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              Environment


                                                 concat.


                    Probing                 Probing
                     States                 Actions


Figure 1: General policy evaluation aims to evaluate any given policy’s return based on the policy’s
actions (referred to as probing actions) in the learned probing states. The policy can be improved
through maximising the prediction of the learned value function via gradient ascent.


4     E XPERIMENTS

This section presents an empirical study of parameter-based value functions (PBVFs) with finger-
printing. We begin with a demonstration that fingerprinting can learn interesting states in MNIST
purely through the designated evaluation task of mapping randomly initialized Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) to their expected loss. We also show that such a procedure could be used to con-
struct a value function for offline improvement in MNIST. Next, we proceed to our main experiments
on continuous control tasks in MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012). Here we show that our approach is
competitive with strong baselines like DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2015) and ARS (Mania et al., 2018),
while it lacks sample efficiency when compared to SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018). A strength of our
approach is invariance to policy architecture. To illustrate this, we provide results on zero-shot
learning of new policy architectures. Thereafter, we present a detailed analysis of the learned probing
states in various MuJoCo environments. We conclude our study with the surprising observation that
very few probing states are required to clone near-optimal behaviour in certain MuJoCo environments.
An open-source implementation of our code is provided as supplementary material.

4.1   M OTIVATING EXPERIMENTS ON MNIST

We begin our experimental section with an intuitive demonstration of how PBVFs with fingerprinting
work, using the MNIST digit classification problem. The policy is a CNN, mapping images to a
probability distribution over digit classes. The environment simulation consists of running a forward
pass of the CNN on a batch of data and receiving the reward, which in this case is the negative
cross-entropy between the output of the CNN and the labels of the data. The value function learns
to map CNN parameters to the reward (the negative loss) obtained during the simulation. Then
the CNN learns to improve itself only by following the prediction of the value function, without
access to the supervised learning loss. These MNIST experiments can be considered as a contextual
bandit problem, where the initial state (or context) is given by the batch of training data sampled and
there are no transition dynamics. We start with a randomly initialized CNN and value function and
iteratively update them following Algorithm 1. Using only 10 probing states, we obtain a test set
accuracy of 82.5%. When increasing the number of probing states to 50, the accuracy increases to
87%.

Visualization of probing states Figure 2 shows some of the probing states learned by our model,
starting from random noise. During learning, we observe the appearance of various digits (sometimes
the same digit in different shapes). Since probing states are states in which the action of the policy
is informative about its global behavior, it is intuitive that digits should appear. We emphasize that
both the CNNs and the value function are starting from random initializations. The convolutional
filters and the probing states are learned using Algorithm 1, without access to the supervised loss. For
more complex datasets like CIFAR10 our method found it difficult to learn meaningful probing states.


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This is possibly due to the high variance in the training data given a specific class and highlights a
limitation of our method.


        Figure 2: Samples of probing states learned while training Algorithm 1 on MNIST.


Offline policy improvement Using this setting, we perform another experiment. We collect one
offline dataset {πθi , li }N
                           i=1 of N randomly initialized CNN policies and their losses. We constrain
the maximum accuracy of these CNNs in the training set to be 12%. We then use the dataset to train
a value function offline. After training, we randomly initialize a new CNN and take many steps of
gradient ascent through the fixed value function, obtaining a final CNN whose accuracy is around
65% on the test set. Our experiments show that our value function can combine the behavior of many
bad NNs to produce a much better NN in a zero shot manner. We found that also with randomly
initialized policies some digits appear as probing states, although they are less evident than in the
online framework. We include learning curves and probing states for this scenario in Appendix B.1.

4.2   M AIN EXPERIMENTS ON M U J O C O

Here we present our main evaluation on selected continuous control problems from MuJoCo (Todorov
et al., 2012). Since our algorithm performs direct search in parameter space, we choose Augmented
Random Search (ARS) (Mania et al., 2018) as baseline for comparison. Moreover, since our algorithm
employs deterministic policies, off-policy data, and an actor-critic architecture, a natural competitor is
the Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (DDPG) algorithm (Lillicrap et al., 2015), a strong baseline
for continuous control. We also compare our method with the state-of-the-art Soft Actor-Critic
(SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018).

Implementation details For the policy architecture, we use an MLP with 2 hidden layers and
256 neurons for each layer. We use 200 probing states and later provide an analysis of them. Our
implementation is based on the public code for Parameter-Based Value Functions. In some MuJoCo
environments like Hopper and Walker, a bad agent can fail and the episode ends after very few
time steps. This results in an excessive number of bad policies in the replay buffer, which can bias
learning. Indeed, by the time a good policy is observed, it becomes difficult to use it for training when
uniformly sampling experience from the replay buffer. We find that by prioritizing more recent data
we are able to achieve a more uniform distribution over the buffer and increase the sample efficiency.
We provide an ablation in Appendix B.2, showing the contribution of this component and of policy
fingerprinting. Like in the original ARS and PBVF papers (Mania et al., 2018; Faccio et al., 2021),
we use observation normalization and remove the survival bonus for the reward. The survival bonus,
which provides reward 1 at each time step for remaining alive in Hopper, Walker and Ant, induces a
challenging local optimum in parameter space where the agent would learn to keep still.
For DDPG and SAC, we use the default hyperparameters, yielding results on par with the best reported
results for the method. For ARS, we tune for each environment step size, number of population and
noise. For our method, we use a fixed set of hyperparameters, with the only exception of Ant. In
Ant, we observe that setting the parameter noise for perturbations to 0.05 results in very rare positive


                                                    5
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  returns for ARS and PSSVF (after subtracting the survival bonus). Therefore we use less noise for
  this environment. We discuss implementation details and hyperparameters in Appendix A.

                            Ant-v3                                               HalfCheetah-v3                                              Swimmer-v3
         6000                                                   12500                                                        300                                          pssvf
                                                                10000                                                                                                     ars
         4000                                                                                                                200                                          ddpg
return


                                                       return


                                                                                                                    return
                                                                  7500                                                                                                    sac
                                                                  5000                                                       100
         2000
                                                                  2500
                                                                                                                               0
            0                                                        0
           0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M                0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M                 0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M
                            time steps                                               time steps                                                time steps
                          Walker2d-v3                                               Hopper-v3                                         InvertedDoublePendulum-v2
         6000                                                     4000                                                   10000

                                                                  3000                                                   8000
         4000
                                                                                                                         6000
return


                                                         return


                                                                                                                return
                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                         4000
         2000
                                                                  1000
                                                                                                                         2000
            0                                                        0                                                         0
           0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M                0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M                 0.00M 0.05M 0.10M 0.15M 0.20M 0.25M 0.30M
                            time steps                                               time steps                                                time steps


 Figure 3: Return as a function of the environment interactions. The solid curve represents the mean
 (across 20 runs), and the shaded region represents a 95% bootstrapped confidence interval.


  Results Figure 3 shows learning curves in terms of expected return (mean and 95% confidence
  interval) achieved by our algorithm and the baselines across time in the environments. Our algorithm
  is very competitive with DDPG and ARS. It outperforms DDPG in all environments with the
  exception of HalfCheetah and Walker, and displays faster initial learning than ARS. In the Swimmer
  environment, DDPG and SAC fails to learn an optimal policy due to the problem of discounting2 . On
  the other hand, in HalfCheetah, parameter-based methods take a long time to improve, and the ability
  of DDPG to give credit to sub-episodes is crucial here to learn quickly. Furthermore, the variance
  of our method’s performance is less than DDPG’s and comparable to ARS’s. Like evolutionary
  approaches, our method uses only the return as learning data, while ignoring what happens in each
  state-action pairs. This is a limitation of our method and it is evident how PSSVF and ARS are less
  sample efficient in comparison to SAC in many environments.
  In preliminary experiments we tried to learn also a function V (s0 , θ), incorporating the information
  on the initial state. In practice, we can store in the buffer tuples (s0 , θ, r) consisting of initial state,
  policy parameters and episodic return. When training the PSSVF (now similar to the PSVF), we
  concatenate the initial state to the probing actions and map the vector of probing actions and initial
  state to the return. Then policy improvement is achieved by finding the policy parameters that
  maximize the value function’s prediction taking an expectation over the initial states sampled from
  the buffer. The results were very similar to those we presented in this section, so we decided to use
  the more straightforward approach that ignores the initial state and directly maps policy parameters
  to expected return. It would be also possible to learn a general value function V (s, θ) for any state,
  like in the PSVF algorithm (Faccio et al., 2021). We leave this as future work.

  Comparison to vanilla PSSVF A direct comparison to the standard Parameter-Based Value
  function is unfeasible for large NNs. This is because in the vanilla PSSVF, flattened policy parameters
  are directly fed to the value function. In our policy configuration, the flattened vector of policy
  parameters contains about 70K elements, which is significantly more than 200 × nA elements used
  to represent policies with fingerprinting. Nevertheless, we provide a direct comparison between the
  two approaches using a smaller policy architecture which consists of an MLP with 2 hidden layers
  and 64 neurons per layer. The complete results are provided in Appendix B.2. Our results in this
  setting show that the fingerprint mechanism could be useful even for smaller policies.

   2
     This is a common problem for Temporal Difference methods: the policy optimizing expected return in
 Swimmer with γ = 0.99 is sub-optimal when considering the expected return with γ = 1. See the ablation in
 Appendix A.3.1 of (Faccio et al., 2021).


                                                                                          6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  4.3           Z ERO - SHOT LEARNING OF NEW POLICY ARCHITECTURES

  Here we show that our method can generalize across policy architectures. We train a PSSVF using
  NN policies as in the main experiments. Then we randomly initialize a linear policy and start taking
  gradient ascent steps through the fixed value function, finding the parameters of the policy that
  maximizes the value function’s prediction. In Figure 5 we observe that a near-optimal linear policy
  can be zero-shot-learned through the value function even if it was trained using policies with different
  architecture. It achieves an expected return of 345, while the return of best NN used for training was
  360. Figure 12 (Appendix) shows results for zero-shot learning deep policies in Swimmer. We notice
  more variance in the performance, which might be caused by the deep policy overfitting more easily
  probing-state/probing-action pairs during the policy improvement phase.

  4.4           F INGERPRINT A NALYSIS

 Ablation on number of probing states Our experiments show that learning probing states helps
 evaluating the performance of many policies, but how many of such probing states are necessary for
 learning? We run our main experiments again, with fewer probing states, and discover that in many
 environments, a very small number of states is enough to achieve good performance. In particular,
 we find that the PSSVF with 5 probing states achieves 314 and 2790 final return in Swimmer and
 Hopper respectively, while Walker needs at least 50 probing states to obtain a return above 2000. In
 general, 200 probing states represent a good trade-off between learning stability and computational
 complexity. We compare the performances of PSSVF versions with varying numbers of probing
 states. We use the same hyperparameters as in the main experiments (see Appendix A.2), apart for
 the number of probing states. Figure 4 shows that in Hopper and Swimmer 10 probing states are
 sufficient to learn a good policy, while Walker needs a larger number of probing states to provide
 stability in learning.
                          Walker2d-v3                                             Hopper-v3                                              Swimmer-v3
         3000                                                   3000                                                   300                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                      2
         2000                                                   2000                                                   200                                            5
return


                                                       return


                                                                                                              return


                                                                                                                                                                      10
         1000                                                   1000                                                   100                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                                                                                           0
            0                                                      0                                                                                                  200
           0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M              0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M               0.00M 0.50M 1.00M 1.50M 2.00M 2.50M 3.00M   500
                            time steps                                             time steps                                              time steps


  Figure 4: Average return of PSSVF with different number of probing states as a function of the
  number of time steps in the environment. The solid line is the average over 10 independent runs; the
  shading indicates 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals.


 The most surprising result is that a randomly initialized
 policy can learn near-optimal behaviors in Swimmer and              400

 Hopper by knowing how to act only in 3 (5) such crucial             300

 learned states (out of infinitely many in the continuous            200
                                                                                                                 return


 state space). To verify this, we manually select 3 of the           100
 5 learned probing states in Swimmer, and compute the                  0
 actions of an optimal policy in such states. Then we train             0  200  400          600
                                                                                 gradient steps
                                                                                                 800 1000

 a new, randomly initialized policy, to just fit these 3 data
 points minimizing MSE loss. After many gradient steps, Figure 5: Performance of a linear pol-
 the policy obtains a return of 355, compared to the return icy (in blue) zero-shot learned (aver-
 of 364 of the optimal policy that was used to compute such aged over 5 runs, 95% bootstrapped CI).
 actions. Figure 15 (in Appendix B.3) includes a detailed The orange line shows the best perfor-
 analysis of this experiment. The probing actions are the mance of the deep NN when training the
 vectors [−0.97, −0.86], [−0.18, −0.99], [0.86, 0.68]. In PSSVF.
 the plot we notice that when the agent’s state is close
 to the first probing state (bottom plot, depicted in blue),
 then both components of the actions are close to -1, like the probing action in such state. When
 the agent’s state is close to the second state (bottom plot, depicted in orange), the first component


                                                                                        7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of the action moves from -1 to 0 (and then to +1) in a smooth way, while the second component
jumps directly to +1. This behavior is consistent with the second probing action, since the second
component is more negative than the first. Notably, although the distance between the agent’s state
and the third probing state (bottom plot, depicted in green) is never close to zero, such a probing
state is crucial: it induces the agent to take positive actions whenever the other probing states are far
away. We observe similar behavior for other environments, although they need more of such states to
encode the behavior of an optimal policy. Using a similar procedure, we are able to train a randomly
initialized policy in Hopper achieving 2200 return, using only 5 state-action pairs. We provide a
detailed discussion and learning curves for this task in Appendix B.3.

Visualization of RL probing states It is possible to visualize the probing states learned by the
PSSVF. To understand the behaviour in probing states, we initialize the MuJoCo environment to
the learned probing state (when possible) and let it evolve for a few time steps while performing
no action. In Appendix B.3 we show the crucial learned probing states of our previous experiment.
Additional probing states for all environments can be seen in animated form on the website https:
//anonymous260522.github.io/.

5    R ELATED W ORK

There is a long history of RL algorithms performing direct search in parameter space or policy space.
The most common approaches include evolution strategies, e.g., (Rechenberg, 1971; Sehnke et al.,
2010; 2008; Wierstra et al., 2014; Salimans et al., 2017). They iteratively simulate a population of
policies and use the result to estimate a direction of improvement in parameter space. Evolution
strategies, however, don’t reuse data: the information contained in the population is lost as soon as an
update is performed, making them sample-inefficient. Several attempts have been made to reuse past
data, often involving importance sampling (IS) (Zhao et al., 2013), but these methods suffer from
high variance of the fitness estimator (Metelli et al., 2018). Our method directly estimates a fitness
for each policy observed in the history and makes efficient reuse of past data without involving IS.
Direct search can be facilitated by compressed network search (Koutnik et al., 2010) and algorithms
that distill the knowledge of an NN into another NN (Schmidhuber, 1992). Closely related to our
fingerprint embedding is also the concept of Dataset Distillation (Wang et al., 2018). However,
in our RL setting, learning to distill crucial states from an environment is harder due to the non-
differentiability of the environment. Estimating a global objective function is common in control
theory, where usually a gaussian process is maintained over the policy parameters. This allows to
perform direct policy optimization during the parameter search. Such approaches are often used in
the Bayesian optimization framework (Snoek et al., 2015; 2012), where a tractable posterior over the
parameter space is used to drive policy improvements. Despite the soundness of these approaches,
they usually employ very small control policies and scale badly with the dimension of the policy
parameters. Our method, however, is invariant to policy parametrization.
It is based on a recent class of algorithms that were developed to address global estimation and
improvement of policies. For Policy Evaluation Networks (PVNs) (Harb et al., 2020), an actor-critic
algorithm for offline learning through policy fingerprinting was proposed. PVNs focus on the offline
RL setting. In PVNs, first a dataset of randomly initialized policies with their returns is collected.
Then, once their V (θ) with policy fingerprinting is trained, they perform policy improvement through
gradient ascent steps on V . Their experimental setting is similar to our MNIST offline demonstration,
which we provide just to give an intuition on how policy fingerprinting works. Concurrently,
Parameter-Based Value Functions were developed to provide single value functions able to evaluate
any policy, given a state, state-action pair, or a distribution over the agent’s initial states. PBVFs did
not use any dimensionality reductions techniques such as the policy fingerprinting mechanism, but
demonstrated sample efficiency in the online RL scenario, directly using the flattened parameters
of a neural network as inputs. They exhibited zero-shot learning for linear policies, but failed when
the policy parameters were high-dimensional. Here, however, we demonstrated that PBVFs with
policy fingerprinting mechanisms can be efficient in the online scenario. A minor difference between
our approach and PVNs is that PVNs predict a discretized distribution of the return, whereas our
approach simply predicts the expected return. Our method can be seen like an online version of
PVN without some of the tricks used, or like a version of PSSVF where policy fingerprinting is used.
Fingerprinting itself is similar to a technique for "learning to think" (Schmidhuber, 2015) where one


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


NN learns to send queries (sequences of activation vectors) into another NN and learns to use the
answers (sequences of activation vectors) to improve its performance.
Recent work (Tang et al., 2020) learned Parameter-Based State-Value Functions which, coupled with
PPO, improved performance. The authors did not use the value function to directly backpropagate
gradients through the policy parameters, but only exploited the general policy evaluation properties
of the method. They also proposed two dimensionality reduction techniques. The first, called Surface
Policy Representation, consists of learning a state-action embedding that encodes possible information
from a policy πθ . This requires feeding state-action pairs to a common MLP whose output is received
as input to the value function. The MLP is trained such that it allows for both low prediction error in
the value function and low reconstruction error of the action, given a state and the embedding. This
method is not differentiable in the policy parameters, therefore it cannot be used for gradient-based
policy improvement. The second method, called Origin Policy Representation (OPR), consists of
using an MLP that performs layer-wise extraction of features from policy parameters. OPR uses
MLPs to take as input direcly the weight matrix of each layer. This approach is almost identical to
directly feeding the policy parameters to the value function (they concatenate the state to the last
layer of such MLP), and suffers from the curse of dimensionality. Also, OPR was not used to directly
improve the policy parameters, but only to provide better policy evaluation.
Alternative strategies to represent policies have been studied in previous work. One such strategy
aims to learn a representation function mapping trajectories to a policy embedding through an auto-
encoding objective (Grover et al., 2018; Raileanu et al., 2020). In particular, Grover et al. (2018) use
this idea to model the agent’s behavior in a multi-agent setting. The approach presented by Raileanu
et al. (2020) performs gradient ascent steps finding a policy embedding that maximizes the value
function’s predicted return. While this maximization through the value function is similar to our
setting, it relies on a representation function (or policy decoder). Our method does not use a decoder
and instead directly backpropagates the gradients into the policy parameters for policy improvement.
Closer to our fingerprinting setup, Pacchiano et al. (2020) utilize pairs of states and actions (from
the corresponding policy) as a policy representation. However, unlike in our approach, the probing
states are not learned, but sampled from a chosen probing state distribution. Kanervisto et al. (2020)
suggest representing policies based on visited states via Gaussian Mixture Models applied to an
offline dataset of data from multiple policies. The authors mention that their current version of policy
supervectors is intended for analysing policies and is not yet suitable for online optimization. Value
functions conditioned on other quantities include vector-valued adaptive critics Schmidhuber (1991),
General Value Functions (Sutton et al., 2011), and Universal Value Function Approximators (Schaul
et al., 2015). Unlike our approach these methods typically generalize over achieving different goals,
and are not used to generalize across policies.


6    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK

Our approach connects Parameter-Based Value Functions (PBVFs) and the fingerprinting mechanism
of Policy Evaluation Networks. It can efficiently evaluate large Neural Networks, is suitable for
off-policy data reuse, and competitive with existing baselines for online RL tasks. Zero-shot learning
experiments on MNIST and continuous control problems demonstrated our method’s generalization
capabilities. Our value function is invariant to policy architecture changes, and can extract essential
knowledge about a complex environment by learning a small number of situations that are important
to evaluate the success of a policy. A randomly initialized policy can learn optimal behaviors in
Swimmer (Hopper) by knowing how to act only in 3 (5) such crucial learned states (out of infinitely
many in the continuous state space). This suggests that some of the most commonly used RL
benchmarks require to learn only a few crucial state-action pairs. Our set of learned probing states is
instead used to evaluate any policy, while in practice different policies may need different probing
states for efficient evaluation. A natural direction for improving this method and scaling it to more
complex tasks is to generate probing states in a more dynamic way, or learn to retrieve them directly
from the agent’s experience in the replay buffer. Like evolutionary approaches and trajectory based
RL, our method might suffer high variance in stochastic environments or when the variance of the
return over the initial state is high. In such scenario, poor value estimates might prevent policy
improvement or zero-shot learning. Finally, PBVFs are a general framework that also considers value
functions that receive states and state-action pairs as input. We plan to investigate how these value
functions trained by Temporal Differences (Sutton, 1988) behave with policy fingerprinting.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Achiam, J. (2018). Spinning Up in Deep Reinforcement Learning.
Cortes, C., Mansour, Y., and Mohri, M. (2010). Learning bounds for importance weighting. In
  Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 442–450.
Faccio, F., Kirsch, L., and Schmidhuber, J. (2021). Parameter-based value functions. In 9th
  International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May
  3-7, 2021. OpenReview.net.
Fujimoto, S., Van Hoof, H., and Meger, D. (2018). Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09477.
Grover, A., Al-Shedivat, M., Gupta, J., Burda, Y., and Edwards, H. (2018). Learning policy
  representations in multiagent systems. In International conference on machine learning, pages
  1802–1811. PMLR.
Haarnoja, T., Zhou, A., Abbeel, P., and Levine, S. (2018). Soft actor-critic: Off-policy maximum
  entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01290.
Harb, J., Schaul, T., Precup, D., and Bacon, P.-L. (2020). Policy evaluation networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2002.11833.
Kanervisto, A., Kinnunen, T., and Hautamäki, V. (2020). General characterization of agents by states
  they visit. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.01244.
Kober, J., Bagnell, J. A., and Peters, J. (2013). Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey. The
  International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(11):1238–1274.
Konda, V. and Tsitsiklis, J. (2001). Actor-critic algorithms. Society for Industrial and Applied
  Mathematics, 42.
Koutnik, J., Gomez, F., and Schmidhuber, J. (2010). Evolving neural networks in compressed weight
  space. In Proceedings of the 12th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation,
  pages 619–626.
Lillicrap, T. P., Hunt, J. J., Pritzel, A., Heess, N., Erez, T., Tassa, Y., Silver, D., and Wierstra, D.
  (2015). Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.02971.
Mania, H., Guy, A., and Recht, B. (2018). Simple random search of static linear policies is competitive
 for reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 1800–
 1809.
Metelli, A. M., Papini, M., Faccio, F., and Restelli, M. (2018). Policy optimization via importance
 sampling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 5442–5454.
Mnih, V., Badia, A. P., Mirza, M., Graves, A., Lillicrap, T., Harley, T., Silver, D., and Kavukcuoglu,
 K. (2016). Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference
 on machine learning, pages 1928–1937. PMLR.
Pacchiano, A., Parker-Holder, J., Tang, Y., Choromanski, K., Choromanska, A., and Jordan, M.
  (2020). Learning to score behaviors for guided policy optimization. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pages 7445–7454. PMLR.
Peters, J. and Schaal, S. (2008). Natural actor-critic. Neurocomput., 71(7-9):1180–1190.
Precup, D., Sutton, R. S., and Dasgupta, S. (2001). Off-policy temporal difference learning with
  function approximation. In ICML.
Puterman, M. L. (2014). Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
  Wiley & Sons.
Raileanu, R., Goldstein, M., Szlam, A., and Fergus, R. (2020). Fast adaptation to new environments
  via policy-dynamics value functions. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pages 7920–7931.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rechenberg, I. (1971). Evolutionsstrategie - Optimierung technischer Systeme nach Prinzipien der
  biologischen Evolution. Dissertation. Published 1973 by Fromman-Holzboog.
Salimans, T., Ho, J., Chen, X., Sidor, S., and Sutskever, I. (2017). Evolution strategies as a scalable
  alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864.
Schaul, T., Horgan, D., Gregor, K., and Silver, D. (2015). Universal value function approximators.
  In Proceedings of the 32Nd International Conference on International Conference on Machine
  Learning - Volume 37, ICML’15, pages 1312–1320. JMLR.org.
Schmidhuber, J. (1991). Reinforcement learning in Markovian and non-Markovian environments.
  In Lippman, D. S., Moody, J. E., and Touretzky, D. S., editors, Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 3 (NIPS 3), pages 500–506. Morgan Kaufmann.
Schmidhuber, J. (1992). Learning complex, extended sequences using the principle of history
  compression. Neural Computation, 4(2):234–242.
Schmidhuber, J. (2015). On learning to think: Algorithmic information theory for novel com-
  binations of reinforcement learning controllers and recurrent neural world models. Preprint
  arXiv:1511.09249.
Sehnke, F., Osendorfer, C., Rückstieß, T., Graves, A., Peters, J., and Schmidhuber, J. (2008). Policy
  gradients with parameter-based exploration for control. In Kůrková, V., Neruda, R., and Koutník,
  J., editors, Artificial Neural Networks - ICANN 2008, pages 387–396, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer
  Berlin Heidelberg.
Sehnke, F., Osendorfer, C., Rückstieß, T., Graves, A., Peters, J., and Schmidhuber, J. (2010).
  Parameter-exploring policy gradients. Neural Networks, 23(4):551–559.
Snoek, J., Larochelle, H., and Adams, R. P. (2012). Practical bayesian optimization of machine
  learning algorithms. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2951–2959.
Snoek, J., Rippel, O., Swersky, K., Kiros, R., Satish, N., Sundaram, N., Patwary, M. M. A., Prabhat,
  P., and Adams, R. P. (2015). Scalable bayesian optimization using deep neural networks. In
  Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on International Conference on Machine
  Learning - Volume 37, ICML’15, page 2171–2180. JMLR.org.
Stratonovich, R. (1960). Conditional Markov processes. Theory of Probability And Its Applications,
   5(2):156–178.
Sutton, R. S. (1984). Temporal Credit Assignment in Reinforcement Learning. PhD thesis, University
  of Massachusetts Amherst.
Sutton, R. S. (1988). Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine learning,
  3(1):9–44.
Sutton, R. S., Modayil, J., Delp, M., Degris, T., Pilarski, P. M., White, A., and Precup, D. (2011).
  Horde: A scalable real-time architecture for learning knowledge from unsupervised sensorimotor
  interaction. In The 10th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems -
  Volume 2, AAMAS ’11, pages 761–768, Richland, SC. International Foundation for Autonomous
  Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Tang, H., Meng, Z., Hao, J., Chen, C., Graves, D., Li, D., Yu, C., Mao, H., Liu, W., Yang, Y., et al.
  (2020). What about inputting policy in value function: Policy representation and policy-extended
  value function approximator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.09536.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. (2012). Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In
  2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 5026–5033.
Wang, T., Zhu, J.-Y., Torralba, A., and Efros, A. A. (2018). Dataset distillation. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:1811.10959.
Wierstra, D., Schaul, T., Glasmachers, T., Sun, Y., Peters, J., and Schmidhuber, J. (2014). Natural
 evolution strategies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(1):949–980.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wu, Y., Mansimov, E., Grosse, R. B., Liao, S., and Ba, J. (2017). Scalable trust-region method
 for deep reinforcement learning using kronecker-factored approximation. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30.
Zhao, T., Hachiya, H., Tangkaratt, V., Morimoto, J., and Sugiyama, M. (2013). Efficient sample reuse
  in policy gradients with parameter-based exploration. Neural computation, 25(6):1512–1547.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
A.1   MNIST I MPLEMENTATION

For our experiments with MNIST we adapt the official code for PSSVF to CNN policies and the
MNIST classification problem.

      • Policy architecture: The policy consists of two convolutional layers with 4 and 8 output
        channels respectively, 3 × 3 kernels and a stride of 1. Each convolutional layer is followed
        by ReLU activations. The output from the convolutional layers is flattened and provided to
        a fully connected linear layer which outputs the logits for the ten MNIST classes. The logits
        are fed into a categorical distribution; the outputs are interpreted as class probabilities.
      • Value function architecture: MLP with 2 hidden layers and 64 neurons per layer with bias.
        ReLU activations.
      • Batch size for computing the loss: 1024
      • Batch size for value function optimization: 4
      • Buffer size: 1000
      • Loss: Cross entropy
      • Initialization of probing states: uniformly random in [−0.5, 0.5)
      • Update frequency: every time a new episode is collected
      • Number of policy updates: 1
      • Number of value function updates: 5
      • Learning rate policy: 1e-6
      • Learning rate value function: 1e-3
      • Noise for policy perturbation: 0.05
      • Priority sampling from replay buffer: True, with weights 1/x0.8 , where x is the number of
        episodes since the data was stored in the buffer
      • Default PyTorch initialization for all networks.
      • Optimizer: Adam

A.2   RL I MPLEMENTATION

Here we report the hyperparameters used for PSSVF and the baselines. For PSSVF, we use the open
source implementation provided by Faccio et al. (2021). For DDPG and SAC, we use the spinning-up
RL implementation (Achiam, 2018), whose results are on par with the best reported results. For ARS,
we adapt the publicly available implementation (Mania et al., 2018) to Deep NN policies.
Shared hyperparameters:

      • Policy architecture: Deterministic MLP with 2 hidden layers and 256 neurons per layer with
        bias. Tanh activations for PSSVF and ARS. ReLu activations for DDPG and SAC. The
        output layer has Tanh nonlinearity and bounds the action in the action-space limit.
      • Value function architecture: MLP with 2 hidden layers and 256 neurons per layer with bias.
        ReLU activations for PSSVF and DDPG and SAC.
      • Initialization for actors and critics: Default PyTorch initialization
      • Batch size: 128 for DDPG and SAC. 16 for PSSVF
      • Learning rate actor: 1e-3 for DDPG and SAC; 2e-6 for PSSVF
      • Learning rate critic: 1e-3 for DDPG and SAC, 5e-3 for PSSVF
      • Noise for exploration: 0.05 in parameter space for PSSVF; 0.1 in action space for DDPG
      • Actor’s frequency of updates: every episode for PSSVF; every 50 time steps for DDPG and
        SAC; every batch for ARS


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Critic’s frequency of updates: every episode for PSSVF; every 50 time steps for DDPG and
         SAC
       • Replay buffer size: 100k for DDPG and SAC; 10k for PSSVF
       • Optimizer: Adam for PSSVF and DDPG and SAC
       • Discount factor: 0.99 for DDPG and SAC; 1 for PSSVF and ARS
       • Survival reward adjustment: True for ARS and PSSVF in Hopper, Walker, Ant; False for
         DDPG and SAC
       • Environmental interactions: 300k time steps in InvertedDoublePendulum; 3M time steps in
         all other environments

Tuned hyperparameters:

       • Step size for ARS: tuned with values in {1e − 2, 1e − 3, 1e − 4}
       • Number of directions and elite directions for ARS: tuned with values in
         {[1, 1], [8, 4], [8, 8], [32, 4], [32, 16], [64, 8], [64, 32]}, where the first element denotes the
         number of directions and the second element the number of elite directions
       • Noise for exploration in ARS: tuned with values in {0.1, 0.05, 0.025}

Hyperparameters for specific algorithms:
PSSVF:

       • Number of probing states: 200
       • Initialization of probing states: uniformly random in [0, 1)
       • Observation normalization: True
       • Number of policy updates: 5
       • Number of value function updates: 5
       • Priority sampling from replay buffer: True, with weights 1/x1.1 , where x is the number of
         episodes since the data was stored in the buffer

ARS:

       • Observation normalization: True

DDPG and SAC:

       • Observation normalization: False
       • Number of policy updates: 50
       • Number of value function updates: 50
       • Start-steps (random actions): 10000 time-steps
       • Update after (no training): 1000 time-steps
       • Polyak parameter: 0.995
       • Entropy parameter (SAC): 0.2

A.3    GPU USAGE / C OMPUTATION REQUIREMENTS

Each run of PSSVF in the main experiment takes around 2.5 hours on a Tesla P100 GPU. We ran 4
instances of our algorithm for each GPU. We estimate a total of 75 node hours to reproduce our main
RL results (20 independent runs for 6 environments).


                                                    14
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     B                   E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

     B.1                 MNIST EXPERIMENTS

    Online learning through Algorithm 1 We use PSSVF (Algorithm 1) with the hyperparameters
    described in Appendix A.1. Figure 6 shows the performance of PSSVF using CNNs on MNIST with
    10 and 50 probing states as a function of the number of interactions with the dataset. Each interaction
    consists of perturbing the current policy with random noise, computing the loss of the perturbed
    policy on a batch of data, storing the perturbed policy and its loss, and updating.

                80                                                       2.2
                                                                                                                     50 probing states
                                                                                                                     10 probing states
test accuracy


                60


                                                            train loss
                                                                         2.0
                40
                                                                         1.8
                20
                                                                         1.6
                     0     50000   100000 150000   200000                      0    50000   100000 150000   200000
                                     iterations                                               iterations



     Figure 6: On the left: test accuracy of PSSVF as a function of the interactions with the dataset. On
     the right: loss of the perturbed CNN on the training set. Average over 5 independent runs and 95%
     bootstrapped confidence interval.


     Visualization of learned probing states We plot the evolution of some of the probing states,
     starting from random noise, until the PSSVF is learned. We consider one run of the previous
     experiment with 10 probing states and show how they change during learning. This is depicted in
     Figure 7 where randomly initialized probing states slowly become similar to digits.

    Offline policy improvement This section describes the offline MNIST experiment of the main
    paper. Here every iteration encompasses the following steps. We perturb a randomly initialized
    CNN with gaussian noise with standard deviation 0.1. Then we compute the loss on a batch of 1024
    training data. If the accuracy on such batch is below 12%, we store the CNN and its loss, otherwise
    we discard the data. At every iteration we also train a PSSVF with 200 probing states, using the data
    collected (whose accuracy is at most 12%). We repeat this for 90000 iterations. Then, we randomly
    initialize a new CNN and train it by taking gradient steps through the fixed PSSVF, without further
    seeing training data. In Figure 8 we plot the performance of the zero-shot learned CNN. Surprisingly,
    it achieves a test accuracy of 65%, although only CNNs with at most 12% accuracy are used in
    training. From the same figure we also observe that the prediction of the PSSVF is quite accurate up
    to 80 gradient steps, after which the performance degrades. We use a learning rate of 1e − 3 for the
    CNN.

     Visualization of learned probing states When training the PSSVF using CNNs whose accuracy is
     at most 12%, we also observe the formation of "numbers" as probing states, although they are not as
     evident as in the online setting. We provide some examples in Figure 9.

     B.2                 M AIN EXPERIMENTS ON M U J O C O

    To measure learning progress, we evaluate each algorithm for 10 episodes every 10000 time steps.
    We use the learned policy for PSSVF and ARS and the deterministic actor (without action noise)
    for DDPG. We use 20 independent instances of the same hyperparameter configuration for PSSVF
    and DDPG in all environments. When tuning ARS, we run 5 instances of the algorithm for each
    hyperparameter configuration. Then we select the best hyperparameter for each environment and
    carry out a further 20 independent runs. We report the best hyperparameters found for ARS in Table 1.
    In addition to the learning curves of the main paper in Figure 3, we report the final return with a
    standard deviation in Table 2.


                                                                                   15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: From left to right, the 10 probing states learned by the PSSVF using Algorithm 1. Each
column represents 12500 interactions.



Ablation on weighted sampling In Figure 10 we show the benefit of using non-uniform sampling
from the replay buffer in Hopper and Walker environments. We compare uniform sampling (no
weight) to non uniform sampling with weight 1/xk , where k ∈ {1.0, 1.1}, and x is the number of
episodes since the data was stored in the buffer. We achieve the best results in Hopper and Walker for
the choice of x = 1.1. It is interesting to take this into consideration when comparing our approach
to vanilla PSSVF.


                                                 16
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                70                                                                     0.0023                                                                            test loss
                60                                                                     0.0022                                                                            value function prediction
test accuracy   50                                                                     0.0021
                                                                                       0.0020


                                                                                loss
                40
                                                                                       0.0019
                30
                                                                                       0.0018
                20                                                                     0.0017
                     0    25       50    75 100 125           150     175    200                 0              25   50       75 100 125          150    175    200
                                          gradient steps                                                                       gradient steps


     Figure 8: On the left: test accuracy of a random initialized CNN zero-shot learned using a learned
     PSSVF. On the right, the prediction of the performance of the CNN given by the PSSVF and the true
     performance on the test set. Average over 5 independent runs and 95% bootstrapped c.i.


     Figure 9: Samples of probing states learned by the PSSVF using CNNs with at most 12% training set
     accuracy.

                                                                Table 1: Best hyperparameters for ARS

                Environment                                                 step size                      directions             noise
                Walker2d-v3                                                   0.01                            [8,8]               0.05
                Swimmer-v3                                                    0.01                            [8,4]               0.05
                HalfCheetah-v3                                                0.01                            [8,4]               0.05
                Ant-v3                                                        0.01                          [32,16]               0.01
                Hopper-v3                                                     0.01                            [8,4]               0.05
                InvertedDoublePendulum-v2                                     0.01                            [8,8]               0.025

                                                  Table 2: Final return (average over final 20 evaluations)

                Environment                               PSSVF                            ARS                                    DDPG                       SAC
                Walker2d-v3                             2333 ± 343                      1488 ± 961                             2432 ± 1330               5287 ± 467
                Swimmer-v3                               349 ± 60                        342 ± 21                                129 ± 25                   44 ± 1
                HalfCheetah-v3                          3067 ± 820                      2497 ± 611                            10695 ± 1358               13599 ± 932
                Ant-v3                                  1549 ± 240                      1697 ± 225                              466 ± 716                5319 ± 992
                Hopper-v3                              2969 ± 165                       2340 ± 199                             1634 ± 1036               3292 ± 345
                InvertedDouble
                Pendulum-v2                          7649 ± 2640                       4515 ± 2733                        7377 ± 3770                      9235 ± 227

                                                Walker2d-v3                                                                               Hopper-v3
                3000                                                                                     3000                                                                           k=1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                        k=1.0
                2000                                                                                     2000                                                                           No weight
 return


                                                                                                return


                1000                                                                                     1000

                   0                                                                                        0
                  0.00M        0.50M    1.00M      1.50M      2.00M     2.50M           3.00M              0.00M      0.50M       1.00M     1.50M       2.00M    2.50M       3.00M
                                                 time steps                                                                               time steps


    Figure 10: Comparison between our algorithm without weighted sampling from the replay buffer and
    with weight 1/xk , where k ∈ {1.0, 1.1}. Average over 10 independent runs and 95% bootstrapped
    confidence interval.


                                                                                                           17
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Comparison to vanilla PSSVF Here we compare our PSSVF with policy fingerprinting to vanilla
  PSSVF. For vanilla PSSVF, we use the best hyperparameters reported by Faccio et al. (2021) when
  optimizing policies with 2 hidden layers and 64 neurons per layer and optimizing over the final
  rewards. Our algorithm uses the policy architecture of vanilla PSSVF and the hyperparameters of our
  main experiments, changing only the learning rate of the policy to 1e − 4 and the noise for policy
  perturbations to 0.1. Figure 11 shows that while in Swimmer policy fingerprinting is enough to
  achieve an improvement over vanilla PSSVF, in Hopper non-uniform sampling plays an important
  role. Note that in the vanilla PSSVF paper, learning rates and perturbation noise are tuned for each
  environment, while in our experiments we keep a fixed set of hyperparameters for all environments
  to maintain consistency. We expect the performance of our approach to also improve by selecting
  hyperparameters separately for each environment.
                                  Swimmer-v3                                                                       Hopper-v3
         300                                                                          3000                                                                vanilla pssvf
                                                                                                                                                          pssvf-fingerprint
         200                                                                          2000                                                                pssvf-fingerprint weighted sampling
return


                                                                             return
         100                                                                          1000
           0
                                                                                         0
          0.00M   0.50M   1.00M      1.50M      2.00M        2.50M   3.00M              0.00M    0.50M     1.00M     1.50M      2.00M   2.50M     3.00M
                                   time steps                                                                      time steps


  Figure 11: Comparison between vanilla PSSVF with no weighted sampling and no fingerprinting,
  PSSVF with policy fingerprinting, and our final algorithm that uses also weighted sampling. The
  solid line is the average over 10 independent runs; the shading indicates 95% bootstrapped confidence
  intervals.


  Zero-shot learning of new policy architectures For this task we use the same hyperparameters as
  in the main experiments (see Appendix A.2). We use a learning rate of 1e − 4 to zero-shot learn the
  linear policy. Figure 12 reports similar results for deep policies.
                                                     400

                                                     300

                                                     200
                                                return


                                                     100

                                                         0
                                                         0              200                     400            600              800             1000
                                                                                                gradient steps


  Figure 12: Performance of a deep policy (in blue) zero-shot learned (averaged over 5 runs, 95%
  bootstrapped CI). The orange line shows the best performance of the deep NN when training the
  PSSVF.


  B.3             F INGERPRINT A NALYSIS

 Learning Swimmer with 3 states We are interested in what is the smallest amount of state-
 action pairs we could use to clone an optimal policy. In order to select the 3 transitions we try all
 combinations of 3 probing states our of 5 that we used to train our PSSVF. When cloning using all
 5 probing states, the performance is very similar to the optimal policy. When choosing 4 out of 5
 probing states, we notice that the performance highly depends on which probing state is removed,
 suggesting that some of the learned probing states are more important than others. When trying 3 out
 of 5 probing states this effect is more evident, and many combinations of 3 probing states lead to poor
 cloning performance. Here we report the learning curves for the experiment in the main paper where
 we fit a randomly initialized policy using only 3 transitions (see Section 4.4). These 3 transitions
 are 3 probing states and the corresponding optimal action (probing action) in those states. We can


                                                                                                      18
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  see in Figure 13 that as the MSE loss goes to zero when fitting the 3 transitions, the return of the
  policy increases until it almost matches the optimal value. In this experiment we train a PSSVF with
  5 probing states following Algorithm 1 for 2M time steps. We manually select a subset of 3 probing
  states and act in those states using the learned policy. We then fit a new policy over those 3 transition.
  We use a batch size of 3 and a learning rate of 2e − 5 to fit the new policy. The other hyperparameters
  are the same as in the main experiments (see Appendix A.2).
                                                                   0.7
         300                                                       0.6
                                                                   0.5
         200                                                       0.4
return


                                                            loss
                                                                   0.3
         100                                                       0.2
                                                                   0.1
           0
                                                                   0.0
               0    1000   2000        3000   4000   5000                 0   1000   2000        3000   4000   5000
                            gradient steps                                            gradient steps



  Figure 13: On the left: return of the policy learned using 3 transitions in Swimmer. On the right,
  MSE for fitting the 3 transitions. Average over 5 independent runs and 95% bootstrapped confidence
  interval.

  Learning Hopper with 5 states We repeat the same experiment of cloning near-optimal behaviour
  from a few states in the Hopper environment. Using the action of a good policy (whose return is 2450)
  in 5 probing states, we are able to fit a new policy and obtain a final return of 2200. We use a batch
  size of 5 and a learning rate of 1e − 4 for the randomly initialized policy. All other hyperparameters
  are like in the Swimmer experiment with 3 transitions. Figure 14 shows the learning curve, while
  Figure 16 relates the behavior of the policy learned using the 5 transitions to the distance of the
  current agent’s state to the probing states. The 5 probing actions {ãk }5k=1 are:
                                    ã1 = [0.4859, 0.6492, −0.7818],
                                    ã2 = [0.9251, 0.9100, 0.2322],
                                    ã3 = [0.0405, 0.0475, 0.9091],
                                    ã4 = [0.2925, −0.4677, −0.1329],
                                    ã5 = [0.7578, 0.4327, −0.1521].
  We observe a similar behavior of the Swimmer experiments (Figure 15), where the action chosen
  by the agent is similar to the probing action of a probing state whenever the agent’s state is close to
  the probing state. Although the dynamics in Hopper are more complex than in Swimmer, 5 probing
  states are enough to make the agent perform non-trivial actions in the environment.
                                                                   0.10
         2500
         2000                                                      0.08

         1500                                                      0.06
return


                                                            loss


         1000                                                      0.04
         500                                                       0.02
           0                                                       0.00
                0   1000   2000        3000   4000   5000                 0   1000   2000        3000   4000   5000
                            gradient steps                                            gradient steps



  Figure 14: On the left: return of the policy learned using 5 transitions in Hopper. On the right,
  MSE for fitting the 5 transitions. Average over 5 independent runs and 95% bootstrapped confidence
  interval.



                                                        19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 15: Behavior of the policy learned from 3 probing state-probing action pairs in Swimmer. From
top to bottom: each component of the state vector across time steps in an environment simulation;
each component of the action vector; L2 distance of the current state to each of the 3 probing states
used for learning.


Figure 16: Behavior of the policy learned from 5 probing state-probing action pairs in Hopper. From
top to bottom: each component of the state vector across time steps in an environmental simulation;
each component of the action vector; L2 distance of the current state to each of the 5 probing states
used for learning.



                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Visualization of probing states in RL In Figure 15 we show the three probing states of the
last experiment on Swimmer. In environments like Hopper and Walker, probing states might not
correspond to a real state in the environment (e.g. some components of the probing state are outside
a specific range). We notice that this is usually not the case and that the learned probing states
generally correspond to valid environmental states. Moreover, we observe that probing states tend
to get closer to certain critical situations over learning. These are states where certain actions have
a significant effect on the future. In the Ant environment, we notice that all components of the
probing state vector from index 28 to 111 learn a value of around 1e − 8. Interestingly, the process of
fingerprinting discovers this ‘bug’ in MuJoCo 2.0.2.2 that sets all contact forces in Ant to zero. Since
these components of the state vector remain constant during the environmental interactions, and are
therefore not relevant for learning, the PSSVF learns to set them to zero as well.
Figure 17 shows the evolution of the Swimmer environment from the selected probing states when no
action is taken. The 3 probing states reported are those used for the experiment of Figures 13 and 15.


Figure 17: From top to bottom: the three learned probing states in Swimmer. From left to right:
Evolution of the environment over time steps. The agent is initialized in the probing state and
performs no action.


Figure 18: From top to bottom: the 5 learned probing states on Hopper. From left to right: various
time steps in the environment. The agent is initialized in the probing state and performs no action.



Figure 18 shows 3 out of the 5 learned probing states on Hopper in the experiment of Figures 14
and 16. The other 2 probing states do not correspond to valid states in Hopper and are therefore
not visualized. No action is taken from the probing state and the environment is allowed to evolve
naturally from the probing state. The duration of interaction differs in each row of the figure as
termination occurs at different points from the probing states.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 19: Evolution of the environment from a probing state when (Top) no actions taken, (Bottom)
the first action in the probing state is taken using a good policy. Then no action is performed.


Figure 19 supports our hypothesis that some probing states might capture critical scenarios. In the
considered probing state from Hopper we see that taking no action results in immediate failure as
indicated by the shorter span of interaction in the top panel of Figure 19. In contrast, acting for a
single time-step with a successful policy in that situation helps the agent survive and prolongs the
interaction (bottom panel of Figure 19).
Additional probing states for all environments can be seen in animated form on the website https:
//anonymous260522.github.io/.

C    S OCIETAL I MPACT
Our work makes algorithmic contributions to actor-critic approaches for reinforcement learning and
does not focus on specific real-world applications. Using our PSSVF for offline improvement of
policies (as shown in our MNIST experiment) could help mitigate risks from directly applying deep
neural network policies to online situations in the real world.

D    E NVIRONMENT DETAILS
Mujoco is made available with Apache License 2.0. The MNIST dataset is available through the
creative commons license CC BY-SA 3.0.


                                                 22
