Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING TO TAKE A B REAK : S USTAINABLE
O PTIMIZATION OF L ONG -T ERM U SER E NGAGEMENT
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Optimizing user engagement is a key goal for modern recommendation systems,
         but blindly pushing users towards increased consumption risks burn-out, churn, or
         even addictive habits. To promote digital well-being, most platforms now offer a
         service that periodically prompts users to take a break. These, however, must be
         set up manually, and so may be suboptimal for both users and the system. In this
         paper, we propose a framework for optimizing long-term engagement by learning
         individualized breaking policies. Using Lotka-Volterra dynamics, we model users
         as acting based on two balancing latent states: drive, and interest—which must
         be conserved. We then give an efficient learning algorithm, provide theoretical
         guarantees, and empirically evaluate its performance on semi-synthetic data.


1   I NTRODUCTION
As consumers of content, we have come to rely extensively on algorithmic recommendations. This
has made the task of recommending—in a relevant, timely, and personalized manner—key to the
success of modern media platforms. Most commercial systems are built with the primary aim of
optimizing user engagement, a process in which machine learning plays a central role. But alongside
their many successes, recommendation systems have also been scrutinized for heedlessly driving
users towards excessive and often undesired levels of consumption. This has raised awareness as to
the need for redesigning recommendation systems in ways that actively promote digital well-being.
How can media platforms balance business goals with user well-being? One prominent approach,
which is now offered by most major platforms, is to periodically prompt users to take breaks (Con-
stine, 2018; Perez, 2018). The idea behind breaks is that occasional disruptions curb the inertial
urge for perpetual consumption, and can therefore aid in reducing ‘mindless scrolling’ (Rauch,
2018), or even addiction (Montag et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2016). As a general means for promoting
well-being, breaking is psychologically well-grounded (e.g., Danziger et al., 2011; Sievertsen et al.,
2016). But for platforms, breaks serve a utilitarian purpose: their goal is to foster long-term engage-
ment by compensating for the myopic nature of conventional recommendation algorithms, which are
typically trained to optimize immediate engagement. Since breaking schedules are applied heuris-
tically on top of existing recommendation policies—and typically need to be set up manually by
users—current solutions unlikely utilize their full potential (Monge Roffarello & De Russis, 2019).
In this paper, we propose a disciplined learning framework for responsible and sustainable optimiza-
tion of long-term user engagement by controlling breaks. Our point of departure is that sustained
engagement necessitates sustained user well-being, and here we advocate for breaks as a means to
establish both. Focusing on feed-based recommendation, our framework optimizes long-term en-
gagement by learning an optimal breaking policy that prescribes individualized breaking schedules.
The challenge in learning to break is that the effects of recommendations on users can slowly accu-
mulate over time, deeming as ineffectual policies that rely on clear signs of over-exposure. To be
preemptive, we argue that breaks must be scheduled in a way that anticipates the future trajectory
of user behavior, and early on. To achieve this, we introduce a novel class of behavioral models
based on Lokta-Volterra (LV) dynamical systems (Lotka, 1910). These depict users as acting based
on two balancing forces: drive to consume and intrinsic interest, with corresponding latent states.
Intuitively, high interest increases drive to consume, but prolonged consumption decreases interest;
together, these describe how user behavior varies over time and in response to recommendations.
Our model captures the notion that interest can exhaust long before over-consumption is observed.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This arms our approach with the prescience needed to prevent burn-out by ensuring that interest is
sustainably preserved; thus, whereas current solutions target the symptom—ours aims for the cause.
Our proposed learning algorithm consists of two steps: First, we embed user interaction sequences
in ‘LV-space’—the set of all possible trajectories that our behavioral model class can express. Then,
we optimize individualized breaking policies by solving an optimal control problem over this la-
tent space, in which the control variable is a breaking schedule applied on top of the existing rec-
ommendation scheme. Here the challenge is that different breaking policies can lead to different
counterfactual trajectories, of which observational data is only partially informative. Since our goal
considers long-term outcomes, our solution is to optimize directly for counterfactual steady-states.
From a behavioral perspective, we view this as aiming to steer towards sustainable habits; from a
computational perspective, under our choice of policy class, this enables tractable learning.
As we show, the optimization landscape of LV equilibria admits a compact representation, whose
main benefit is that it can be fully described by predictions of individualized user engagement rates.
Practically, this is advantageous, as it circumvents the need to take arbitrary and costly exploration
steps, and enables learning using readily available predictive tools (e.g., Gupta et al., 2006). We
make use of a small set of learned predictive models, each trained on a small and minimally-invasive
experimental dataset, which allow us to tune our policy to suit different conditions. The final learned
policy has an intuitive interpretation: it takes as input a small set of predictions for a user, and via
careful interpolation, applies a decision rule that anticipates the effects of breaking on future out-
comes (c.f. conventional approaches, which take in predictions and apply the myopic argmax rule).
Our main theoretical result is a bound on the expected long-term engagement of our learned breaking
policy, relative to the optimal policy in the class. We show that the gap decomposes into three distinct
additive terms: (i) predictive error, (ii) modeling error (i.e., embedding distortion), and (iii) variance
around the (theoretical) steady state. These provide an intuitive interpretation of the bound, as well
as means to understand the effects of different modeling choices. Our proof technique relies on
carefully weaving LV equilibrium analysis within conventional concentration bounds for learning.
Finally, we provide an empirical evaluation of our approach on semi-synthetic data. Using the
MoiveLens 1M dataset, we generate discrete time-series data in a way that captures the essence of
our behavioral model, but is different from the actual continuous-time dynamics we optimize over.
Results show that despite this gap, our approach improves significantly over myopic baselines, and
often closely matches an optimal oracle. Taken together, these demonstrate the potential utility of
our approach. Code is available at: https://github.com/lvml-iclr-2023/lvml.

Broader perspective. At a high level, our work argues for viewing recommendation as a task of
sustainable resource management. As other cognitive tasks, engaging with digital content requires
the availability of certain cognitive resources—attentional, executive, or emotional. These resources
are inherently limited, and prolonged engagement depletes them (Kahneman, 1973; Muraven &
Baumeister, 2000); this, in turn, can reduce the capacity of key cognitive processes (e.g., perception,
attention, memory, self-control, and decision-making), and in the extreme—cause ego depletion
(Baumeister et al., 1998) or cognitive fatigue (Mullette-Gillman et al., 2015). As a means to allow
resources to replenish, ‘mental breaks’ have been shown to be highly effective (Bergum & Lehr,
1962; Hennfng et al., 1989; Gilboa et al., 2008; Ross et al., 2014; Helton & Russell, 2017).
Nevertheless, traditional approaches to recommendation remain agnostic to the idea that recom-
mending takes a cognitive toll: they simply recommend at each point in time the item predicted to
be most engaging (Robertson, 1977). As an alternative, our approach explicitly models recommen-
dation as a process which draws on these resources, and therefore—must also conserve them. The
subclass of ‘Predator-Prey’ LV dynamics which we draw on are used extensively in ecology for mod-
eling the dynamics of interacting populations, and demonstrate how over-predation can ultimately
lead to self-extinction by eliminating the prey population—but also show how enabling resources
to naturally replenish ensures sustainable relations. As such, here we advocate for studying recom-
mendation systems as human-centric ecosystems, and take one step towards their sustainable design.

1.1   R ELATED WORK

User dynamics: latent states and feedback. A recent body of work aims to capture time-varying
behavior by modeling users as acting based on dynamic latent states. Broadly, works in this field


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


model the effects of recommendations as either shifting user preferences via positive-only feedback
(Jiang et al., 2019; Kalimeris et al., 2021; Sanna Passino et al., 2021; Dean & Morgenstern, 2022), or
reducing willingness to consume via negative-only feedback, e.g. via boredom, satiation, or fatigue
(Wang & Lin, 2003; Warlop et al., 2018; Kleinberg & Immorlica, 2018; Cao et al., 2020; Leqi et al.,
2021). While these restrict behavior to expressing a unidirectional effect, our approach integrates
both types of feedback and models internal states as competing but balancing forces, which we argue
is more realistic. This draws connections to recent attempts of injecting psychological modeling into
recommendation system design (Kleinberg et al., 2022; Dubey et al., 2022; Curmei et al., 2022).
Works in this field often combine theoretical analysis with simulation studies (Schmit & Riquelme,
2018; Chaney et al., 2018; Mansoury et al., 2020; Krauth et al., 2020), and here we follow suit.

Lotka-Volterra dynamics: modeling, learning, and control. The study of ecosystem dynamics
and their conservation has a long and rich history, in which LV analysis plays an integral role (see
e.g. Hofbauer et al. (1998); Takeuchi (1996)). LV systems our used primarily for modeling biologi-
cal ecosystems, but are also used in economics (Weibull, 1997; Samuelson, 1998), finance (Farmer,
2002; Scholl et al., 2021), and behavioral modeling (e.g., drug addiction and relapse (Duncan et al.,
2019)). In terms of learning, Gorbach et al. (2017) and Ryder et al. (2018) propose variational tech-
niques for dynamical systems, but do not consider control. Our work aims to directly learn optimal
policies, for which we draw on recent advances in turnpike optimal control (Trélat & Zuazua, 2015).

2       L EARNING SETTING
We consider a sequential recommendation setting in which users interact with a stream of recom-
mended items over time. New users u are sampled independently from some unknown distribution
D, and time for each user is measured relative to their time of joining. Interactions occur at discrete
time-points in continuous time, t ∈ R+ , and upon user request: when a user u queries the system for
additional content at time t, the system responds by presenting a recommended item x(t) ∈ X . We
assume recommendations are governed by an existing and fixed recommendation policy ψ, which
determines x(t) given a request from u at time t. We allow ψ to be stochastic, and make no ad-
ditional assumptions on its structure or mechanics. User interactions are therefore described by a
sequence of pairs {(ti , xi )}i , where xi = x(ti ) ∼ ψ(u; ti ) ∈ X is the item recommended to u at
time ti .
Our key modeling assumption is that subsequent request times, ti+1 = ti + ∆ti for ∆ti > 0, are
determined jointly by the user’s ‘state’ at time ti and the recommended item xi (note this means ∆ti
can depend on ti ). We consider user states as latent and in the abstract, but broadly expect ‘good’
recommendations to entail frequent requests by inducing small values of ∆ti . Together, user u’s
choice behavior, coupled with the policy ψ, induce a temporal point process (TPP) which governs
the generation of interaction sequences of duration t as {(ti , xi ) | ti ∈ [0, t]} ∼ TPPψ (u; t).
For each user, the system collects data until some (relative) fixed time T0 , and seeks to optimize
engagement in the subsequent interval [T0 , T0 + T ], where T is a predetermined time horizon. We
denote the corresponding input sequences by Su0 = {(ti , xi ) | ti ∈ [0, T0 )}, and target sequences
by Su = {(ti , xi ) | ti ∈ [T0 , T ]}. Defining by T1 |Su | the engagement rate of u for the chosen
time horizon T , our
                   goal  in learning will be to maximize expected long-term user engagement rate,
namely Eu∼D E T1 |Su | for (Su0 , Su ) ∼ TPPψ (u; T0 + T ), in expectation over new users.

Breaking policies. The unique aspect of our learning problem is that our only means for increasing
engagement is by suggesting breaks. Our task will be to learn a breaking policy π ∈ Π which can
override ψ: when user u queries the system at time ti , the policy π(u; ti ) ∈ {0, 1} determines
whether to present the intended item x(t) ∼ ψ(u; ti ) (for π = 0), or suggest a break instead
(π = 1).1 Denoting the overall composed policy by π ◦ ψ, our aim is to learn a breaking policy π
that increases engagement by complementing an existing ψ. Hence, our learning objective is:

              arg maxπ∈Π Eu∼D ETPP T1 |Su | ,      (Su0 , Su ) ∼ TPPπ◦ψ (u; T0 + T )           (1)
Broadly, we expect breaks to negatively affect short-term engagement (i.e., entail longer ensuing
∆ti ), but have the potential to improve engagement in the long run if scheduled appropriately.
    1
        This is similar in spirit to the ‘learning to defer’ paradigm (Madras et al., 2018), but in a different context.


                                                            3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Data and exploration. For learning an optimal breaking policy, we assume the system has access
to a dataset of previously logged interactions S = {(S10 , S1 ), . . . , (Sm
                                                                           0
                                                                             , Sm )} for m train-time users
u1 , . . . , um ∼ D, collected under a ‘clean’ recommendation policy ψ. It will be convenient to
assume that the system ‘featurizes’ user input sequences Su0 via a vector mapping ϕ used in learning.
For clarity, we overload notation and represent users as u = ϕ(Su0 ) ∈ Rd . This allows us to support
additional user feedback (e.g., ratings) or information (e.g., demographics) as input to ϕ.
Since Eq. (1) is a policy problem (note breaks affect outcomes), learning requires some form of
exploration or experimentation. Here we aim for experimentation to be simple and minimal. Specif-
                                                                                              mj
ically, we assume access to a small number of N additional datasets, S (j) = {(uk , Sk )}k=1      , col-
lected for different users, and under composed policies πj ◦ ψ for various predetermined πj . These
datasets can either be given at the onset, or collected as part of the learning process; our only usage
of them will be for learning predictors ŷ = fj (u) of engagement rate y = T1 |Su |. Ideally, we would
like to make do with only a few S (j) of small size and that can be gathered concurrently; our results
show that even a single additional dataset can be highly informative, and in some cases sufficient.

Learning to break. To effectively optimize Eq. (1), learning must anticipate the effects of different
breaking policies π ∈ Π on future sequences Su of unobserved users u. It will therefore be useful to
distinguish between the policy π itself, which determines when breaks are applied, and a component
for estimating individualized counterfactual engagement rates T1 |Ŝu (π)| induced by π, which will
aid in choosing a good policy. Our focus will be on learning simple policies coupled with rich and
task-appropriate models of responsive user behavior. In particular, we set Π to include all stationary
policies, π(u) = π(pu ), which for each user u recommends a break with a time-independent per-
sonalized probability pu = p(u) ∈ [0, 1]. Stationary policies are interpretable, amenable to efficient
optimization, and straightforward to implement. As we show, despite their simplicity, such policies
can be quite expressive when coupled with an appropriate behavioral model.

3    E NGAGEMENT VIA ‘P REDATOR -P REY ’ DYNAMICS
To optimize engagement with breaks, we propose to model user behavior as a dynamical system of
Lotka-Volterra (LV) Predator-Prey equations. The model operates over continuous dynamics, which
has analytic and optimizational benefits; we later make the connection back to discrete sequences.

Behavioral model. Our model of user behavior views each user as acting based on two types of
time-dependent latent variables: internal drive for consumption, denoted by λ(t) ∈ R+ ; and intrinsic
interest, denoted by q(t) ∈ [0, 1]. Intuitively, we expect that engaging experiences will reinforce a
user’s desire to further consume; conversely, excessive exposure to content should slowly ‘erode’
her interest—but left alone, will allow it to replenish (Thoman et al., 2011). Thus, drive and interest
act as balancing forces. Together, we model the time-dependent relations between λ(t) and q(t) as:
                          dλ                            dq
                             = −αλ + βλq,                  = γq(1 − q) − δλq                           (2)
                          dt                            dt
where θ = (α, β, γ, δ) ≥ 0 parameterize the dynamics. For λ (drive, or ‘predator’), α determines its
natural decay rate, and β its interest-dependent self-reinforcement rate; for q (interest, or ‘prey’), γ
specifies its natural replenishment rate, and δ its rate of depletion from consumption. Note the two
equations are coupled: q mediates the reinforcement of λ, and λ mediates the depletion of q.

Dynamical properties. The LV model in Eq. (2) describes consumption as a cycle: when interest
q(t) is high, drive to consume λ(t) increases, resulting in positive feedback; conversely, when λ(t) is
high, q(t) decreases, which expresses negative feedback. In general, λ grows until interest is too low
to sustain consumption, at which point consumption drops sharply, allowing interest to recover—and
the cycle repeats. The cycling behavior exhibits oscillations in λ and q, with one lagging after the
other. A typical trajectory is illustrated in Figure 1. Note how the drop in λ occurs only some time
after q is depleted; hence, anticipating (and preventing) the collapse of λ requires knowledge (and
conservation) of q. Thus, q serves as a resource: necessary for consumption, and of limited supply.
Over time, and if no interventions are applied, the magnitude of oscillations decreases, and the
system naturally approaches a stable equilibrium, denoted (λ∗ , q ∗ ), determined by the system pa-


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   λ(t) and q(t) - Joint evolution over time                                                                  (λ, q) - Phase-space diagram
                                                                                                                                    0.8
                                                               Consumption drive λ(t)                                                                                        (λ(t), q(t))
                          20                                                                  0.7                                   0.7
                                                               Intrinsic interest q(t)                                                                                       (λ∗ , q ∗ )
 Consumption drive λ(t)
                                                               Equilibrium consumption λ∗
                          15                                                                                                        0.6


                                                                                                    Interest q(t)



                                                                                                                    Interest q(t)
                                                                                              0.6

                                                                                                                                    0.5
                          10                                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                    0.4
                           5                                                                  0.4
                                                                                                                                    0.3

                           0                                                                  0.3
                               0      20         40            60          80           100                                               0   5         10            15         20
                                                      Time t                                                                                      Consumption drive λ(t)


Figure 1: Characteristic LV dynamics (Eq. (2)). (Left) Temporal relations between consumption
drive λ(t), intrinsic interest q(t), and equilibrium λ∗ . Note how λ drops only some time after q has
depleted. (Right) Evolution of the same system in phase space (λ, q), with its equilibrium (λ∗ , q ∗ ).


rameters θ = (α, β, γ, δ) and which attracts all initial conditions λ(0), q(0) (Takeuchi, 1996). Equi-
librium plays a key role in our approach, as it captures the notion of habits, which we aim to improve.

Engagement maximization as optimal control. To optimize engagement (Eq. (1)), we propose
to optimize λ∗ as an alternative proxy. Broadly, our approach will be to associate with each user
u a dynamical system parameterized by θu = (αu , βu , γu , δu ), and recommend breaks which lead
to high values of the corresponding λ∗u = λ∗θu . Intuitively, if we think of T1 |Su | as an ‘empirical’
rate (determined by the ∆ti in Su ), then λ∗u is its continuous theoretical counterpart, and so ideally
we would like to find a θu for which λ∗u is the limiting behavior of T1 |Su | (i.e., when ∆t → 0 and
T → ∞). In practice, we expect λ∗u to be a useful target when the observed T1 |Su | exhibits habits
that are ‘close enough’ to the theoretical equilibrium, and in Sec. 4.3 we make this condition precise.
Since our goal is to optimize a breaking policy, we must also be precise about the way breaks affect
dynamics in our model. Towards this, we introduce into Eq. (2) a control variable, p(t) ∈ [0, 1],
which acts as a ‘gate’ that controls the mediation strength between λ(t) and q(t) via:
               dλ                                   dq
                   = −αλ + βλq(1 − p),                  = γq(1 − q) − δλq(1 − p)                  (3)
               dt                                   dt
When p > 0, breaking has a dual effect: it decelerates drive λ, and at the same time, lets q recover.
Our goal will now be to solve the optimal control problem of finding p(t) which maximizes λ∗ .
Note that not every dynamic controlling schedule guarantees convergence to some λ∗ . Hence, we
focus on fixed controls, p ∈ [0, 1], which we prove converge to equilibrium, and having closed form.
Lemma 1. Let θ = (α, β, γ, δ) define an LV system as in Eq. (3). Then for any p ∈ [0, 1], we have:

                     γ 1             α 1
           λ∗θ (p) =           1−                if p ∈ [0, 1 − α/β] , and zero otherwise.        (4)
                     δ 1−p           β 1−p

Proof in Appendix A.1. For optimization, Lemma 1 is useful since it depicts λ∗ as a function of p,
parameterized by θ. Thus, given some θu for user u, our objective is to solve the control problem:
                                                                           pu = arg maxp∈[0,1] λ∗θu (p)                                                                                    (5)
Optimizing engagement now reduces to solving Eq. (5); given pu , we make the connection back to
discrete time by setting the breaking policy to be π(pu ), which recommends breaks at rate pu .

4                          L EARNING OPTIMAL BREAKING POLICIES
We now turn to presenting our learning algorithm. Our approach to optimizing engagement consists
of two steps: (i) associating with each user u a set of LV parameters θu , and then (ii) finding pu which
maximizes λ∗θu (p), and plugging into π(pu ). In practice, we add an intermediate prediction step,
which allows us to ‘shortcut’ directly from observations to optimal policies. We conclude with     anal-
ysis showing when learned policies π(pu ) lead to good expected engagement Eu∼D ETPP T1 |Su | .


                                                                                                          5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.1   E MBEDDING USERS IN LV SPACE

To find θu , a seemingly reasonable
                           P        approach would be to fit an LV trajectory to the initial sequence
Su0 , i.e., by solving minθ i |∆ti − λθ (ti )| for the observed ti ∈ Su0 . This can be interpreted as
embedding Su0 in ‘LV-space’ by finding the nearest continuous trajectory, for which θ provides a
compact representation. However, a key issue with this approach is that Su0 contains past observa-
tions made under a single policy π(p) (e.g., the ‘clean’ policy π(0)). To optimize future engagement,
the learned θu must correctly account for the affects of general p on possbile ensuing sequences Su .
As an alternative, we propose to find θu by fitting the entire equilibrium curve of λ∗θ (p) (Eq. (4)).
Formally, for each p, define the expected empirical engagement rate λ̄u (p) as:

                         λ̄u (p) = Eπ T1 |Su | ,   Su ∼ TPPπ(p)◦ψ (u; T )                         (6)
i.e., λ̄ is the rate of counterfactual future trajectories for all possible choices of p. Ideally, we would
like to find θ for which the learned curve λ∗θ (p) closely aligns with that of λ̄u (p) across p ∈ [0, 1]:
                                        θ̄u = arg min ∥λ̄u − λ∗θ ∥                                      (7)
                                                  θ

for some function norm ∥ · ∥, and for which λ∗θ̄u and λ̄u have similar maximizing p (since we aim for
optimizing λ∗θ to work well for λ̄u ). Unfortunately, λ̄u is a theoretical construct, and so θ̄u cannot
be obtained from observations. Hence, we propose to replace λ̄u with a finite set of predictions.

The role of prediction. Recall our input consists of a primary dataset S (0) = S = {(ui , Si )}m       i=1 ,
as well as additional ‘experimental’ datasets S (j) collected under different πj = π(pj ) and of
sizes mj for j = 1, . . . , N . We can use these to learn individualized, policy-specific predictors
fj (u) = fpj (u), trained to predict for each user u her engagement rate y = T1 |Su | under πj . For ex-
                                                      P
ample, if we train fj to minimize the squared error k (fj (uk ) − yk )2 on pairs (uk , yk ) ∈ S (j) , then
fj (u) should be a reasonable estimator of the expected λ̄u (pj ). Hence, for a given u, a finite set of
                                                                ∗
pairs {(pj , fj (u))}N
                     j=1 gives points to which we can fit θ to λθ . Our final criterion for choosing θ̂u is:

                                                               N
                                                               X                            2
                    θ̂u = arg min ∥f (u) − λ∗θ ∥ = arg min           (fj (u) − λ∗θ (pj ))               (8)
                              θ                           θ    j=1

given here with the ℓ2 vector norm, and where f (u) = (f1 (u), f2 (u), . . . , fN (u)) ∈ RN
                                                                                          + . As we
will see next, optimizing over p requires only the ratios α/β and γ/δ, in which λ∗ is quadratic.
Hence, Eq. (8) can be efficiently solved using a polynomial Non-Negative Least Squares (NNLS)
regression solver (Chen & Plemmons, 2010).

The role of experimentation. Two parameters control the goodness of fit for θ̂u : the number of
experimental datasets, N , and their sizes, mj for j ∈ [N ]. In general, increasing N provides more
data points for solving Eq. (8), and increasing each mj reduces noise for that point (i.e., fu (p) should
be closer to λ̄u ). But experimentation is costly, and so in reality N and the mj may be small. As
motivation, we next show that under realizability and for accurate predictions, N = 2 suffices.
Proposition 1. Fix N = 2, and let p0 , p1 ∈ [0, 1 − α/β]. For a user u, if (i) exists θu s.t. λ̄u = λ∗θu ,
and (ii) fi (u) = λ̄u (pi ) for i = 1, 2, then θ̂u is optimal, i.e., solving Eq. (8) gives θ̂u = θ̄u .

Proof in Appendix A.1, and relies on Lemma 1. Next, we discuss how to obtain π(u) from θu .

4.2   F ROM PREDICTIONS TO OPTIMAL POLICIES

Recall our goal is to learn an individualized breaking policy π that for each user u applies an appro-
priate, personalized breaking schedule π(u). To be able to generalize to unseen u, the conventional
approach is to learn a parameterized policy π(u; η), where η is optimized on training data, and ap-
plied to new users at test-time. Our approach, by relying on predictions, circumvents the need to
learn parameterized policies: once the predictors {fj (u)}j have been learned, the policy problem
decomposes over users, and optimal policies π(u) are determined independently for each user.


                                                      6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   LV equilibrium consumption λ∗ (p)                                    Optimal stationary policy p∗ (α/β)                                  Policy optimization from data



                                                                 β                                           β                                                    8
                                                                 α = 0.7                          0.4        α = 0.7


Equilibrium consumption λ∗ γδ
                        6                                        β                                           β
                                                                 α = 1.5                                     α = 1.5


                                                                           Optimal policy (p∗ )


                                                                                                                                               Consumption rate
                                                                 β                                0.3        β                                                    7
                                                                 α = 2.8                                     α = 2.8

                        4                                                                                        ∗    β
                                                                                                             p        α
                                                                                                  0.2                                                             6

                        2                                                                                                                                                      λ̄u (p)           (pi , fpi (u))
                                                                                                  0.1                                                             5            λ∗θ̄u (p)         p̂
                                                                                                                                                                               λ∗θ̂ (p)          p∗
                                                                                                                                                                                  u
                        0                                                                         0.0                                                             4
                                  0.0     0.2        0.4        0.6                                            1          2           3                               0.0        0.2         0.4        0.6
                                         Probability of break (p)                                             System parameters (β/α)                                            Probability of break (p)


Figure 2: (Left) Equilibrium curves λ∗ (p) and optimal policies p∗ (markers) for user types (θu )
that: benefit from breaks (green), do not require breaks (orange), and will inevitably churn (blue).
(Center) The optimal policy p∗ for all β/α, showing a second-order phase change at β/α = 2.
(Right) An illustration of the true counterfactual engagement curve (orange),


Optimal policies. Given θu , our next result establishes a closed form solution for the optimal pu .
Note that Eq. (4) shows λ∗θ (p) is piece-wise polynomial in z = 1/(1 − p). Solving for z, we get:
Lemma 2. Let θ = (α, β, γ, δ) define an LV system as in Eq. (3). Then the optimal p∗ is given by:
                                                                                                                          α         α  1
                                              p∗ (θ) = arg max λ∗θ (p) = 1 − 2                                                 if     ≤ , and zero otherwise.                                                      (9)
                                                               p∈[0,1]                                                    β         β  2

Proof in Appendix A.1. Hence, once θu is found, our learned policy is defined as:
                                                                       π(u) = π(p̂u ),                                     where p̂u = p∗ (θ̂u )                                                                  (10)

              compute p̂u , the least squares approach in Eq. (8) is applied to obtain the polynomial
Altogether, to
coefficients γδuu , αβuu δγuu , then αβuu is estimated from their ratio, and then plugged into Eq. (9) to ob-
tain p̂u . For N = 2, π(u) has a closed-form formulation as a function of predictions (Appendix A.2).
Additionally, note that by Eq. (10), p̂u exhibits a phase transition at αβuu = 12 , below which p̂u = 0.
Corollary 1. In LV space, π(u) partitions users to those who require breaks, and those who don’t.
Corollary 2. In the realizable case of Prop. 1, π(p̂u ) idempotently improves over the myopic π(0).

Thus, the optimal policy can be interpreted as suggesting breaks only when it deems them necessary.
Figure 2 illustrates λ∗ (p) curves, phase shift, and optimal and learned policies for various user types.

4.3                               T HEORETICAL GUARANTEES

We are now ready to state our main theoretical result, which bounds the expected long-term engage-
ment obtained by our learned policy, π̂. Our bound shows that the gap between π̂ and the optimal
policy, π opt , is goverened by three additive terms, each relating to a different aspect of our ap-
proach: modeling error (εLV ), predictive error (εpred ), and deviation from expected behavior (εdev ).
A description and interpretation of each term follows shortly. For simplicity, we focus on N = 2.
Theorem 1 (Informal). Let p0 , p1 ∈ [0, 1], and denote by π opt ∈ Π be the optimal stationary policy.
Then for the learned breaking policy π̂, we have:
                                                           ηTPP
                   Eu,πopt T1 |Su | − Eu,π̂ T1 |Su | ≤            (εLV + εpred + εdev )
                                                       |p1 − p0 |
where ηTPP is a TPP-specific constant scale factor.

Formal statement, precise definitions, and proof are given in Appendix A.3. The proof consists of
three main steps: We begin with a clean LV system at T = ∞, and quantify the downstream effect of
perturbing the optimal policy. Then, we plug in the learned policy, and bound the gap due to predic-
tive errors and finite T . The final step makes the transition from continuous dynamics to the discrete
TPP. We next detail the role of each of the five terms in the bound, and how they can be controlled.


                                                                                                                           7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• Predictive error: Since targets y = T1 |Su | are real, εpred is simply the expected regression error
  over users, measured here in RMSE. As is standard, εpred can be reduced by increasing the num-
  ber of samples m, or by learning more expressive predictive functions f (e.g., larger neural nets).
• Modeling error: LV dynamics permit tractable learning; but as any hypothesis class, this trades
  off with model capacity. Here, εLV quantifies the error due limited expressive power. Further re-
  ducing εLV can be achieved by consider richer dynamic models—a challenge left for future work.
• Deviation from expectation: The learned p̂u rely on predicted equilibrium, but are trained on
  finite-horizon data. In expectation, εdev captures how finite sequences deviate from their mean.
  As a rule of thumb, we expect larger T to reduce this form of noise, but this cannot be guaranteed.
• Sensitivity : For N = 2, the term |p1 − p0 | quantifies the added value of exploring beyond the
  default breaking policy of p0 . Intuitively, when the points are farther away, fitting the equilibrium
  curve is easier. Thus, for the likely case of p0 = 0, the experimental breaking rate p1 should be
  chosen to balance between performance gain and overexposure of experimental subjects to breaks.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We conclude with an empirical evaluation of our approach on semi-synthetic data. We use the
MovieLens 1M dataset to generate recommendations and simulate user behavior, enabling us to
evaluate counterfactual outcomes under different policies. See Appendix B for additional details.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP

Data. The MovieLens 1M dataset (Harper & Konstan, 2015) includes 1,000,209 ratings provided
by 6,040 users and for 3,706 items, which we use to obtain features, determine the dynamics, and
emulate ϕ. We sample and hold out 30% of all ratings rux via user-stratified sampling, to which we
apply Collaborative Filtering (CF) to get user features u and item features x that approximate u⊤ x ≈
rux (d = 8, RMSE = 0.917, r ∈ [1, 5]). This mimics a process where ϕ is based on items recom-
mended by ψ and rated by users. We then take the remaining data points and randomly assign 1,000
users to the test set, on which we evaluate policies. The remaining users are assigned to the train set,
which is then further partitioned into the main S and the different S (j) per experimental condition.

Recommendation policy and user behavior. Following Kalimeris et al. (2021); Hron et al.
(2022), we set ψ to recommend based on learned softmax scores, softmaxx (r̂u ), taken over all
non held-out x having ratings for u. For user behavior, we generate discrete interaction sequences
Su in a way that relates to our dynamic model, but is nonetheless quite distinct. Specifically, each
user u is associated with discrete-time latent-state variables, updated via an LV discretization scheme
(see Appendix B.5). These, together with recommended items xi = x(ti ), determine consecutive
∆ti ∈ Su . Importantly, we let ∆ti depend on u’s rating for xi , namely ru,xi , which we interpret
as u’s utility from consuming xi . We parameterize this dependence via ‘immediate’, item-specific
consumption gain parameters βui that depend on ru,xi , and for simplicity set αu , γu , δu to be fixed.
Note that since βui depends on the recommended xi , it varies in time, and hence there is no single β
that underlies the dynamics: even in the limit (∆t → 0, T → ∞), user behavior cannot be described
by a continuous LV system, which implies εLV > 0 (see Appendix Figure 5). Since the baseline
RMSE is high, we set βui ∝ r̃u,x 2
                                    i
                                      , where r̃u,xi = κru,xi + (1 − κ)u⊤ x, so that κ interpolates
between predicted ratings (κ = 0) and true ratings (κ = 1). This allows us to (indirectly) control
εpred . For all experiments we use T = 100, and so expect a roughly fixed εdev > 0.

Methods. We compare our approach (LV) to several baselines: (i) a default policy which my-
opically optimizes for immediate engagement (and so does not break); (ii) a ‘safety switch’ policy
(safety@τ ) that breaks once consumption surpasses a threshold τ ; (iii) a prediction-based policy
(best-of) that chooses the best observed pu = arg maxpj fj (u) (rather than optimizing over pu ∈
[0, 1]); and (iv) an oracle benchmark which directly optimizes the (generally unknown) true under-
lying dynamics. We measure mean long-term engagement rate (LTE) for each approach, and report
averages and standard errors computed over 10 random splits. Performance is measured relative to
the default baseline as it represents no change in policy (typical absolute values are LTE ≈ 10).


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Engagement for different policies (κ = 0.5)                                                Engagement per LV breaking schedule                                              Engagement for varying p1 (p0 = 0)
                               8%
                                                                                                                                LV decision rule

 % improvement (vs. default)


                                                                                       % improvement (vs. default)


                                                                                                                                                                        % improvement (vs. default)
                                                                                                                     20%                                                                              6%
                               6%


                                                                                                                           p̂
                                                                                                                     15%
                                                                                                                                                                                                      4%
                               4%                                                                                                                                                                                                 LV, κ = 1
                                                                                                                     10%               ˆ                                                                                          LV, κ = 0.5
                                                                                                                                      β/α                                                             2%
                               2%                                                                                                                                                                                                 LV, κ = 0
                                                                                                                     5%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  best-of, κ = 1
                               0%                                                                                                           κ=1               κ=0                                     0%                          best-of, κ = 0.5
                                                                                                                     0%
                                                                                                                                            κ = 0.5           default                                                             best-of, κ = 0
                               -2%                                                                                                                                                                    -2%
                                           t            6     4     f              e                                       0.0      0.1    0.2    0.3       0.4                                              0.1        0.2         0.3         0.4
                                        aul           @1    @1 st-o     LV
                                                                             ora
                                                                                 cl
                                     def           ety afety be                                                                       Learned LV policy (p̂u )                                                     Assigned treatment (p1 )
                                               saf      s


Figure 3: Results on the MovieLens 1M dataset. (Left) Performance gain of different approaches
(relative to default policy). (Center) Performance of LV by user group, partitioned by learned
policies p̂u . (Right) Sensitivity to an increasingly aggressive experimental p1 (N = 2, p0 = 0).


5.2                                  R ESULTS AND ANALYSIS

Main results. Figure 3 (left) compares the performance of our method to other policies. Here we
set p0 = 0, use N = 3 with pj ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.15}, and consider κ = 0.5 (note κ affects all poli-
cies). As can be seen, our approach significantly improves over default (+6.48%). For safety@τ ,
improvement over the optimal τ = 16 (+5.68%; chosen in hindsight) shows the importance of
being preemptive; for the slightly smaller τ = 14, breaks are harmful. The gap from best-of
(+2.19%) quantifies the gain from the optimization step in Eq. (9), and the close performance to
oracle (-0.918%) suggests that optimizing the empirical curve (Eq. (8)) works well as as proxy.

User types. Figure 3 (center) shows for our approach how gain in LTE varies across learned break-
ing policies p̂u > 0. For increasingly-accurate predictions (κ ∈ {0, 0.5, 1}), the main plot shows
performance gains for each group of users, partitioned by their p̂u values (binned; plot shows average
and unit standard deviation per bin). Gains until p̂u ≤ 0.15 are mild, but for p̂u > 0.15, the general
trend is positive: users who are deemed to require more frequent breaks, benefit more from breaking.
Gains until p̂u ≤ 0.3 increase for all κ, but for p̂u > 0.3, extrapolation becomes difficult: note the
higher variation within each κ, as well as significant differences across κ. This highlights the impor-
tance of accurate predictions for inferring optimal p̂u when the experimental pi are small. The in-
laied plot shows that, in line with our theory, p̂u exhibits an empirical phase shift in the estimated θ̂u .

Treatments. Figure 3 (right) shows the effects of experimental treatments on performance. Fo-
cusing on N = 2, we fix p0 = 0, and consider increasingly aggressive experimentation by varying
p1 ∈ (0, 0.4]. For our approach, increasing p1 helps, which is anticipated by our theoretical bound.
For the best-of approach, larger p1 also helps, but exhibits population-level optimum (p1 ≈ 0.24),
which is easy to ‘overshoot’. Note that when prediction accuracy is low (κ = 0), experimentation is
essential: if p1 is not sufficiently large, then performance can sharply deteriorate.


6                               D ISCUSSION

Our paper studies the novel problem of learning optimal breaking policies for recommendation.
We posit a tight connection between long-term engagement and user well-being, and argue that
optimizing the former requires careful consideration of the latter. Viewing cognitive capacity as
a limited but conservable resource, we propose Lotka-Volterra dynamics as a behavioral model
that enables effective, responsible, and sustainable optimization of recommendation ecosystems.
As any policy task that involves humans, care must be taken regarding potential risks. While our
experiments show that optimizing engagement also improves well-being, this need not always be
the case; in fact, merely measuring well-being in reality is challenging. Breaks, as interventions, are
presumably ‘safe’, in the sense that at worst they may lead to suboptimal performance (for system) or
satisfaction (for users). But breaks can also be used nefariously, e.g., by enabling temporally-varying
rewards (Eyal, 2019). As such, breaking policies should be deployed accountably and transparently.


                                                                                                                                            9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Roy F Baumeister, Ellen Bratslavsky, Mark Muraven, and Dianne M Tice. Ego depletion: is the
  active self a limited resource. Journal of personality and social psychology., 74(5), 1998.
Bruce O Bergum and Donald J Lehr. Vigilance performance as a function of interpolated rest.
  Journal of Applied Psychology, 46(6):425, 1962.
Junyu Cao, Wei Sun, Zuo-Jun (Max) Shen, and Markus Ettl. Fatigue-aware bandits for dependent
  click models. In AAAI, pp. 3341–3348, 2020.
Allison JB Chaney, Brandon M Stewart, and Barbara E Engelhardt. How algorithmic confounding
  in recommendation systems increases homogeneity and decreases utility. In Proceedings of the
  12th ACM conference on recommender systems, pp. 224–232, 2018.
Donghui Chen and Robert J Plemmons. Nonnegativity constraints in numerical analysis. In The
  birth of numerical analysis, pp. 109–139. World Scientific, 2010.
Josh Constine. Instagram says ‘you’re all caught up’ in first time-well-spent feature. techcrunch,
  2018. URL https://techcrunch.com/2018/05/21/scroll-responsibly/. [Online; accessed 23-
  September-2022].
Mihaela Curmei, Andreas A. Haupt, Benjamin Recht, and Dylan Hadfield-Menell. Towards
 psychologically-grounded dynamic preference models. In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Confer-
 ence on Recommender Systems, RecSys ’22, pp. 35–48, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association
 for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450392785. doi: 10.1145/3523227.3546778.
Shai Danziger, Jonathan Levav, and Liora Avnaim-Pesso. Extraneous factors in judicial decisions.
  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(17):6889–6892, 2011. doi: 10.1073/
  pnas.1018033108.
Sarah Dean and Jamie Morgenstern. Preference dynamics under personalized recommendations. In
  Proceedings of the 23rd ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, EC ’22, pp. 795–816,
  New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450391504. doi:
  10.1145/3490486.3538346.
Xiang Ding, Jing Xu, Guanling Chen, and Chenren Xu. Beyond smartphone overuse: identifying
  addictive mobile apps. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human
  Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2821–2828, 2016.
Rachit Dubey, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Peter Dayan. The pursuit of happiness: A reinforcement
  learning perspective on habituation and comparisons. PLoS Comput. Biol., 18(8), 2022. doi:
  10.1371/journal.pcbi.1010316.
Jacob P Duncan, Teresa Aubele-Futch, and Monica McGrath. A fast-slow dynamical system model
  of addiction: Predicting relapse frequency. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems, 18(2):
  881–903, 2019.
Nir Eyal. Hooked : how to build habit-forming products / Nir Eyal with Ryan Hoover. Portfo-
  lio/Penguin, New York, updated edition edition, 2019. ISBN 9781591847786.
J Doyne Farmer. Market force, ecology and evolution. Industrial and Corporate Change, 11(5):
  895–953, 2002.
Simona Gilboa, Arie Shirom, Yitzhak Fried, and Cary Cooper. A meta-analysis of work demand
  stressors and job performance: examining main and moderating effects. Personnel psychology,
  61(2):227–271, 2008.
Nico S Gorbach, Stefan Bauer, and Joachim M Buhmann. Scalable variational inference for dynam-
  ical systems. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Sunil Gupta, Dominique Hanssens, Bruce Hardie, Wiliam Kahn, V Kumar, Nathaniel Lin, Nalini
  Ravishanker, and S Sriram. Modeling customer lifetime value. Journal of service research, 9(2):
  139–155, 2006.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F Maxwell Harper and Joseph A Konstan. The movielens datasets: History and context. Acm
  transactions on interactive intelligent systems (tiis), 5(4):1–19, 2015.

William S Helton and Paul N Russell. Rest is still best: The role of the qualitative and quantitative
 load of interruptions on vigilance. Human factors, 59(1):91–100, 2017.

Robert A Hennfng, Steven L Sauter, Gavriel Salvendy, and Edward F Krieg Jr. Microbreak length,
  performance, and stress in a data entry task. Ergonomics, 32(7):855–864, 1989.

Josef Hofbauer, Karl Sigmund, et al. Evolutionary games and population dynamics. Cambridge
  university press, 1998.

Jiri Hron, Karl Krauth, Michael I Jordan, Niki Kilbertus, and Sarah Dean. Modeling content creator
   incentives on algorithm-curated platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13102, 2022.

Nicolas Hug. Surprise: A python library for recommender systems. Journal of Open Source Soft-
  ware, 5(52):2174, 2020.

Ray Jiang, Silvia Chiappa, Tor Lattimore, András György, and Pushmeet Kohli. Degenerate feed-
  back loops in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI,
  Ethics, and Society, pp. 383–390, 2019.

Daniel Kahneman. Attention and effort, volume 1063. Citeseer, 1973.

Dimitris Kalimeris, Smriti Bhagat, Shankar Kalyanaraman, and Udi Weinsberg. Preference am-
  plification in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on
  Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 805–815, 2021.

Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. The challenge of understand-
  ing what users want: Inconsistent preferences and engagement optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.11776, 2022.

Robert Kleinberg and Nicole Immorlica. Recharging bandits. In 2018 IEEE 59th Annual Symposium
  on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 309–319. IEEE, 2018.

Karl Krauth, Sarah Dean, Alex Zhao, Wenshuo Guo, Mihaela Curmei, Benjamin Recht, and
  Michael I Jordan. Do offline metrics predict online performance in recommender systems? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2011.07931, 2020.

Liu Leqi, Fatma Kilinc Karzan, Zachary Lipton, and Alan Montgomery. Rebounding bandits for
  modeling satiation effects. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4003–4014,
  2021.

Alfred J. Lotka. Contribution to the theory of periodic reactions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry,
  14(3):271–274, 1910. doi: 10.1021/j150111a004.

David Madras, Toni Pitassi, and Richard Zemel. Predict responsibly: improving fairness and accu-
  racy by learning to defer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.

Masoud Mansoury, Himan Abdollahpouri, Mykola Pechenizkiy, Bamshad Mobasher, and Robin
 Burke. Feedback loop and bias amplification in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the
 29th ACM international conference on information & knowledge management, pp. 2145–2148,
 2020.

Alberto Monge Roffarello and Luigi De Russis. The race towards digital wellbeing: Issues and
  opportunities. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems,
  pp. 1–14, 2019.

Christian Montag, Zhiying Zhao, Cornelia Sindermann, Lei Xu, Meina Fu, Jialin Li, Xiaoxiao
  Zheng, Keshuang Li, Keith M Kendrick, Jing Dai, et al. Internet communication disorder and
  the structure of the human brain: Initial insights on wechat addiction. Scientific reports, 8(1):
  1–10, 2018.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O’Dhaniel A Mullette-Gillman, Ruth LF Leong, and Yoanna A Kurnianingsih. Cognitive fatigue
  destabilizes economic decision making preferences and strategies. PloS one, 10(7):e0132022,
  2015.
Mark Muraven and Roy F Baumeister. Self-regulation and depletion of limited resources: Does
 self-control resemble a muscle? Psychological bulletin, 126(2):247, 2000.
Sarah Perez. Apple unveils a new set of ‘digital wellness’ features for better managing screen time.
  TechCrunch, June, 4, 2018. URL https://techcrunch.com/2018/06/04/apple-unveils-a-new-set-
  of-digital-wellness-features-for-better-managing-screen-time/. [Online; accessed 23-September-
  2022].
Jennifer Rauch. Slow media: Why slow is satisfying, sustainable, and smart. Oxford University
  Press, 2018.
Stephen E Robertson. The probability ranking principle in ir. Journal of documentation, 1977.
Hayden A Ross, Paul N Russell, and William S Helton. Effects of breaks and goal switches on the
  vigilance decrement. Experimental brain research, 232(6):1729–1737, 2014.
Tom Ryder, Andrew Golightly, A Stephen McGough, and Dennis Prangle. Black-box variational
  inference for stochastic differential equations. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 4423–4432. PMLR, 2018.
Larry Samuelson. Evolutionary games and equilibrium selection, volume 1. MIT press, 1998.
Francesco Sanna Passino, Lucas Maystre, Dmitrii Moor, Ashton Anderson, and Mounia Lalmas.
  Where to next? a dynamic model of user preferences. In Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021,
  WWW ’21, pp. 3210–3220, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
  ISBN 9781450383127. doi: 10.1145/3442381.3450028.
Sven Schmit and Carlos Riquelme. Human interaction with recommendation systems. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 862–870. PMLR, 2018.
Maarten P. Scholl, Anisoara Calinescu, and J. Doyne Farmer. How market ecology explains market
 malfunction. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 118(26):e2015574118, 2021.
 doi: 10.1073/pnas.2015574118.
Hans Henrik Sievertsen, Francesca Gino, and Marco Piovesan. Cognitive fatigue influences stu-
  dents’ performance on standardized tests. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113
  (10):2621–2624, 2016.
Yasuhiro Takeuchi. Global dynamical properties of Lotka-Volterra systems. World Scientific, 1996.
Dustin B Thoman, Jessi L Smith, and Paul J Silvia. The resource replenishment function of interest.
  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2(6):592–599, 2011.
Emmanuel Trélat and Enrique Zuazua. The turnpike property in finite-dimensional nonlinear opti-
  mal control. Journal of Differential Equations, 258(1):81–114, 2015.
Mengting Wan and Julian McAuley. Item recommendation on monotonic behavior chains. In Pro-
 ceedings of the 12th ACM conference on recommender systems, pp. 86–94, 2018.
Mengting Wan, Rishabh Misra, Ndapa Nakashole, and Julian McAuley. Fine-grained spoiler detec-
 tion from large-scale review corpora. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.13416, 2019.
Jyun-Cheng Wang and Juo-Ping Lin. Are personalization systems really personal?-effects of con-
  formity in reducing information. In 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
  Sciences, 2003. Proceedings of the, pp. 10–pp. IEEE, 2003.
Romain Warlop, Alessandro Lazaric, and Jérémie Mary. Fighting boredom in recommender systems
  with linear reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
  2018.
Jörgen W Weibull. Evolutionary game theory. MIT press, 1997.

                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     D EFERRED PROOFS
In this section, we formalize the model presented in section 3, and prove the claims presented in
section 4. The section ends with a formal proof of Theorem 1.

A.1   P ROPERTIES OF L OTKA -VOLTERRA SYSTEMS

Definition A.1 (Static policy equilibrium). Let λ(t), q(t) denote a Lokta-Volterra model character-
ized by parameters θ = (α, β, γ, δ) ∈ R4+ , as defined in Equation 2. Let p ∈ [0, 1], and denote by
πp the static policy corresponding to p. For λ(0), q(0) > 0, the static equilibrium of the system is
defined as:
                                        λ∗ (p; θ) = lim λ(t)
                                                    t→∞
                                        q ∗ (p; θ) = lim q(t)
                                                    t→∞

We denote λ∗ (p) = λ∗ (p; θ) when θ is clear from the context. We denote λ∗ (p; u) = λ∗ (p; θu )
when a user u ∈ U characterized by parameters θu is given and clear from the context.
Proposition A.1 (Global stability). λ∗ (p; θ) exists and uniquely defined for all θ ∈ R4+ , p ∈ [0, 1]
and for all initial conditions λ(0), q(0) > 0.

Proof. See (Takeuchi, 1996, Section 3.2).
Lemma A.1 (Equilibrium of LV behavioral model. Formal proof of Lemma 1). Assume a Lokta-
Volterra model characterized by θ = (α, β, γ, δ) ∈ R4+ , and let p ∈ [0, 1] denote the proportion
of interactions in which a forced break is served. The static equilibrium of the model under static
policy πp is given by:
                                   (                            h         i
                                     γ 1
                            ∗        δ 1−p   1− αβ
                                                    1
                                                   1−p      p ∈ 0, 1 − αβ
                         λ (p) =
                                     0                      otherwise
                                   (             h          i
                                     α 1                  α
                                             p ∈   0, 1 −
                          q ∗ (p) = β 1−p                 β
                                     1       otherwise

Proof. The LV dynamical system is given by Equation 3:
                                   dλ
                                      = −αλ + β(1 − p)λq
                                   dt
                                   dq
                                      = γq(1 − q) − δ(1 − p)λq
                                   dt
        h         i
                                    dq
when p ∈ 0, 1 − α           dλ
                β we equate dt = 0, dt = 0 and obtain the result. The solution is guaranteed
to be valid, as both λ∗ (p) > 0 and q ∗ (p) ∈ [0, 1].
                         h        i
Conversely, when p ∈  / 0, 1 − α                                  d
                                 β , there exists ϵ > 0 such that dt log λ < −ϵ < 0 for all λ > 0,
q ∈ [0, 1]. From this we obtain that log λ(t) tends towards −∞, and therefore λ(t) tends towards
0, and λ∗ (p) = 0 as required. When λ(t) is close to zero, the interaction terms vanish in the dq
                                                                                               dt
equation, and q(t) grows logistically towards 1.
Proposition A.2 (Equilibrium bounds). For a Lotka-Volterra model, the static equilibrium λ∗ (p) is
bounded by:
                                                    βγ
                                      0 ≤ λ∗ (p) ≤
                                                   4αδ
                                                   h     i
                    1                                  β
Proof. Denote x = 1−p  . From Lemma A.1, for x ∈ 1, α      the equilibrium consumption λ∗ (x) is
given by:
                                    ∗       γ         α
                                  λ (x) = x 1 − x
                                            δ         β

                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                                           n     o
                                                                                               β
and is zero otherwise. The equilibrium is a quadratic function of x with roots x ∈          0, α  , and
                                       β
therefore attains its maximum at x = 2α  . Plugging back the maximizing x into λ∗ we obtain
the upper bound. Lower bound is attained as the equilibrium in Lemma A.1 is clipped by 0 from
below.

Lemma A.2 (Optimal static policy. Formal proof of Lemma 2). The optimal static policy for a
Lotka-Volterra system is given by:
                                          (
                                           1 − 2α
                                                β
                                                   α   1
                                                   β ≤ 2
                                   popt =          α   1
                                           0       β > 2

And the optimal equilibrium engagement rate is given by:
                                        ( βγ             α
                                                           ≤ 12
                                λopt = γ               β
                                  ∗       4αδ
                                                   α     α    1
                                          δ 1− β         β > 2


                   1                                                                           β
Proof. Denote x = 1−p . From Proposition A.2, the global maximum of λ∗ (x) is attained at x = 2α .
                                                                  β
Consider two cases: When α           1
                              β ≤ 2 , we obtain that xopt = 2α ≥ 1, and therefore popt = 1 − x ∈
                                                                                                 1

[0, 1]. From this we obtain that in this case the global maximum is attained on the simplex, and
given by the formula from Proposition A.2. Conversely, when α              1                   1
                                                                     β > 2 , we obtain p = 1 − x < 0,
                                                                   ∗
and therefore xopt translates to a negative value of p. As λ (p) is uni-modal, the optimal policy
restricted to the simplex [0, 1] in this case is attained on the closest boundary point p = 0.
Figure 2 provides graphical intuition for this proof (left and center subplots).

Proposition A.3 (Inference of α/β from two-treatment equilibrium data. Formal proof of Proposi-
tion 1). Let λ(t), q(t) be a Lokta-Volterra model, let p1 , p2 ∈ [0, 1]. Denote by λ∗ (p1 ), λ∗ (p2 ) the
static equilibrium rates corresponding to static policies πp1 , πp2 , and assume λ∗ (p1 ), λ∗ (p2 ) > 0.
The parameter ratio α β is given by the following formula:

                                α   (1 − p2 )λ∗ (p2 ) − (1 − p1 )λ∗ (p1 )
                                  =              1        1
                                β              1−p1 − 1−p2


Proof. From Lemma A.1, the equilibrium consumption λ∗ (p) is given by:

                                      γ 1         α 1
                            λ∗ (p) =          1−
                                      δ 1−p        β 1−p
                                                              2
                                      γ 1      αγ       1
                                   =         −
                                      δ 1−p β δ 1−p
                                                                  h         i
When λ∗ (pi ) is observed for different policies p1 , . . . , pm ∈ 0, 1 − α
                                                                          β , we obtain a polynomial
                                              αγ
regression problem for the parameters αβ and β δ , which can be solved e.g using Non-Negative Least
Squares.
When m = 2, we obtain a system of two linear equations. Apply Cramer’s rule to obtain:
                  λ∗ (p2 )    λ∗ (p1 )
     γ          (1−p1 )2 − (1−p2 )2           (1 − p2 )2 λ∗ (p2 ) − (1 − p1 )2 λ∗ (p1 )
       =        1                 1         =                                                       (11)
     δ   (1−p1 )(1−p2 )2 − (1−p1 )2 (1−p2 )
                                                              p2 − p1


                   λ∗ (p2 )   λ∗ (p1 )
   αγ           (1−p1 ) − (1−p2 )                                (1 − p2 )λ∗ (p2 ) − (1 − p1 )λ∗ (p1 )
      =        1                 1         = (1 − p 1 )(1 − p2 )
   βδ   (1−p1 )(1−p2 )2 − (1−p1 )2 (1−p2 )
                                                                               p2 − p1
                                                                                                    (12)


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


And therefore α
              β is given by:

                λ∗ (p2 )  λ∗ (p1 )
         α      (1−p1 ) − (1−p2 )                               (1 − p2 )λ∗ (p2 ) − (1 − p1 )λ∗ (p1 )
           =    λ∗ (p2 )   λ∗ (p1 )
                                        = (1 − p1 )(1 − p2 )
         β                                                     (1 − p2 )2 λ∗ (p2 ) − (1 − p1 )2 λ∗ (p1 )
               (1−p1 )2 − (1−p2 )2


A.2   M ODEL FITTING FROM ENGAGEMENT PREDICTIONS

Notations. In this section only, we use the common notation q = 1 − p to denote complementary
probabilities.
Definition A.2 (Empirical value of α/β). For single-channel experiments with forced-break proba-
bilities p1 , p2 , denote λi = λ∗ (pi ), fi = fpi (u), qi = 1−pi . The empirical value of the α
                                                                                              β parameter
is given by the following formula:
                                            α̂   q1 q2 (q1 f1 − q2 f2 )
                                               =
                                            β        q12 f1 − q22 f2
Proposition A.4 (α/β estimation error from predictionh errors).
                                                           i    Given a single-channel Lokta-
Volterra system with parameter α                       α           ∗    ∗
                               β ≥ 1. Let p1 , p2 ∈ 1, β , denote λi = λ (pi ) ∈ R+ , and
let fi = λ∗i + εi be the predicted engagement rates corresponding to p1 , p2 . When |ε1 |, |ε2 | ≤ ε ≤
γ |p1 −p2 |
 δ    4     , the estimation error is bounded by:

                                            α α̂        ε      βδ
                                              −   ≤
                                            β   β   |p1 − p2 | αγ

Proof. denote qi = 1 − pi . The value of α
                                         β is given by Proposition A.3:

                                           α   q1 q2 (q1 λ∗1 − q2 λ∗2 )
                                             =
                                           β       q12 λ∗1 − q22 λ∗2
And the estimator for α
                      β is obtained by replacing the true value with their predictions:

                                  α̂   q1 q2 (q1 f1 − q2 f2 )
                                     =
                                  β        q12 f1 − q22 f2
                                       q1 q2 (q1 (λ∗1 + ε1 ) − q2 (λ∗2 + ε2 ))
                                     =
                                           q12 (λ∗1 + ε1 ) − q22 (λ∗2 + ε2 )
The estimation error is given by:
         α α̂              q12 q22 (q1 − q2 )(ε2 λ∗1 − ε1 λ∗2 )
           −   =
         β   β    (q1 λ1 − q22 λ∗2 )(q12 λ∗1 − q22 λ∗2 − (q12 ε1 − q22 ε2 ))
                     2  ∗

                         2   q1 − q2                                             1
               = (q1 q2 )                     |ε2 λ∗ − ε1 λ∗2 | 2 ∗
                 | {z } q12 λ∗1 − q22 λ∗2 | 1 {z              } q1 λ1 − q22 λ∗2 − (q12 ε1 − q22 ε2 )
                   ≡(i) |         {z        }       ≡(iii)      |               {z                   }
                                        ≡(ii)                                       ≡(iv)

We now proceed to bound each factor:
                             2
• For (i), the term (q1 q2 ) is bounded by 1 since q1 , q2 ∈ [0, 1].
                           q1 −q2

                                                     γ −1
• For (ii), the term   q12 λ∗   2 ∗    is equal to   δ    by Eq. (11).
                            1 −q2 λ2


                                                                 βγ
                                      obtain the bound 0 ≤ λ∗i ≤ 4αδ
• For (iii), from Proposition A.2  we                                , and therefore the term
                                          βγ        βγ
  |ε2 λ∗1 − ε1 λ∗2 | is bounded by 2      4αδ   ε = 2αδ ε.


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     1
• For (iv), the term   q12 λ∗   2 ∗     2      2        is equal to:
                            1 −q2 λ2 −(q1 ε1 −q2 ε2 )


                                                          1
                           (iv) ≡
                                      q12 λ∗1 − q22 λ∗2 − (q12 ε1 − q22 ε2 )
                                                                                                −1
                                         1      q12 λ∗1 − q22 λ∗2 − (q12 ε1 − q22 ε2 )
                                 =
                                     |p1 − p2 |                p1 − p2
                                                                                            −1

                                         1      q12 λ∗1 − q22 λ∗2 q12 ε1 − q22 ε2
                                 =                               −
                                     |p1 − p2 |     p −p             p1 − p2
                                                | 1 {z 2 }
                                                         Eq. (11)
                                                                             −1
                                         1      γ  q 2 ε1 − q22 ε2
                                 =                − 1
                                     |p1 − p2 | δ     p1 − p2
             q12 ε1 −q22 ε2
  Note that      p1 −p2     ≤ |p12ε
                                 −p2 | .       When ε is small enough, and specifically when the bound
     γ |p1 −p2 |
  ε≤ δ 4          holds, we obtain:
                                                           −1                     −1
                                  γ  q 2 ε1 − q22 ε2                 δ    1                 δ
                                    − 1                          ≤     1−              ≤2
                                  δ     p1 − p2                      γ    2                 γ
  and therefore:
                                                                  2      δ
                                                  (iv) ≤
                                                              |p1 − p2 | γ

Aggregating results (i)-(iv) above, we obtain the overall bound:
         α α̂            2   q1 − q2                                         1
           −   = (q1 q2 )                  |ε2 λ∗ − ε1 λ∗2 | 2 ∗
         β   β   | {z } q12 λ∗1 − q22 λ∗2 | 1 {z          } q1 λ1 − q22 λ∗2 − (q12 ε1 − q22 ε2 )
                   ≤1      |    {z       }      ≤ βγ ε
                                                            |               {z                   }
                                                               2αδ
                                        = γδ                                                 2
                                                                                        ≤ |p −p   δ
                                                                                                | γ
                                                                                                1   2

                         ε      βδ
                   ≤
                     |p1 − p2 | αγ


Proposition A.5 (Cost of α/β estimation error). Let α  β be the engagement ratio parameter of a
                                            ˆ
one-channel Lotka-Volterra system, and let α                                            ∗
                                             β be an estimate of these parameters. Let λopt be the
                                                                                          ˆ
engagement rate of the optimal static policy, and denote λ∗ (x) = λ∗ (p̂(x)). When αβ  −   α
                                                                                           β    ≤
    n      o
      α
min 2β  , 1 The price of estimation error is bounded by:
                           ˆ  !                (
                                                        −2         ˆ      −1 )
              ∗       ∗    α           γ             α       α     α        α
             λopt − λ             ≤        min     2           −        , 4
                           β           δ             β       β     β        β

                             ˆ
                                                                            γ
Proof. Denote r = α β , x =  α
                             β , and assume without loss of generality that δ = 1 and r ≤ 1. The
optimal equilibrium engagement rate is given by:
                                           1
                                    ∗             r ∈ 0, 12
                                  λopt =    4r
                                            1 − r r ∈ 21 , 1
The chosen policy p̂(x) is given by:

                                                        1 − 2x       x ∈ 0, 21
                                        p̂(x) =
                                                        0            otherwise

                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                      Cost of estimation error for different values of αβ , and the corresponding upper bounds
                     1.0
                                    α
                                    β = 0.30
                     0.8
 ∆λ∗ = λ∗ (p∗ ) − λ∗ (p̂)
                                    α
                                    β = 0.40
                                    α
                     0.6            β = 0.60
                                    α
                                    β = 0.80
                     0.4

                     0.2

                     0.0

                             −0.8              −0.6              −0.4             −0.2                 0.0           0.2              0.4        0.6
                                                                                                     ˆ
                                                                                                     α     α
                                                                                           ∆ αβ =    β − β


Figure 4: Graphical illustration of Proposition A.5. Cost of estimation error for different values of
α
β , and their corresponding upper bounds given by the claim.


Assume without loss of generality that x ∈ 0, 12 , as values of x outside the interval can be clipped
to its edges without affecting the result. The equilibrium engagement rate of the selected policy is
given by:
                           ∗         ∗               0              x ∈ 0, 2r
                         λ (x) = λ (p̂(x)) = 1               r

                                                     2x 1 − 2x      x ∈ 2r , 12
Denote ∆(x) = λ∗opt − λ∗ (x). We obtain:
                                       1
                                       
                                        4r                          r ∈ 0, 12 , x ∈ 0, 2r
                                       
                                        (x−r)   2
                      ∗       ∗                                      r ∈ 0, 12 , x ∈ 2r , 12
            ∆(x) = λopt − λ (x) =          4x 2r

                                       
                                       
                                        (1 − r)                     r ∈ 12 , 1 , x ∈ 0, 2r
                                                      1       r

                                         (1 − r) − 2x    1 − 2x      r ∈ 21 , 1 , x ∈ 2r , 12
                1
Observe that 4r   ≥ 1 − r for all r ∈ (0, 1], and therefore we obtain for all x, r:
                                                        1
                                               ∆(x) ≤                                             (13)
                                                        4r
From the convexity of ∆(x) in the region around x = r we obtain:
                                                     1
                                          ∆(x) ≤ 2 |x − r|                                        (14)
                                                    2r
Finally, combining the two bounds yields the final result. A geometric interpretation of this claim is
illustrated in Figure 4.


A.3                         O PTIMAL STATIONARY POLICY FROM ENGAGEMENT PREDICTIONS

Definition A.3 (Expected observable rate). Let u ∈ U, p ∈ [0, 1], and T > 0. Let p ∈ [0, 1], denote
the corresponding static policy by πp . The expected observable rate λ̄u (p; T ) is defined as:

                                                  1
                                λ̄u (p; u) = Eπ     TPPπp (u; T )
                                                  T
where expectation is taken over the stochastic decisions of πp .
Definition A.4 (Lokta-Volterra approximation of TPP). Let u ∈ U, and T > 0. Denote by p∗ the
maximizer of expected observable rate:
                                        p∗ = arg max λ̄u (p; u)
                                                                                         p∈[0,1]


The LV approximation of TPP(u; T ) is defined as:
                                                              θu∗ = arg min max λ̄u (p; u) − λ∗ (p; θ)
                                                                            θ       p∈[0,1]
                                                 ∗                  ∗
such that arg maxp λ (p; θ) = p . The corresponding approximation error is defined as:
                                                                 εLV,u = max λ̄u (p; u) − λ∗ (p; θu∗ )
                                                                                p∈[0,1]


                                                                                            17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Notations. When u is clear from the context, we denote θ∗ = θu∗ , εLV = εLV,u . We use α∗ , β ∗ , . . .
to refer to the corresponding parts of the Lokta-Volterra parameters vector θ∗ .
We are now ready to state and prove the main theorem for this section:
Theorem A.1 (Regret bound for learned static policy. Formal version of Theorem 1). Let p1 , p2 ∈
[0, 1] denote two static forced-break policies, and denote by U the set of users, and assume they re-
main engaged   under the stationary
                                    policies π(p                    Su (p; T ) ∼ TPPπp ◦ψ (u; T ),
                                               1 ) and π(p2 ). Assume
and let µ = maxu∈U γ̄δ̄uu · maxu′ ∈U γ̄δ̄u′′ , ν = maxu∈U        β̄u
                                                                 ᾱu   .
                                            u


Let fp1 , fp2 : U → R+ be functions predicting T1 |Su (p1 ; T )|, T1 |Su (p2 ; T )|, respectively. Denote
the learned policy by p̂, and the optimal policy by p∗ .
If (i) the expected RMSE of fp1 , fp2 is bounded by εpred , (ii) the average absolute deviation of
 1
T |TPP(u; T )| is bounded by εdev , and (iii) the expected LV approximation error of the system is
bounded by εLV , then the learned policy p̂ has bounded regret:
                                                            ηTPP
              Eu,π T1 |Su (p∗ ; T )| − T1 |Su (p̂; T )| ≤            (εpred + εdev + εLV )
                                                          |p1 − p2 |
where expectation is taken over stochastic choices of policies, and ηTPP = g(µ, ν) ∈ poly(µ, ν).

Proof. By assumption (i), the functions fp1 , fp2 have bounded expected RMSE:
                                h                           2 i
                             Eu fpi (u) − T1 |Su (pi ; T )|     ≤ ε2pred                            (15)

Applying Jensen’s inequality with the convex function φ(x) = x2 yields:
                                                2     h                             2 i
               Eu fpi (u) − T1 |Su (pi ; T )|     ≤ Eu fpi (u) − T1 |Su (pi ; T )|
Combining with Eq. (15) and taking the square root, we obtain an upper bound on the expected
absolute error:
                           Eu fpi (u) − T1 |Su (pi ; T )| ≤ εpred                       (16)

Let ∆f = |fpi (u) − λ∗ (pi )| apply the triangle inequality to obtain:
         ∆f = |fpi (u) − λ∗ (pi )|
             ≤ fpi (u) − T1 |Su (u; T )| + T1 |Su (u; T )| − λ̄(pi ; u) + λ̄(pi ; u) − λ∗ (pi )

Denote εf = εpred + εdev + εLV . Applying the triangle inequality and using the bounds in Eq. (16)
together with assumptions (ii), (iii), we obtain:

                        Eu,π [∆f ] ≤Eu fpi (u) − T1 |Su (u; T )|

                                        + Eu,π T1 |Su (u; T )| − λ̄(pi ; u)

                                        + Eu λ̄(pi ; u) − λ∗ (pi ; θu∗ )
                                   ≤εpred + εdev + εLV = εf                             (17)
                                               ˆ
Denote θu∗ = (α, β, γ, δ). The empirical value α      α
                                               β of β is given by Definition A.2. Denote the
                             ˆ
estimation error by ∆ αβ = α β − β
                                     α
                                         .

By Proposition A.4, the following pointwise upper bound on ∆ αβ applies when ∆f ≤ γδ |p1 −p
                                                                                         4
                                                                                            2|
                                                                                               :
                                                  ∆f      βδ
                                         ∆ αβ ≤                                                     (18)
                                               |p1 − p2 | αγ
Plugging in the bound on the expected value of ∆f into Eq. (18), we obtain in expectation:

                              γ |p1 − p2 |               ∆f      βδ        γ |p1 − p2 |
           Eu,π ∆ αβ | ∆f ≤                  ≤ Eu,π                 | ∆f ≤
                              δ     4                 |p1 − p2 | αγ        δ     4
                                                   εf           βδ
                                             ≤            max                                       (19)
                                               |p1 − p2 | u αγ


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next, we apply Proposition A.5. Denote ∆λ∗ = λ∗ (p∗ )−λ∗ (p̂), and define the following probability
event:
                                         γ |p1 − p2 |                  1
                           A = ∆f ≤                     and ∆ αβ ≤
                                          δ     4                     2ν
Note that the bound in Proposition A.5 is represented as a minimum between two functions, one
linear in ε and one constant. To leverage this property, apply the law of total expectation:

                      Eu,π [∆λ∗ ] = Eu,π [∆λ∗ | A]P[A] + Eu,π ∆λ∗ | Ā P Ā                   (20)

Under A, the first term in Eq. (20) can be bounded by the linear term in Proposition A.5. Taking
P[A] ≤ 1 and combining with equation Eq. (18):
                       Eu,π [∆λ∗ | A]P[A] ≤ Eu,π [∆λ∗ | A]
                                                   2
                                                   β γ
                                          ≤ Eu,π         ∆ α | A
                                                  2α2 δ β
                                                   2
                                                   β γ      ∆f     βδ
                                          ≤ Eu,π                      | A
                                                  2α2 δ |p1 − p2 | αγ
                                                ν3
                                          ≤             εf                                     (21)
                                            2|p1 − p2 |

The expectation factor in the second term of Eq. (20) can be bounded by the constant term in Propo-
sition A.5:
                                             1          βγ    ν      γ
                             Eu,π ∆λ∗ | Ā ≤ max           ≤ max                                (22)
                                               4 u αδ         4 u δ

Decompose the probability factor P Ā using the law of total probability:

                      γ |p1 − p2 |                1          γ |p1 − p2 |          γ |p1 − p2 |
    P Ā = P ∆f >                    + P ∆β >
                                            α        | ∆f ≤                P ∆f ≤
                      δ      4                   2ν          δ     4               δ     4

                      γ |p1 − p2 |                1          γ |p1 − p2 |
          ≤ P ∆f >                   + P ∆ αβ >      | ∆f ≤
                      δ      4                   2ν          δ     4

Apply Markov’s inequality P[|X| ≥ a] ≤ E[|X|]
                                          a    on the probabilities to obtain:
                                                                               −1
                                  γ |p1 − p2 |                   γ |p1 − p2 |
                         P ∆f >                  ≤ Eu,π [∆f ]
                                  δ     4                        δ     4
                                                                 4            δ
                                                     ≤ εf              max                     (23)
                                                 by Eq. (17) |p1 − p2 | u γ


                        1        γ |p1 − p2 |                            γ |p1 − p2 |
              P ∆ αβ >    | ∆f ≤                ≤ Eu,π ∆ αβ | ∆f ≤
                       2ν        δ     4                                 δ     4
                                                                εf          βδ
                                                    ≤                 max
                                                by Eq. (19) |p1 − p2 | u αγ
                                                         εf            δ
                                                ≤               ν max                          (24)
                                                    |p1 − p2 |     u   γ
Plugging back equations Eq. (21), Eq. (22),Eq. (23),Eq. (24) into equation Eq. (20), we obtain
bounds for each term:

                Eu,π [∆λ∗ ] = Eu,π [∆λ∗ | A]P[A] + Eu,π ∆λ∗ | Ā             P Ā              (25)
                              |       {z       } |       {z     }            | {z }
                                    by Eq. (21)          by Eq. (22)   by Eq. (23),Eq. (24)

we obtain:                                          3
                                        εf         ν       ν2
                      Eu,π [∆λ∗ ] ≤                   + ν+     µ = ελ∗
                                    |p1 − p2 |      2      4

                                                   19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To obtain the regret bound on the empirical rates, we apply assumptions (ii), (iii) once again to
bound the expected difference between λ∗ (p) and T1 |Su (p; T )|, and apply the triangle inequality:

                  Eu,π T1 |Su (p∗ ; T )| − T1 |Su (p̂; T )| ≤ ελ∗ + 2(εdev + εLV )
              ν                 β
Note that |p1 −p 2|
                      > 1, as α   ≥ 1 since all the users are assumed to remain engaged in the
long
     term,
           and   |p 1 − p 2 |
                              ≤ 1 as p1 , p2 ∈ [0, 1]. Therefore, the function ηTPP = g(µ, ν) =
 ν3            2

 2 +     ν + ν4    η + 2ν satisfies:
                      1      ∗         1
                                                                   ηTPP
             Eu,π    T |Su (p ; T )| − T |Su (p̂; T )|       ≤
                                                                 |p1 − p2 |
                                                                            (εpred + εdev + εLV )


B     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

B.1   DATA

MovieLens-1M We base our main experimental environment on the MovieLens-1M dataset,
which is a standard benchmark dataset used widely in recommendation system research (Harper
& Konstan, 2015). The dataset includes 1,000,209 ratings provided by 6,040 users and for 3,706
movies. Ratings are in the range {1, . . . , 5}, and all users in the dataset have at least 20 reported
ratings. The dataset is publicly available at: https://grouplens.org/datasets/movielens/1m/.

Data partitioning. To learn latent user and item features, 30% of all ratings were drawn at random.
Stratified sampling was applied to ensure that all users and items were covered, and so that each users
have roughly the same proportion of ratings used for this step. These ratings were only used only for
learning a CF model, and were discarded afterwards. The remaining 70% data points were used for
training and testing. For these, we first randomly sampled 1,000 users to form the test set. Then, the
remaining users were partitioned into the main train set S, which included 70% (≈3,528) of these
users, and the experimental treatment sets S (j) , each including 10% (≈504) users for N = 3. This
procedure was repeated 10 times with different random seeds. We report average results, together
with 95% t-distribution confidence intervals representing variation between runs.

B.2   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS
• Hardware: All experiments were run on a single laptop, with 16GB of RAM, M1 Pro processor,
  and with no GPU support.
• Runtime: A single run consisting the entire pipeline (data loading and partitioning, collaborative
  filtering, training classifiers, simulating dynamics, learning policies, measuring and comparing
  performance) takes roughly 23 minutes. The main bottleneck is the discrete LV simulation, taking
  roughly 70% of runtime to compute, mostly due to bookkeeping necessary for the non-stationary
  baselines. Simulation code was optimized using the NUMBA jit compiler, which improves run-
  time.
• Optimization packages:
  – Collaborative filtering (CF): We use the SURPRISE package (Hug, 2020), which includes an
    implementation of the SVD algorithm for CF. All parameters were set to default values.
  – Regression: We use the SCIKIT- LEARN implementation of linear regression for predicting
    long-term engagement from user features (i.e the prediction models fj (u) in Eq. (8)). All
    parameters were set to default values.
  – Non-Negative Least Squares (NNLS): We use the SCIPY. OPTIMIZE implementation of NNLS.
    The algorithm was used with its default parameters.
• Code: Code for reproducing all of our figures and experiments is available in the following repos-
  itory: https://github.com/lvml-iclr-2023/lvml.


                                                    20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.3   OTHER BASELINES
• Safety: In each step of the TPP simulation, look k step back, and calculate the empirical rate
  λ̃i = ti −tki−k . If this rate exceeds the threshold λ̃i > τ , the policy enters a ‘cool-down’ policy
  state, serving only forced breaks until the next time period. In our experiments, we used thresholds
  τ ∈ {14, 16}, k = 10 look-behind steps, and defined the cool-down period as 0.5 time units.
• Oracle: To estimate the effect of perfect predictions, we implement an oracle predictor fporacle (u)
  which has access to the latent user parameters. For a given u and for each p, the predictor
  outputs the infinite-horizon LV equilibrium for u, namely fporacle (u) = λ∗ (p; θ̃u ). We define
  θ̃u = (αu , β̃u , γu , δu ), where αu , γu , δu are the unobserved parameters for the given user, and β̃u
  is the expected value of βux induced by the distribution over recommended items x induced by
  the recommendation policy ψ. We view θ̃u as a useful proxy for the otherwise unattainable θ̄u .

B.4   H YPERPARAMETERS
• Collaborative filtering: We used d = 8 latent factors and enabled bias terms, which ensured per-
  formance is close to the benchmark of RMSE = 0.873 reported in the SURPRISE documentation.
  We used the vanilla SVD solver, with all hyperparameters set to their default values.
• Recommendation policy: Softmax temperature was set to 0.5.
• Prediction: We trained regressors f (u) on input feature vectors consisting of three components:
                                         u = (ṽu , bu , ρ̂u ) ∈ Rd+2                                 (26)
  The three components are: (i) SVD latent user factors ṽu ∈ Rd , (ii) SVD user bias term bu ∈ R,
  (iii) an additional feature consisting of the average predicted ratings for unseen items r̂u weighted
  by recommendation probability, which we found to slightly improve predictive performance:
                                             X
                                  ρ̂u =              r̂ux · softmaxx (r̂u )                        (27)
                                        x∈holdout(u)

  Where holdout(u) is the set of unseen items corresponding to user u, r̂ux ∈ [1, 5] are the pre-
                                   |holdout(u)|
  dicted ratings, and r̂u ∈ [1, 5]              is the vector of all predicted ratings used for softmax
  recommendation as described in section 5. We chose to focus on linear models since the treat-
  ment datasets are relatively small (each |S (j) | ≈ 500), and since other model classes (including
  boosted trees and MLPs) did not perform significantly better.
• Discrete TPP: Interaction sequences for each user were generated according to an LV dis-
  cretization scheme TPPLV (u; T ), described in detail in the next section. Latent sates were
  initialized randomly with relative uniform noise around the theoretical LV equilibrium point
  (λ0 , q0 ) = ((1 + ξλ )λ∗ , (1 + ξq )q ∗ ), where ξλ , ξq ∼ Uniform(−0.1, 0.1). Latent states were up-
  dated each B = 10 recommendations to stabilize noise (see Figure 5). When x is recommended
  to u at time t, latent states and ∆t are set according to βu (t), which depends on ratings rux (true or
  mixed with predictions u⊤ x via κ). Specifically, we use βu (t) = rux    2
                                                                             /5 ∈ {0.2, 0.8, 1.8, 3.2, 5},
  which is convex, to accentuate the role of low ratings since they are underrepresented in the data.
  For B ≥ 1, we take the effective βu (t) to be the average over the B items recommended in that
  step. We set α = 1.3, and chose γ = 0.2, δ = 0.01 (which together determine scale) so that
  typical values for engagement rate T1 |Su | are on the order of ≈ 10 for the chosen T = 100.

B.5   D ISCRETE TPP FOR L OKTA -VOLTERRA SIMULATION

The Temporal Point Process (TPP) we use for simulating user interaction sequences Su is based
on a discretization of the LV system described in Eq. (2), using the forward Euler method with
variable step sizes. We denote this process by TPPLV (u; T ), and present the sampling procedure in
Algorithm 1.
Each user is associated with discrete latent states λi , qi , and parameters αu , γu , δu . Initial states
λ0 , q0 are set randomly. At each step, and in time ti , the system recommends xi = x(ti ), which
triggers updates in latent states, and determines the next time of interaction ti+1 . As noted, these
update depend on item-specific parameters βu,xi .


                                                    21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Discrete simulation (B = 1)             Discrete simulation (B = 10)                    Continuous ODE


 Latent consumption drive λ(t)
                                 120

                                 100

                                  80

                                  60

                                  40

                                  20
                                       0    20     40          60   80   100   0    20      40          60   80   100     0   20       40          60    80      100
                                                        time                                     time                                       time

                                                                                                                   λ(t)       Cumulative rate           Theoretical λ∗



Figure 5: Example discrete sequence Su ∼ TPPLV (u; T ), compared to continuous LV dynam-
ics. Our TPP produces discrete sequences that are qualitatively different from their continuous-
time analogs (blue lines), Nonetheless, it captures the general properties of our proposed behavioral
model: note how cumulative averaging behavior (orange dashes) exhibits ‘habit formation’, which
our equilibrium approach targets (blue dots). For the same initial conditions λ(0), q(0), the figure
shows how varying the number of recommended items per step (B) ‘smooths’ the discrete behavior
(left: B = 1, center: B = 10). For fixed βu (t) = βu , when B → ∞, and when ∆t → 0, TPP
sequences approach a continuous LV trajectory; in general, and particularly when βu (t) varies by
step and per recommended items—this is not the case.


Under stationary policy π(p), the system recommends an item with probability (1 − p), and suggests
a break with probability p. The simulator considers B recommendation opportunities at each step.
For each k ∈ {1, . . . , B}, denote by Ik ∈ {0, 1} the break indicator, equal to 0 when a break
is recommended at the k-th slot in the batch. Denote by x ∼ ψ the item recommended by the
                                       2
underlying policy ψ, and by β(x) = rux   /5 the corresponding LV hyperparameter as defined above.

Algorithm 1: Sample from TPPLV (u; T )
Input: Break probability p ∈ [0, 1]
         Stationary content recommendation probability ψ
         Lotka-Volterra parameters θu = (α, β, γ, δ)
         Time horizon T > 0
Output: Interaction sequence Su ∼ TPPLV   π(p)◦ψ (u; T )
Initialize i = 0, t0 = 0, Su = {};
while ti < T do
     foreach k ∈ {1, . . . , B} do
         Ik ∼ Bernoulli(1 − p);
         xk ∼ ψ;
         βk ←− β(ruxk );
     end
     ∆ti ←− λ−1 i ;                                                 PB
                                                                         I β
                                 λi+1 ←− λi + −α + k=1B k k qi λi ∆ti ;
                                                          PB
                                                               Ik δ
                                 qi+1 ←− qi + γ(1 − qi ) − k=1
                                                             B      λ i   qi ∆ti ;
   ti+1 ←− ti + λ−1
                 i+1 ;
   Su ←− Su ∪ {(ti , (x1 , . . . , xB ), (I1 , . . . , IB ))} ;
   i ←− i + 1 ;
end


                                                                                           22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C                                A DDITIONAL EMPIRICAL EVALUATION
In this section, we provide additional empirical results as further indicators of potential applicability:
• In subsection C.1, we repeat the experiments presented in section 5 using a different dataset,
  showing that qualitative results remain consistent across recommendation modalities.
• In subsection C.2, we demonstrate how to leverage additional problem structure commonly avail-
  able in practice, and develop adaptive breaking policies which improve over time.
• Finally, in subsection C.3 we present a stateless consumption model which is unrelated to Lotka-
  Volterra and does not promote breaks. Evaluation of the LV policy optimization method under
  this model shows that the optimization procedure does not degrade performance when breaks are
  not beneficial, thus extending Corollary 2 beyond the realizable case.

C.1                                  A DDITIONAL DATASET

The Goodreads dataset. The Goodreads book recommendations data set is a common bench-
mark dataset used in recommendation systems research (Wan & McAuley, 2018; Wan et al., 2019).
Ratings are in the range {1, . . . , 5}, and the dataset is filtered to only include users with at least
20 reported ratings. We use the official comic-books genre subset of the dataset, which includes
3,679,076 ratings provided by 41,932 users and for 87,565 books after pre-processing. The dataset
is publicly available at: https://sites.google.com/eng.ucsd.edu/ucsdbookgraph/. Pre-processing code
is available in our code repository: https://github.com/lvml-iclr-2023/lvml.

Evaluation. For evaluation, we follow the same procedure described in Appendix B, maintaining
identical data processing procedures, constants, and hyperparameters. This procedure was repeated
10 times with different random seeds. We report average results, together with 95% t-distribution
confidence intervals.

Results. Figure 6 shows results for the Goodreads experiment, in the same format as Figure 3.
Results exhibit performance and trends that are qualitatively similar to the MovieLens experiment
in section 5. The LV policy optimization method achieved better performance on this dataset (right
pane): The performance of the LV is closer to oracle (-0.526% in Goodreads compared to -0.918%
in ML1M), and the gap from the best-of method is slightly larger (+5.77% in Goodreads compared
to +2.19% in ML1M). Varying user types (center pane) shows less variation across values of κ,
indicating that predictors achieve satisfactory performance even when the κ is low and prediction
is harder (see subsection 5.1). Varying treatments (right pane) also coincides with the observations:
LV policy optimization on the Goodreads dataset exhibits less performance degradation as p1 → 0,
suggesting that less data may be sufficient for optimization. We attribute these results to the larger
size of the dataset (approximately 3.6M interactions, compared to 1M interactions in ML1M), and
to the possibility that a stronger structure may exist in this recommendation modality compared to
general movie recommendation.

                                Engagement for different policies (κ = 0.5)                                               Engagement per LV breaking schedule                                              Engagement for varying p1 (p0 = 0)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     13%
                               12%                                                                                             LV decision rule
 % improvement (vs. default)


                                                                                      % improvement (vs. default)


                                                                                                                                                                       % improvement (vs. default)


                                                                                                                    25%
                                                                                                                                                                                                     10%
                               10%
                                                                                                                    20%
                                                                                                                          p̂


                                                                                                                                                                                                     8%
                               8%                                                                                                                                                                                                LV, κ = 1
                                                                                                                    15%
                                                                                                                                      ˆ
                                                                                                                                     β/α                                                             5%                          LV, κ = 0.5
                               5%
                                                                                                                    10%                                                                                                          LV, κ = 0
                               3%                                                                                                                                                                    2%                          best-of, κ = 1
                                                                                                                    5%
                                                                                                                                           κ=1               κ=0                                                                 best-of, κ = 0.5
                               0%                                                                                                                                                                    0%
                                                                                                                    0%                     κ = 0.5           default                                                             best-of, κ = 0

                                           t            6    4     f            cle                                       0.0      0.1    0.2    0.3       0.4                                              0.1        0.2         0.3         0.4
                                        aul          @1    @1 st-o     LV
                                                                            ora
                                     def          ety afety be                                                                       Learned LV policy (p̂u )                                                     Assigned treatment (p1 )
                                               saf     s


Figure 6: Results on the Goodreads comic-books dataset (compare to Figure 3). (Left) Perfor-
mance gain of different approaches (relative to default policy). (Center) Performance of LV by
user group, partitioned by learned policies p̂u . (Right) Sensitivity to an increasingly aggressive ex-
perimental p1 (N = 2, p0 = 0).


                                                                                                                                           23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2    L EVERAGING ADDITIONAL STRUCTURE USING ADAPTIVE POLICIES

One benefit of our approach in section 4 is that it requires only predictions of long-term engage-
ment. In reality, however, other sources of information may also be available to the learner, which
may be useful for improving decisions regarding when to recommend breaks. Here we consider
additional information in the form of explicit user feedback, collected by the system over the course
of interaction. We model users as providing to the system feedback regarding item quality, namely
true ratings rux , for some of the recommended items x they consume. For simplicity, we assume
users report ratings with probability pr ∈ [0, 1], independently for each item, where we vary pr
across experimental conditions. Intuitively, we would expect that, over time, user-reported ratings
help improve our learned breaking policy; however, over-relying on few data and at and early stage
my hinder performance. Here we examine when and how such feedback should be utilized.

Adaptive policy optimization. To extend our approach to incorporate ratings-based feedback,
we propose an adaptive explore-then-exploit approach which can leverage sparse explicit feedback.
Fixing an adaptation time T0 ∈ [0, T ] (a hyperparameter), the method applies the standard learned
breaking policy π̂ (Equation 9) in the time frame t ≤ T0 , during which it also collects and stores
user-reported ratings. Then, at time t = T0 , the method updates the learning policy on the basis of
the new ratings data, and applies this policy until the eventual time T . In particular, ratings are used
to improve the estimated component ρ̂u in the user feature vector u′ (described in Equation 27). In
this way, the method uses the existing engagement predictors fp (u) without requiring any retraining.
A formal description of this method is provided in Algorithm 2. Here we denote the set of rat-
                                                      ∗
ings collected until time t by r[0,t] ∈ {1, . . . , 5} ; the average rating at time t by ρ̄(0,t) =
   1
         P
                   r; and the set of long-term engagement predictions for a feature vector u by
|r[0,t] | r∈r[0,t]
f (u) = {(pi , fpi (u))} (as in subsection 4.1).

Algorithm 2: Adaptive policy optimization using sparse rating signals
Input: Initial break probability p ∈ [0, 1]
        Time horizon T > 0
        Adaptation time T0 ∈ [0, T ]
        User feature vector u = (ṽ, b, ρ̂)
1. Collect ratings data r[0,T0 ] with breaking policy π(p) until time T0 ;
2. Construct updated feature vector u′ = (ṽ, b, ρ̄[0,T0 ] ) using the average rating ρ̄[0,T0 ] ;
3. Compute updated long-term engagement predictions f (u′ ) ;
4. Use the LV policy optimization method to obtain updated policy p′ = p∗ (f (u′ )) ;
5. Use breaking policy π(p′ ) for the remaining time t ∈ [T0 , T ] ;


Evaluation. We evaluate the adaptive policies using the MovieLens-1M experimental setup, as
described in section 5 and appendix B. We make use of the same linear regression predictors fp (u)
from the main part of the experiment, and maintain the same time horizon T = 100. We vary the
ratings density parameter pr in the range [0, 1], and vary the adaptation time T0 across three distinct
values T0 ∈ {0.5, 5, 50}.

Results. Results are presented in Figure 7. In the results, we observe that LV-adaptive with
T0 = 5 represents an optimal point within the hyperparameter space. For this choice, results show
significant gains over the non-adaptive LV method even under moderate rating densities, and quick
convergence towards the LV-true-ratings upper bound. In contrast, LV-adaptive with T0 = 0.5
represents a “premature optimization” scenario, attempting to adapt the policy without allowing
the estimated average ρ̄[0,T0 ] enough time to converge to its expected value. Similarly, T0 = 50
represents the result of “late optimization”, which has accurate estimation of ρ̄[0,T0 ] but not enough
time to benefit from the updated policy. Finally

C.3    D ISTINCT BEHAVIORAL MODEL

In this work, we propose the LV model as a behavioral hypothesis class for counterfactual prediction
of long-term engagement. As such, using the LV model within the learning-to-break optimization


                                                      24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                   Performance of LV-adaptive policy (κ = 0.0, T = 100)
                                  8%


 Improvement over myopic policy
                                                                                                                            Policy
                                                                                                                       LV-adaptive (T0 = 5.0)
                                  6%
                                                                                                                       LV-adaptive (T0 = 0.5)
                                                                                                                       LV-adaptive (T0 = 50.0)
                                  4%
                                                                                                                       oracle
                                                                                                                       LV-true-ratings
                                  2%                                                                                   LV
                                                                                                                       best-of
                                  0%                                                                                   default

                                       0.0   0.2                  0.4                       0.6           0.8    1.0
                                                                        Rating density pr


Figure 7: Adaptive policy evaluation for varying rating density pr ∈ [0, 1]. Solid blue line rep-
resents the adaptive policy described in Algorithm 2, with adaptation time T0 = 5. Dashed lines
represent the performance of adaptive policies under different choices of T0 . Cyan horizontal line
represents LV-true-ratings, a non-adaptive method with oracle access to the true average rating.
The remaining horizontal lines represent the performance of selected non-adaptive policies, as pre-
sented in Figure 3 (left pane).


framework is a design choice, to be made at the discretion of the learner; our LV model would be a
good choice if it fits the data better than alternative model classes, given the amount of available data.
This relation is made precise in our error bound (Theorem 1), which bounds the error when using
the LV model for any underlying TPP (i.e., we make no assumptions about the true underlying data
generation process).
Our main experiments evaluate our approach on data that is not LV dynamics, but nonetheless, bear
some resemblance. To complement these results, here we run an additional experiment in which
we empirically evaluate our LV-based approach on data that is generated by a behavioral model
that is entirely distinct. In particular, we consider a user model in which consumption decisions
only depend on the quality of recommended items, without any dependence on internal states—i.e.,
it is stateless. This conforms to behavioral models which are implicitly assumed in conventional
recommendation methods such as collaborative filtering.

Stateless content consumption. The data generation process is formalized in Algorithm 3.
As a means of capturing stateless behavior, we define a “close-range” temporal point process
TPPCR (u; T ) which generates sequences of user interactions based solely on the average rating
of recommended items in a batch. Here we relate rating with utility, and assume that items having
higher utility (and therefore higher ratings) induce more frequent interactions; in the same way, we
consider break prompts as items having zero utility, and hence zero rating. At time ti , and given
a batch of size B with k ≤ B recommended items and B − k ≥ 0 breaks prompts, users acting
according to the stateless behavioral will consume the next batch of content at time:
                                                                                                          −1
                                                                                                    k
                                                                                      1          1 X
                                                               ti+1 = ti +                    ruxj                                       (28)
                                                                                      τ B j=1

                                                                          k
where (rux1 , . . . , ruxk ) ∈ {1, . . . , 5} are the ratings of the items recommended at time k, and
τ > 0 is a constant latent parameter to be learned from data. The breaking policy π decides on
the number of items k to recommend on each step. Since rux ≥ 1 for all user-item pairs, the time
difference ∆ti = ti+1 − ti in Equation 28 is minimized by taking k = B. This shows that the
optimal breaking policy under this behavioral model is the default one, which does not prompt the
user to break.

Evaluation. We evaluate the stateless behavioral model using the MovieLens-1M experimental
setup, as described in section 5. We set τ = 4 for all users, utilize linear regression for engagement
prediction, and maintain all hyperparameters without change. Data processing steps are performed
as described in appendix B, and the chosen breaking policies are evaluated.


                                                                                             25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3: Sample from TPPCR (u; T )
Input: Break probability p ∈ [0, 1]
         Stationary content recommendation probability ψ
         Scalar parameter θu = τ > 0
         Time horizon T > 0
Output: Interaction sequence Su ∼ TPPCR  π(p)◦ψ (u; T )
Initialize i = 0, t0 = 0, Su = {};
while ti < T do
     foreach k ∈ {1, . . . , B} do
         Ik ∼ Bernoulli(1 − p);
         xk ∼ ψ;
     end
                        P             −1
                              B
     ti+1 ←− ti + τ1 B1 k=1 Ik ruxk       ;
   Su ←− Su ∪ {(ti , (x1 , . . . , xB ), (I1 , . . . , IB ))} ;
   i ←− i + 1 ;
end


                                LV fit with unbiased prediction                                    LV fit with over-prediction

                     15
  Consumption rate


                                                                          Consumption rate


                     10                                                                                                                    Expected empirical engagement λ̄u (p)
                                                                                                                                           Engagement predictions (pi , fpi (u))
                                                                                                                                           Best-fit LV equilibrium curve λ∗θ̂ (p)
                                                                                                                                                                            u
                      5
                                                                                                                                           Selected policy p̂


                      0
                          0.0     0.2     0.4       0.6       0.8   1.0                      0.0   0.2     0.4       0.6       0.8   1.0
                                     Probability of break (p)                                         Probability of break (p)


Figure 8: Fitting an LV equilibrium curve on the empirical consumption rates of TPPCR (u; T ).
The plots are a realization of the schematic diagram in Figure 2 using data from the MovieLens-1M
experiment. (Left) Prediction with unbiased engagement predictions. (Right) User with extremely
low engagement, for which the system tends to over-predict. In both cases, the LV policy optimiza-
tion method selects the optimal policy p = 0.


Results. Despite the difference between the true TPP and our choice of model class, the LV policy
optimization method successfully learned the optimal no-breaks—which in this case, is the policy
p = 0 for all users. Further detail is provided by Figure 8, which illustrates the policy optimization
steps under TPPCR (u; T ) for typical users with unbiased and biased engagement predictions. In
both examples, the optimal points of both curves coincide, and the optimal policy is selected despite
poor point-wise fit. Combined, these results show that our approach is “safe”, in the sense that when
breaking is sub-optimal, the learned breaking policy does not override the default policy.


                                                                                                       26
