Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING TO C OUNTER : S TOCHASTIC F EATURE -
BASED L EARNING FOR D IVERSE C OUNTERFACTUAL
E XPLANATIONS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         Interpretable machine learning seeks to understand the reasoning process of com-
         plex black-box systems that are long notorious for lack of explainability. One
         growing interpreting approach is through counterfactual explanations, which go
         beyond why a system arrives at a certain decision to further provide suggestions
         on what a user can do to alter the outcome. A counterfactual example must be
         able to counter the original prediction from the black-box classifier, while also
         satisfying various constraints for practical applications. These constraints exist at
         trade-offs between one and another presenting radical challenges to existing works.
         To this end, we propose a stochastic learning-based framework that effectively
         balances the counterfactual trade-offs. The framework consists of a generation and
         a feature selection module with complementary roles: the former aims to model the
         distribution of valid counterfactuals whereas the latter serves to enforce additional
         constraints in a way that allows for differentiable training and amortized optimiza-
         tion. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in generating actionable
         and plausible counterfactuals that are more diverse than the existing methods and
         particularly in a more efficient manner than counterparts of the same capacity.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Recent advances in machine learning, especially the successes of deep neural networks, have promoted
the use of these systems in various real-world applications. Such models provide remarkable predictive
performance yet often at a cost of transparency and interpretability. This has sparked controversy
over whether to rely on algorithmic predictions for critical decision making, from graduate admission
(Waters & Miikkulainen, 2014; Acharya et al., 2019), job recruitment (Ajunwa et al., 2016) to
high-stakes cases of credit assessment (Lessmann et al., 2015) or criminal justice (Lipton, 2018;
Gifford, 2018). Progress in interpretable machine learning offers interesting solutions to explaining
the predictive mechanisms of black-box models. One useful interpreting approach is through
counterfactual examples, which sheds light on what modifications to be made to an individual’s profile
that can counter an unfavorable decision outcome from a black-box classifier. Such explanations
explore what-if scenarios that suggest possible recourses for future improvement. Counterfactual
explanability indeed has important social implications at both personal and organizational level. For
instance, job applicants who get rejected by the CV screening algorithm of a company are likely to
benefit from feedbacks like ‘getting 1 more referral’ or ‘being fluent in at least 2 languages’, which
would help them better prepare for future applications. At organizational level, by engaging with
job candidates in this way as a form of advocating for transparency in decision making, companies
can improve employer branding and attractiveness to top talents. Internally, organizations can also
validate whether any prejudice or unfairness towards a particular group is implicitly introduced in
historical data and consequentially embedded in the classifiers producing biased decisions.

Related works. Recent years have seen an explosion in literature on counterfactual explanability,
from works that initially focused on one or two specific characteristics or families of models to those
that can deal with multiple constraints and various model types. There have been many attempts
to summarize major themes of research and discuss open challenges in great depth. We therefore
refer readers to Karimi et al. (2020b); Verma et al. (2020); Guidotti (2022) for excellent surveys of


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


methods in this area. We here focus on reviewing algorithms that can support multiple or even diverse
counterfactual generations - a property that has received less attention.
Dealing with the combinatorial nature of the task, earlier works commonly adopt mixed integer
programming (Russell, 2019), genetic algorithms (Sharma et al., 2020), or SMT solvers (Karimi
et al., 2020a). Another recent popular approach is gradient-based optimization (Mothilal et al., 2020;
Bui et al., 2022). In a similar fashion with adversarial learning (Goodfellow et al., 2014), it involves
iteratively perturbing the input data point according to an objective function that incorporates desired
constraints. The whole idea of diversity is to explore different combinations of features and feature
values that can counter the original prediction while accommodating various user needs. To support
diversity, Russell (2019) in particular enforces hard constraints on the current generations to be
different from the previous ones. Such a constraint will however be removed whenever the solver
cannot be satisfied. Meanwhile, Mothilal et al. (2020) and Bui et al. (2022) add another loss term for
diversity using Determinantal Point Processes (Kulesza et al., 2012), whereas the other works only
demonstrate the capacity to generate multiple counterfactuals via empirical results. Moreover, all of
these algorithms are computationally expensive. Along the line, Redelmeier et al. (2021) attempts to
model the conditional likelihood of mutable features given the immutable features using the training
data. They then adopt Monte Carlo sampling to generate counterfactuals from this distribution and
filter out samples that do not meet counterfactual constraints. Amortized optimization emerges as
a more effective strategy that explicitly models the distribution of counterfactual examples via a
generative model such as a Variational auto-encoder (VAE) (Mahajan et al., 2019; Pawelczyk et al.,
2020; Downs et al., 2020) or a Markov decision process (MDP) model under a reinforcement learning
setting (Verma et al., 2022). Obtaining such a distribution, sampling of counterfactuals can therefore
be done straightforwardly.


Contributions. In this paper, we propose a learning-based framework diverging markedly from the
previous approaches. We reformulate the combinatorial search task into a stochastic optimization
problem that can be solved efficiently via gradient descent. Whereas the previous works model the
generative distributions via MDP Verma et al. (2022), VAE or VAE-based counterparts (Mahajan
et al., 2019; Pawelczyk et al., 2020; Downs et al., 2020), we construct a learnable generation module
G that directly models the conditional distributions of individual features such that they form a valid
counterfactual distribution when combined.
Another point of difference of our framework lies in the usage of Bernoulli sampling to ensure that
only minimal changes are introduced to the generative counterfactuals. In prior works, standard
metrics such as L1 or L2 is often used to penalize the distance between the counterfactual and original
data point. Verma et al. (2020) criticizes this approach as non-obvious, especially for handling
categorical features. Avoiding the use of distance measures, we optimize a feature selection module
S to output a Bernoulli distribution for each feature representing the likelihood of the feature being
mutated. S is a flexible module that can adapt to different user-defined constraints about mutability
of features.
Similar to most works, our framework is developed to deal with heterogeneous tabular data. However,
instead of one-hot encoding every categorical feature and treat each level as an individual numerical
feature, we propose the opposite strategy: to discretize the numerical features and treat them as
categorical. The benefits are four-fold: (1) we can conveniently apply one functional form over feature
distributions, which then only requires one reparameterization trick feature-wise; (2) it helps expand
the original input space that may later support generalization; (3) we believe that it yields more useful
explanations and easier for human users to follow the suggestions than forcing them to meet hard
requirements from specific numerical values; (4) it helps reduces privacy risks when revealing the
counterfactual suggestions to the public. To facilitate end-to-end differentiable training, we employ
the Gumbel-Softmax reparameterization trick for effective treatment of categorical features. This is
the first time this strategy is used in this line of research.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows

       • We introduce Learning to Counter (L2C) - a stochastic feature-based learning approach for
         generating counterfactual explanations that address the counterfactual desirable properties
         in a single end-to-end differentiable framework.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • We employ amortized optimization to efficiently generate actionable and diverse counter-
         factual explanations at 100% validity and adequate trade-off with sparsity. Our method
         additionally enforces plausibility by optimizing the generative examples on the input data
         manifold while maintaining one-hotness in the output representations for the categorical
         features.
       • Through extensive experiments on real-world datasets, L2C is shown to balance the trade-
         offs among counterfactual constraints more effectively than the existing methods whereas
         achieving more diverse explanations and sufficient robustness in out-of-distribution settings.
         To the best of our knowledge, we are the first amortized method that supports diverse local
         counterfactual generations.
In the following, we provide a detailed description of the characteristics highlighted in bold.

2    D ESIDERATA OF C OUNTERFACTUAL E XPLANATIONS
The ultimate goal of this line of research is to provide practical guidelines as to what actions an
individual can take to achieve a desired outcome. Desiderata of counterfactual explanations have
been extensively discussed in previous literature (Karimi et al., 2020b; Verma et al., 2020; Guidotti,
2022; Verma et al., 2022). For pragmatic reasons, this paper focuses on counterfactual explanations
with the following characteristics:
• Validity: By definition, a counterfactual example must flip the original black-box outcome.
• Actionability: Counterfactual explanations should be specific to individual user preferences and
  only suggest actionable or feasible changes. In particular, changes should be made on mutable
  features e.g., Work Experience or SAT scores, while leaving immutable features unchanged e.g.,
  Gender or Ethnicity.
• Sparsity: Counterfactuals should be close to the original example where a minimal number of
  features are modified.
• Diversity: Diverse explanations are preferable to capture different preferences from the same user
  so that they can freely explore multiple options to select the best fit.
• Plausibility: Plausible or realistic counterfactuals are to lie close to the training data manifold and
  obey the input domain. An example of implausible instances is one with a numerical feature such
  as Age being above 100 years old, or a categorical feature with more than one category is assigned
  non-zero values in its one-hot representation.
• Scalability: Inference should be done simultaneously and efficiently for multiple input examples.
While validity and actionability are the two must-have criteria to generate a practical counterfactual
explanation, satisfying some, if not all, of the other constraints at the same time is a challenging task.
First, there is a trade-off between validity and sparsity (Verma et al., 2020). To counter the original
outcome, it is naturally easier to change a large number of features without considering whether the
features are mutable or not. On the other hand, strongly enforcing sparsity results in a smaller subset
of features that can be changed, which can compromise diversity since we expect counterfactual
states to differ from one to another substantially.
With respect to Plausibility, this property is often violated when categorical features are not handled
properly (Verma et al., 2020). A common approach to pre-process categorical features is through
one-hot encoding. However, the output representation of a counterfactual example may not maintain
one-hotness or probabilistic format where the sum of all levels equals to 1. This can lead to a
discrepancy where its equivalent one-hot representation (i.e., the plausible representation) fails to
produce the counterfactual outcome. Appendix B.2 will investigate this issue in more detail. Lastly,
scalability is an important consideration and particularly significant in the face of diversity. This is
because the majority of previous methods optimize each input data point separately, and individual
runs are additionally required to produce several counterfactuals. These algorithms are thus highly
time-expensive for large datasets. Monte Carlo sampling (Redelmeier et al., 2021) and amortized
optimization (Mahajan et al., 2019; Downs et al., 2020; Verma et al., 2022) are recently adopted to
boost efficiency. However, none of these methods addresses the diversity constraint nor is equipped
with appropriate treatment for categorical features. We now explain how our framework L2C satisfies
all the above constraints.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3     S TOCHASTIC F EATURE -BASED C OUNTERFACTUAL L EARNING

3.1   P ROBLEM SETUP

Let X denote the input space where x is an input vector with N features of both continuous and
categorical types. As discussed previously, we discretize the numerical features into equal-sized
buckets, which gives us an input of N categorical features wherein each feature xi has ci levels. We
apply one-hot encoding on each feature and flatten them into a single input vector z ∈ {0, 1}D where
      PN
D = i=1 ci . Concretely, feature xi is now  Pcrepresented   by the vector zi ∈ Oci where the set of
one-hot vectors Oci is defined as {0, 1}ci : j=1i
                                                   zij = 1.
Let f be the black-box classifying function and y = f (x) be the decision outcome on the input x.
A valid counterfactual example x  e associated with x is one that alters the original outcome y into a
desired outcome y ′ ̸= y with y ′ = f (e
                                       x). Let ze denote the corresponding one-hot representation of x
                                                                                                     e.
Actionability indicates that some features can be mutable (i.e., changeable), while others should be
kept immutable (i.e., unchangeable). Without loss of generality, let us impose an ordering on the set
of N features such that the first K features are mutable features (i.e., the ones that can be modified)
and denote K := {1, ..., K} ⊂ {1, ..., N }. For each mutable feature (i.e., xi or the one-hot vector
zi with i ∈ K), we aim to learn a local feature-based perturbation distribution P (e     zi | z) where
zei ∈ Oci , while leaving the immutable features unchanged.
To assure a fair comparison, we train the same black-box classifier for both ours and the baseline
methods. Specifically, the input to the classifier is the representation where only categorical features
are one-hot encoded while numerical features are retained at their original values. Later, whenever
necessary to consult the black-box model, for every numerical feature i, we convert the one-hot
representation zei back to [ai , bi ] where [ai , bi ] is the original value range of the feature.


3.2   M ETHODOLOGY

We now detail how L2C works and addresses each counterfactual constraint. Our framework is
summarized in Figure 1.
For each mutable feature zi with i ∈ K, we learn a local feature-based perturbation distribution
P (zei |  z) (i.e., z˜i ∈ O ci ), which is a categorical distribution Cat(pi | z) with category probability
pi = pi1 , pi2 , ..., pici . We form a counterfactual example ze by concatenating zei ∼ Cat(pi | z)
for the mutable features and zi for the immutable features. To achieve validity, we learn the local
feature-based perturbation distribution by maximizing the chance that the counterfactual examples ze
counter the original outcome on x.
Additionally, learning local feature-based perturbation distributions over the mutable features allows
us to conduct a global counterfactual distribution P (e  z | z) over the counterfactual examples ze
defined above. Sampling from this distribution naturally leads to multiple counterfactual generations
efficiently, and we also expect that individual samples zei together can form diverse combinations of
features, thereby promoting diversity within the generative examples.
As previously discussed, too much of diversity can compromise sparsity. Dealing with this constraint,
for each mutable feature zi , we propose to learn a local feature-based selection distribution that
generates a random binary variable si ∼ Bernoulli(πi | z) wherein we replace zi by zei ∼ Cat(pi | z)
if si = 1 and leave z̃i = zi if si = 0. Therefore, the formula to update zei is

                                        zei = (1 − si )zi + si zei .


The benefit of having π = [πi ]i∈K is thus to control sparsity by adding one more channel to decide if
we should modify a mutable feature zi . Appendix B.4 presents an ablation study showing that without
the selection distribution, the perturbation distribution alone can generate diverse counterfactuals but
it changes plenty of mutable features. Meanwhile, optimizing the selection distribution jointly helps
harmonize the trade-off between diversity and sparsity.


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3   O PTIMIZATION O BJECTIVE

In this section, we explain how to design the building blocks of our framework L2C. As shown in
Figure 1, our framework consists of two modules: a counterfactual generator G and a feature
selector S. The counterfactual generator G is used to model the feature-based perturbation
distribution, while feature selector S is employed to model the feature-based selection distribution.
Specifically, given a one-hot vector representation z of a data example x, we feed z to G to form
G(z) = [Gi (z)]i∈K . We then apply the softmax activation function to Gi (z) to define the feature-
based local distribution (i.e., Cat(pi | z))) for zi as

                                           exp Gij (z)
                            pij (z) = Pci                 , ∀j = 1, ..., ci .
                                          k=1 exp Gik (z)


S takes z to form S(z) = [Si (z)]i∈K . We then apply the Sigmoid function to Si (z) to define the
feature-based selection distribution (i.e., Bernoulli(πi | z)) for zi as
                                                          1
                                       πi (z) =                    .
                                                  1 + exp − Si (z)

To encourage sparsity by reducing the number of mutable features chosen to be modified, we
regularize S through L1-norm ∥π(z)∥1 with π(z) = [πi (z)]i∈K .
To summarize, given an one-hot vector representation z of a data example x, we use G to work
out the local feature-based perturbation distribution Cat(pi (z)) for every i ∈ K. We then sample
zei ∼ Cat(pi (z)) for every i ∈ K. Subsequently, we use S to work out the local feature-based
selection distribution Bernoulli(πi (z)) for every i ∈ K. We then sample si ∼ Bernoulli(πi | z) and
update zei = (1 − si )zi + si zei for every i ∈ K. Finally, we concatenate zei for i ∈ K and zi for i ∈
                                                                                                      /K
to form the counterfactual example ze.
G and S are parameterized with neural networks over total parameters θ. For ze to be a valid and
sparse counterfactual associated with a desired outcome y ′ , we propose the following criterion
                                h                                      i
                                            z ), y ′ ) + α Ez ∥π(z)∥1 ,

                           minθ Eze CE(f (e                                                      (1)

where f is the black-box function, CE is the cross-entropy loss, ∥ · ∥1 is L1-norm, α is a loss weight.
Notice that ze formed by concatenating many one-hot vectors is an incompatible representation to the
classifier f , which in fact requires both continuous and one-hot features. In our implementation, we
reconstruct the numerical features by taking the middle point of the range corresponding to the selected
level. We refer to this process as one-hot decoding. Specifically, the input to the one-hot decoder is
      zi ]N
ze = [e   i=1 . If the feature i originally is a categorical feature, we set x  ei = zei . Otherwise, we set
            (2k−1)(bi −ai )
xi = ai +
 e                   2      , which is the middle point of the interval [ai +(k−1)(bi −ai ), ai +k(bi −ai )]
where [ai , bi ] is the range of the feature i and zei corresponds to the level k ∈ {1, ..., ci } (i.e., zeik = 1
and zeij = 0 if j ̸= k). To facilitate the continuous relaxation in Section 3.4, we rewrite
                                         ci
                                         X             (2j − 1)(bi − ai )
                                  x
                                  ei =       zeij ai +                     .                                 (2)
                                         j=1
                                                               2

The final optimization objective is now given as
                                h                                    i
                                            x), y ′ ) + α Ez ∥π(z)∥1 .

                           minθ Exe CE(f (e                                                                  (3)


3.4   R EPARAMETERIZATION FOR CONTINUOUS OPTIMIZATION

Our L2C involves multiple sampling rounds back and forth to optimize the networks. To make the
process continuous and differential for training, we adopt the following reparameterization tricks:


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                      Cat (𝒑𝟏) ∼ 𝒛
                                                                                 (𝟏
                                                                      Cat (𝒑𝟐 ) ∼ 𝒛
                                                                                  (𝟐
                                                Generator                                 if 𝐬𝐢 = 𝟏, perturb
                                                                         ⋮              feature 𝒊 else retain
                                         𝒛𝟏        𝒢
            𝑥=                                                         Cat (𝒑𝑵 ) ∼ 𝒛
                                                                                   (𝑵
            𝑥>        One-hot            𝒛𝟐                                             𝒛( 𝒊 = 1 − 𝑠. 𝒛𝒊 + 𝑠. 𝒛(𝒊
            ⋮         Encoder              ⋮
                                                                      Bern (𝜋=) ∼ 𝑠=
            𝑥?                           𝒛𝑵     Selector
                                                   𝒮                  Bern (𝜋> ) ∼ 𝑠>
                                                                                         Concat 𝑁 vectors 𝒛( 𝒊
                                                                        ⋮
                                                                      Bern (𝜋? ) ∼ 𝑠?
                          classifier decision
                              boundary
                                                                                          𝒛(𝟏 𝒛(𝟐 … 𝒛(𝑵

                 original input    𝒢                 G
                                                     𝒙
                                                                                                 One-hot
                      𝒙                          counterfactual         G
                                                                        𝒙𝟏 G
                                                                           𝒙𝟐 … G
                                                                                𝒙𝑵               Decoder
                                                  local space


Figure 1: For illustration purpose only, the figure assumes all features are mutable. Given an input
x, we discretize the numerical features into categorical levels and one-hot encode all features into
representations z. For every feature i, the generator G learns a local perturbation distribution Cat(pi |z)
so that together they form a distribution of diverse counterfactual representations ze. Intuitively, G
aims to construct a “bridge” across the decision boundary travelling from the input to a local space of
counterfactuals. Simultaneously, the selector S learns to output the distribution Multi-Bernoulli(π|z)
capturing the probability of each feature i being modified. Every pair of feature sample (e         zi , si )
is passed through operation in the blue box, which decides whether to accept the change being
made to the feature i given by zei and enforces feature actionability accordingly. The output is
then decoded into the representations x   e compatible with the black-box system. G and S are jointly
trained via back-propagation according to the objective given in Eq. (3) where the first loss term
ensures G produces valid counterfactuals whereas the second term encourages S to produce sparse
feature combinations. We assure plausibility by optimizing both distributions on input data manifold
and utilizing reparameterization trick to handle categorical features. Finally, through amortized
optimization, L2C supports scalability for efficient generations of multiple counterfactuals.

1) Sampling zei ∼ Cat(pi | z) : To obtain differentiable counterfactual samples, we adopt the
classic temperature-dependent Gumbel-Softmax trick (Jang et al., 2016;       Maddison et al., 2016). Given
the categorical variable zi with category probability pi1 , pi2 , ..., pici . The relaxed representation is
sampled from the Categorical Concrete distribution as zei ∼ Cat-Concrete(log pi1 , ..., log pici ) by

                                        exp (log pij (z) + Gj )/τ
                             zeij = Pci                                      .
                                       k=1 exp (log pik (z) + Gk )/τ

with temperature τ , random noises Gj independently drawn from Gumbel distribution Gt =
− log(− log ut ), ut ∼ Uniform(0, 1). As discussed, we apply this mechanism consistently to
the one-hot representations of all features. The continuous relaxation of Eq. (2) can be gained by
simply using the one-hot relaxation zei .

2) Sampling si ∼ Bernoulli(πi | z) : We again apply the Gumbel-Softmax trick to relax
Bernoulli variables of 2 categories. With temperature τ , random noises Gi0 and Gi1 ∼ Gt =
− log(− log ut ), ut ∼ Uniform(0, 1), the continuous representation si is sampled from Binary
Concrete distribution as si ∼ Bin-Concrete(πi , 1 − πi ) by

                                     exp{ log πi (z) + Gi1 /τ }
             si =                                                                 .
                   exp{ log(1 − πi (z)) + Gi0 }/τ } + exp{ log πi (z) + Gi1 /τ )}

4    E XPERIMENTS
We experiment with 4 popular real-word datasets: German Credit (Dua & Graff, 2017), Graduate
Admission (Acharya et al., 2019), Student Performance (Cortez & Silva, 2008) and Small Business
Administration (SBA) (Li et al., 2018). For the last 2 datasets, we adopt the setup from Bui et al.
(2022), which introduces temporal and geospatial shifts respectively to the testing sets. The goal


                                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is to additionally validate how robust the proposed method is to covariate shifts. For each dataset,
we select a fixed subset of immutable features based on our domain knowledge and suggestions
from (Verma et al., 2022). While implementing the black-box classifiers and the baseline methods,
we standardize numerical features to unit variance and one-hot encode categorical features. Note
again that, for our method only, we discretize numerical features into equal-sized buckets and
decode the numerical features back to their original representations whenever feeding them to the
black-box model. Appendix A describes our tasks and model design in greater detail with the
discretization setup specifically reported in Appendix A.3. Our code repository can be accessed at
https://anonymous.4open.science/r/L2C-AD51/.


Table 1: Description of quantitative evaluation metrics. C denotes a set of counterfactual samples
generated by an interpreting method for a given input example.
 Property        Metric           Description
                 Validity         - Proportion of samples in C can counter the original black-box decision outcome.
 Validity
                 Coverage         - Coverage = 100% if there exists at least 1 valid counterfactual in C.
 Sparsity /      Sparsity         - Proportion of features being changed, averaged over the number of samples in C.
                 Prox Num         - L1 distance of the input data point to a counterfactual sample across the numerical features,
 Actionability
                                  averaged over the number of samples in C.
                 Prox Cat         - Hamming distance of the input data point to a counterfactual sample across categorical
                                  features, averaged over the number of samples in C.
 Diversity       Diversity        - Hamming distance of a pair of counterfactual samples across all features where numerical
                                  features are discretized. The metric is averaged over all pairs of samples in C.
                 Manifold Dist.   - L1 distance of a counterfactual sample to 5 closest training data points across the numerical
 Plausibility
                                  features. Nearest instances are determined by a pre-trained kNN algorithm. The metric is
                                  averaged over the number of samples in C.
                 Valid Cat        - Proportion of categorical features in a counterfactual sample having a proper one-hot or
                                  probabilistic representation in which sum of the values at all levels equal 1. The metric is
                                  averaged over the number of samples in C.



4.1     P ERFORMANCE METRICS

Following the past works Mothilal et al. (2020); Redelmeier et al. (2021); Verma et al. (2022),
Table 1 summarizes the commonly used metrics for quantitatively assessing how well a method
satisfies the constraints outlined in section 2. As for Diversity, a widely adopted measure is the
pairwise distance between counterfactual examples, with distance defined separately for numerical
and categorical features (Mothilal et al., 2020; Redelmeier et al., 2021). Though this approach is
meaningful for interpreting categorical features, we however find it quite obscure for numerical
features. This motivates us to discretize numerical features again when computing Diversity,
which captures how often a feature gets altered as well as how much the change is - specifically
via how often it switches to a different categorical level. The computation of Diversity only
considers valid counterfactuals, so if none of the examples in C are valid, Diversity is set to zero.

4.2     BASELINES AND E VALUATION S ETUP

We compare our method against existing amortized approaches: Feasible-VAE (Mahajan et al., 2019),
CRUDS (Downs et al., 2020), FastAR (Verma et al., 2022), and popular non-amortized methods that
support multiple counterfactual generation: DiCE(Mothilal et al., 2020), CERTIFAI (Sharma et al.,
2020), MCCE (Redelmeier et al., 2021) and COPA (Bui et al., 2022). DiCE offers several search
strategies: Random, KD-tree, or Genetic algorithm. DiCE-Random is adopted in our experiment
since it is reported to consistently yield the best performance across datasets (Verma et al., 2022). We
do not consider MOC (Dandl et al., 2020), which does not support Python implementation, or MACE
(Karimi et al., 2020a) due to its convergence negatively depending on the SAT solver, which is also
extremely expensive on large datasets (Verma et al., 2022).
Here we consider a general setting of binary classification where a counterfactual outcome y ′ is
opposite to the original outcome y, whether y is positive or negative. From each method, we generate
a set of 100 counterfactual explanations. During generation, most methods, including ours, require
multiple iterations of searching for the optimal set of counterfactuals based on the optimization
constraints. To assure a fair comparison on efficiency, a global maximum time budget of 5 minutes is
imposed to search for a set of 100 counterfactuals per input sample. For non-amortized baselines,


                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the algorithms are run directly on the testing sets, while for amortized methods, we train the base
generative models on the training sets and use the testing sets only for evaluation. We tune the
generative models via grid search and report the best settings in Appendix C, which also includes the
description about our special treatment for FastAR.


5    R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

We train each black-box classifier on 5 model initializations and report the average results in Table 2
and Table 4. We also report Time that records the total inference time in seconds for a set of 100
counterfactuals of all testing inputs. Note that COPA has only been shown to work effectively on
linear classifiers. Appendix D provides several illustrative examples for qualitative assessment.
Given the same time budget, our method L2C succeeds in generating 100% valid counterfactuals with
full coverage. Together with DiCE and Feasible-VAE, L2C first satisfies the most important criterion
of a counterfactual explanation and resolves the trade-off against validity. Since the trade-off between
sparsity and diversity often hinders comparison, we attempt to approximate the numerical proximity
level of the closest baseline DiCE by setting a sparsity threshold between 0 and 1 during inference.
The thresholds are chosen in such a way that no more than 2 numerical features get modified in one
sample. Valid counterfactuals exceeding the threshold are filtered out. Recall that we have specified
a fixed set of immutable features for each dataset, based on which we can work out the maximum
sparsity threshold a counterfactual explanation should adhere to (See Appendix A.1). Feasible-VAE,
MCCE and CRUDS cannot fulfill this constraint for all datasets. This is one critical drawback of
Feasible-VAE whose implementation in fact does not consider mutability of features. It is also evident
that L2C is the second-fastest generator while consistently achieving the best diversity of all methods.


Table 2: Comparison of interpreting methods on in-distribution datasets and the corresponding
black-box architectures. ↓ Lower is better. ↑ Higher is better. Bold indicates the best performance for
each dataset. Underline indicates the best performance among methods achieving 100% Validity.
 Method       Prox    Prox      Diversity Sparsity          Validity      Coverage      Manifold   Valid      Time(s)↓
              Num ↓   Cat(%)↓   (%)↑      (%)↓              (%)↑          (%)↑          Dist.↓     Cat (%)↑
                                German Credit (Logistic Regression) - Max. Sparsity: 80.00%
 L2C (Ours)   0.44    30.01     37.81        29.46          100.00       100.00          0.44      100.00            33
 DiCE         0.80    9.41      15.75        11.77          100.00       100.00          0.79      84.36          1,150
 F-VAE        0.70    45.96     2.13         54.07          100.00       100.00          0.14      0.00              36
 COPA         0.69    31.91     19.77        42.12          44.00        44.00           0.29      0.01          17,583
 MCCE         1.05    66.17     33.40        71.24          48.74        100.00          0.35      57.44              2
 CERTIFAI     1.16    51.77     9.92         59.00          53.52        61.49           0.48      100.00        50,258
 FastAR       0.03    0.38      0.01         4.07           95.79        95.79           0.23      93.85         10,605
 CRUDS        0.74    61.76     1.55         67.50          44.00        44.00           0.23      9.74          42,920
                                Graduate Admission (Neural Network) - Max. Sparsity: 85.71%
 L2C (Ours)   1.12    33.52     39.59         43.56         100.00        100.00        1.04       100.00            16
 DiCE         1.17    22.00     33.06         33.75         100.00        100.00        1.30       73.50            412
 F-VAE        0.86    86.50     1.54          92.29         100.00        100.00        0.19       0.00              16
 MCCE         0.99    69.57     22.98         82.61         43.79         84.60         0.35       68.64              1
 CERTIFAI     1.36    0.00      16.61         42.86         90.20         90.20         0.90       100.00           237
 FastAR       0.66    58.69     1.07          72.03         87.41         87.41         0.32       72.30          5,405
 CRUDS        0.84    75.75     1.39          86.14         51.48         52.00         0.20       11.00         21,460



As shown in Figure 2, L2C and DiCE are the two most effective in balancing the trade-offs among
counterfactual constraints, in which L2C converges to this level of performance significantly faster. To
quantify the effectiveness in balancing the trade-off between sparsity and diversity, we propose taking
Harmonic mean of Diversity and (1 - Sparsity). It follows the motivation of F1-score
in measuring Precision against Recall, which thus equals to 2·Diversity·(1−Sparsity)
                                                             Diversity+(1-Sparsity) . Figure 3 shows
the superiority of our method in addressing this trade-off based on the proposed score where L2C
specifically outperforms the second-best method by 2.43% − 18.33% across datasets.
In Appendix B.3, we further evaluate the effects of different threshold levels, showing that setting
the thresholds higher than the current levels can further improve inference time and diversity while
maintaining a good balance against sparsity. We also refer readers to Appendix B.1 and B.2 where
we discuss plausibility and robustness on out-of-distribution datasets in detail.


                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                 L2C        DiCE              F-VAE

                         1.5   Time (hours)                          1.5   Time (hours)                       1.5   Time (hours)                           Time (hours)
                                                                                                                                                     1.5
      Prox Num             1.0                        Prox Num           1.0                 Prox Num             1.0                   Prox Num         1.0
                               0.5                                         0.5                                      0.5                                    0.5

                                               Prox Cat                                Prox Cat                                 Prox Cat                                   Prox Cat

       Sparsity                                       Sparsity                                  Sparsity                                Sparsity
                           Homogeneity                                   Homogeneity                              Homogeneity                            Homogeneity
                      German Credit                            Graduate Admission                        Student Performance                               SBA

Figure 2: Visualizing methods with 100% Validity: L2C, DiCE and Feasible-VAE across important
constraints. Homogeneity = 1 - Diversity and Time is converted to hours for scaling
down the value range. All metrics are preferably lower to be better. L2C lies closely towards the
middle indicating that our method reaches a more effective balancing point.

              L2C                                             L2C                                        L2C                                      L2C
              DiCE                                            DiCE                                       DiCE                                     DiCE
              F-VAE                                           F-VAE                                      F-VAE                                    F-VAE
              COPA                                                                                       COPA
    Method


                                                              MCCE                                                                                MCCE
              MCCE                                                                                       MCCE
              CERTIFAI                                        CERTIFAI                                   CERTIFAI                                 CERTIFAI
              FastAR                                          FastAR                                     FastAR                                   FastAR
              CRUDS                                           CRUDS                                      CRUDS                                    CRUDS
         0       10      20          30   40     50       0     10         20     30   40            0       10           20   30      40     0      5           10   15    20   25
             Harmonic Mean (%) - German Credit         Harmonic Mean (%) - Graduate Admission       Harmonic Mean (%) - Student Performance         Harmonic Mean (%) - SBA

Figure 3: Comparing method capacity in balancing the trade-off of diversity and sparsity based on
the Harmonic mean of Diversity and (1 - Sparsity).


6    C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE WORK
Diverging from the previous approaches, we contribute a novel counterfactual explanation framework
that effectively resolves the trade-offs among counterfactual constraints. Here we target a broad class
of differentiable machine learning classifiers. To fit non-differentiable models in our framework, one
could use policy gradient (Sutton et al., 1999) or attempt to approximate such models as decision
trees or random forests with a differentiable version (Yang et al., 2018; Lucic et al., 2022).
Although we have covered the essential desiderata of a counterfactual explanation, addressing causal
relationships among features is beyond our scope in this paper. Handling correlational or even
causal constraints is indeed a non-trivial challenge, which often requires domain knowledge and/or
the true structural causal models. There are only a few works addressing this, notably Mahajan
et al. (2019); Karimi et al. (2021); Verma et al. (2022), by assuming access to partial knowledge
or utilizing constraints from user specifications. However, there have been no proper quantitative
metrics to evaluate whether such a constraint is satisfied in practice. Recall that in this work, we
assume the conditional distributions of each feature P (xi |x) to be independent. We thus can model
                                                                         Qk
the joint distribution among any k features as P (x1 , x2 , ..., xk |x) = i=1 P (xi |x). Sharing the
same motivation, one can extend L2C to impose constraints on such a joint distribution among the
related features to ensure the generative samples respect causal constraints.
In recent years, there is an increasing concern regarding the privacy risks of counterfactual explana-
tions (Shokri et al., 2021; Goethals et al., 2022). Handling the quality of explanations while taking
security and privacy into account remains an interesting open challenging in this research area. Notice
one of the main differences of our work is that we discretize data into categorical features. Thus, we
believe this approach would help reduce the privacy risks of model stealing or sensitive data exposure
when releasing the counterfactual suggestion to the public. Our future works will focus on tackling
this issue more rigorously.


                                                                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Mohan S Acharya, Asfia Armaan, and Aneeta S Antony. A comparison of regression models for
 prediction of graduate admissions. In 2019 international conference on computational intelligence
 in data science (ICCIDS), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2019.
Ifeoma Ajunwa, Sorelle Friedler, Carlos E Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. Hiring by
   algorithm: predicting and preventing disparate impact. Available at SSRN, 2746078, 2016.
Ngoc Bui, Duy Nguyen, and Viet Anh Nguyen. Counterfactual plans under distributional ambiguity.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12487, 2022.
Paulo Cortez and Alice Maria Gonçalves Silva. Using data mining to predict secondary school
  student performance. 2008.
Susanne Dandl, Christoph Molnar, Martin Binder, and Bernd Bischl. Multi-objective counterfactual
  explanations. In International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, pp. 448–469.
  Springer, 2020.
Michael Downs, Jonathan L Chu, Yaniv Yacoby, Finale Doshi-Velez, and Weiwei Pan. Cruds:
 Counterfactual recourse using disentangled subspaces. ICML WHI, 2020:1–23, 2020.
Dheeru Dua and Casey Graff. UCI machine learning repository, 2017. URL http://archive.
  ics.uci.edu/ml.
Richard Gifford. Legal technology: Criminal justice algorithms: Ai in the courtroom. Proctor, The,
  38(1):32–33, 2018.
Sofie Goethals, Kenneth Sörensen, and David Martens. The privacy issue of counterfactual explana-
  tions: explanation linkage attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.12051, 2022.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014.
Riccardo Guidotti. Counterfactual explanations and how to find them: literature review and bench-
  marking. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, pp. 1–55, 2022.
Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Borja Balle, and Isabel Valera. Model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for consequential decisions. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics, pp. 895–905. PMLR, 2020a.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. A survey of algorithmic
 recourse: definitions, formulations, solutions, and prospects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04050,
 2020b.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. Algorithmic recourse: from coun-
 terfactual explanations to interventions. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM conference on fairness,
 accountability, and transparency, pp. 353–362, 2021.
Jack Klys, Jake Snell, and Richard Zemel. Learning latent subspaces in variational autoencoders.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Alex Kulesza, Ben Taskar, et al. Determinantal point processes for machine learning. Foundations
  and Trends® in Machine Learning, 5(2–3):123–286, 2012.
Stefan Lessmann, Bart Baesens, Hsin-Vonn Seow, and Lyn C Thomas. Benchmarking state-of-
  the-art classification algorithms for credit scoring: An update of research. European Journal of
  Operational Research, 247(1):124–136, 2015.
Min Li, Amy Mickel, and Stanley Taylor. “should this loan be approved or denied?”: A large dataset
 with class assignment guidelines. Journal of Statistics Education, 26(1):55–66, 2018.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zachary C Lipton. The mythos of model interpretability: In machine learning, the concept of
  interpretability is both important and slippery. Queue, 16(3):31–57, 2018.
Ana Lucic, Harrie Oosterhuis, Hinda Haned, and Maarten de Rijke. Focus: Flexible optimizable
  counterfactual explanations for tree ensembles. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 5313–5322, 2022.
Chris J Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous
  relaxation of discrete random variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00712, 2016.
Divyat Mahajan, Chenhao Tan, and Amit Sharma. Preserving causal constraints in counterfactual
  explanations for machine learning classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03277, 2019.
Ramaravind K Mothilal, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. Explaining machine learning classifiers
  through diverse counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on fairness,
  accountability, and transparency, pp. 607–617, 2020.
Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji Kasneci. Learning model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for tabular data. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp. 3126–3132, 2020.
Annabelle Redelmeier, Martin Jullum, Kjersti Aas, and Anders Løland. Mcce: Monte carlo sampling
  of realistic counterfactual explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09790, 2021.
Chris Russell. Efficient search for diverse coherent explanations. In Proceedings of the Conference
  on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 20–28, 2019.
Maximilian Schleich, Zixuan Geng, Yihong Zhang, and Dan Suciu. Geco: quality counterfactual
 explanations in real time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.01292, 2021.
Shubham Sharma, Jette Henderson, and Joydeep Ghosh. Certifai: A common framework to provide
  explanations and analyse the fairness and robustness of black-box models. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 166–172, 2020.
Reza Shokri, Martin Strobel, and Yair Zick. On the privacy risks of model explanations. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 231–241, 2021.
Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 12, 1999.
Sahil Verma, John Dickerson, and Keegan Hines. Counterfactual explanations for machine learning:
  A review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.10596, 2020.
Sahil Verma, Keegan Hines, and John P Dickerson. Amortized generation of sequential algorithmic
  recourses for black-box models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 8512–8519, 2022.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without opening
  the black box: Automated decisions and the gdpr. Harv. JL & Tech., 31:841, 2017.
Austin Waters and Risto Miikkulainen. Grade: Machine learning support for graduate admissions. Ai
  Magazine, 35(1):64–64, 2014.
Yongxin Yang, Irene Garcia Morillo, and Timothy M Hospedales. Deep neural decision trees. ICML
  Workshop on Human Interpretability in Machine Learning., 2018.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS
A.1   DATASET STATISTICS

This section provides additional details about each dataset and experimental setup.

      • German Credit (Dua & Graff, 2017): This dataset includes information of customers taking
        credit at a bank. The task is to classify a customer as a good (label 1) or bad (label 0) credit
        risk. The immutable features include Foreign worker, Number of liable people, Personal
        status, Purpose (Verma et al., 2022).
      • Graduate Admission (Acharya et al., 2019): The set contains data of Indian students’
        applications to Master’s program. The original target variable is an ordinal variable on
        the scale of [0 − 1] indicating the chance of a student being admitted, where 1 indicates
        the highest chance. We set a threshold of 0.7 and re-categorize students as either ”having
        higher chance” (≥ 0.70-label 1) or ”having lower chance” (< 0.70-label 0). The binary
        classification task is to determine if a student profile has a higher chance of being successful
        at their application. The immutable feature is chosen to be University Rating.
      • Student Performance (Cortez & Silva, 2008): This dataset records the performance of
        students at two schools Gabriel Pereira and Mousinho da Silveira. The task is to predict
        whether a student achieves a final score above average (label 1) or not (label 0). The train
        and test splits contain data of students from these two schools separately (Bui et al., 2022).
        The set of immutable features contains Mother’s education, Father’s education, Family
        education support, First period grade.
      • Small Business Administration (SBA) (Li et al., 2018): The dataset presents data on loan
        approvals of small businesses from 1989 to 2014. The train split contains records of the
        period 1989-2006, and the test split includes observations of the period 2006-2014. The task
        is to classify a business with a high (label 1) or low risk (label 0) of loan default (Bui et al.,
        2022). The immutable features consist of From Urban or Rural, New or Existing business,
        Active loan in Recession or not.

Regarding the underlying black-box models, we experiment with Logistic Regression for the linear
classifier and Neural Network for the non-linear classifier. We train linear classifiers on German
Credit and Student Performance, and non-linear classifiers on Graduate Admission (with 3 layers
and 40-dimensional hidden units) and SBA (with 3 layers and 30-dimensional hidden units). For
each task, we further sample 20% random observations of the training sets as validation sets and
train 5 black-box models with the same architecture but with different initializations. Since we have
specified a fixed subset of immutable features, we therefore can derive the maximum sparsity level an
explanation method should obey as
                                             No. immutable features
                                        1−
                                               Total no. features
                       Table 3: Dataset statistics and Black-box performance.
                                                             Black-box
 Dataset               Train/Dev/Test    No. Features                          Test Accuracy   Max. Sparsity
                                                           Architecture
 German Credit          640/160/200           20         Logistic Regression      67.00%          80.00%
 Graduate Admission      320/80/100            7          Neural Network          90.60%          85.71%
 Student Performance     339/84/226           14         Logistic Regression      94.69%          71.43%
 SBA                   755/188/1159           12          Neural Network          90.39%          75.00%


                                                    12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2      M ODEL D ESIGN

We parameterize G and S each with a 2−layer neural networks. Each layer consists of a 50-
dimensional dense layer, followed by a ReLU activation. The final layer of G is another dense
layer that outputs a logit vector of the same dimension as the input, representing the counterfactual
distribution. S produces a probability vector, thus taking Sigmoid as the output layer. We set the
sparsity loss coefficient α = 0.001 and use the same architecture for all tasks. We train our model
with Adam optimizer for 200 epochs, at τ = 0.2 and learning rate of 0.0001.

A.3      D ISCRETIZATION M ECHANISM

Numerical features are discretized based on quantile values using Python function qcut 1 , which
requires specifying the maximum number of buckets/levels and later adjusts it depending on the input
data distribution. We set the maximum buckets to be 4 such that each bucket has at least 100 data
points.
Choosing very few is likely to cause under-fitting since there are very few useful combinatorial
patterns that can counter the original label. We need sufficient diversity for effective learning.
However, too many buckets are undesirable since it can hurt generalization due to some following
reasons : (1) each bucket would contain too little data and the chosen middle value (used to decode
one-hot vector as described in section 3.3) may not represent the bucket well, and (2) the model has
more combinations of features to explore, thus can converge to sub-optimal combinations that cannot
generalize well on unseen test points. The impact of discretization also depends on the proportion of
numerical features in the data compared with categorical features. It would be less severe if there are
more categorical features to provide sufficiently useful patterns for generalization. In this regard, we
therefore decide to split data into equal-sized buckets in the hope of balancing the trade-off.
Table 8 reports how the numerical features of each dataset are discretized. For illustration purpose
only, we round the edge values to the nearest whole number.

B       A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS
B.1      ROBUSTNESS

Table 4 shows that L2C can adequately interpret out-of-distribution examples. One useful application
is when, for example, a student from a different school wishes to transfer to the school which
provides the data to train the models. Our system can inform the student of whether their academic
performance suffices or what they should further do to increase the chance of being admitted. To
explain this capability, since our framework optimizes local counterfactual distributions for each
feature, L2C can cover a sufficiently large space of outputs to support generalization. This strategy
is believed to be more effective than those optimizing for a single output data point, around which
one can imagine that the distribution, if ever there was one, would have an extremely sharp peak,
therefore more likely to fail under severe shifts. Note that robustness analysis is irrelevant for the
non-amortized methods which are directly optimized on the testing sets in our experiments.

B.2      P LAUSIBILITY

Table 4 also demonstrate the capability of maintaining proper representations for categorical features
throughout the generative process. In our framework, the one-hot encoded representations are relaxed
to be continuous during training through the temperature-dependent Gumbel-Softmax trick. In
principle, as the temperature τ approaches zero, the continuous representations get closer to the
binary vectors i.e., discrete Multi-Bernoulli samples, and we thus can expect the continuous samples
to approximate the behavior of the discrete samples. During inference, we revert to discrete sampling
and maintain one-hot representations in the generative samples.
There are many methods with Valid Cat far under 100% meaning that the output representations
for some categorical features are neither one-hot nor a probability vector. We often infer an expla-
nation by selecting the categorical level with the maximum vector value. The inferred category by
    1
        https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.qcut.html


                                                  13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 4: Comparison of interpreting methods on out-of-distribution datasets and the corresponding
black-box architectures. ↓ Lower is better. ↑ Higher is better. Bold indicates the best performance for
each dataset. Underline indicates the best performance among methods achieving 100% Validity.
 Method       Prox    Prox         Diversity Sparsity Validity Coverage Manifold                      Valid      Time(s)↓
              Num ↓   Cat(%)↓     (%)↑          (%)↓           (%)↑          (%)↑            Dist.↓   Cat (%)↑
                                Student Performance (Logistic Regression) - Max. Sparsity: 71.43%
 L2C (Ours)   0.54    22.42       25.79         23.02         100.00         100.00      1.63         100.00            36
 DiCE         0.73    5.36        12.78         12.40         100.00         100.00      1.83         91.36          2,518
 F-VAE        0.88    61.69       8.23          72.63         100.00         100.00      0.57         0.00              36
 COPA         0.79    29.37       25.56         49.55         67.26          67.26       0.64         0.02          18,774
 MCCE         0.96    63.65       24.97         74.03         60.98          93.10       0.84         71.38              1
 CERTIFAI     1.05    0.00        11.88         28.57         98.23          98.23       1.69         100.00           834
 FastAR       0.04    2.34        0.01          8.14          97.71          97.71       0.51         88.48         16,370
 CRUDS        0.96    66.32       3.50          75.94         59.89          60.09       0.84         0.00          39,571
                                          SBA (Neural Network) - Max. Sparsity: 75.00%
 L2C (Ours)   1.09    6.75        14.20          17.67        100.00        100.00       6.22         100.00           310
 DiCE         1.18    0.69        11.08          12.78        100.00        100.00       6.69         97.78          5,522
 F-VAE        0.58    29.85       1.45           76.62        96.59         97.33        1.42         0.00           1,716
 MCCE         0.88    44.63       8.11           81.54        33.21         69.28        3.33         25.00              3
 CERTIFAI     4.97    0.00        12.87          66.67        91.23         91.23        25.04        100.00         1,833
 FastAR       0.51    21.91       0.16           63.41        86.77         86.77        0.97         86.13         55,175
 CRUDS        0.70    63.51       1.08           87.84        58.51         62.24        2.12         24.01        248,719


convention corresponds to an equivalent one-hot representation, which is the plausible input format
fed to the black-box classifier. Hence, a discrepancy can occur in that the output representation yields
the desired outcome whereas the equivalent one-hot one may not, which poses a critical reliability
issue (Guidotti, 2022).
We now investigate the violation of plausibility due to the failure to maintain one-hotness in the
categorical features of a generative example. When processing categorical features, previous strategies
include imposing regularization (Verma et al., 2020), clamping each one-hot column to be a specific
categorical value (Wachter et al., 2017; Downs et al., 2020), relying on genetic algorithms or SMT
solvers for automatic treatment (Karimi et al., 2020a; Schleich et al., 2021), or simply filtering them
out (Lucic et al., 2022). It is clear that these techniques are insufficient to ensure all levels of a
categorical feature are effectively handled, resulting in plenty of methods failing to achieve 100% on
Valid Cat reported in Section 5.
We hypothesize that the black-box outcome on the output representation of a categorical feature is
sometimes not aligned with the outcome on its equivalent one-hot representation. Specifically for a
categorical feature, some methods output a continuous representation like [0.05, 0.01, 0.02, 0.1] that
may be not be summed up to 1. However, when returning the qualitative explanation to users, we
need to return the inferred categorical level, which is 4 in this example. This level is thus equivalent
to the one-hot representation [0, 0, 0, 1]. Since the compatible representation of category features to
the black-box classifiers is in one-hot format, there may be a mismatch in the prediction on these
two different representations for the categorical feature - that is, the continuous one can counter the
original outcome while its equivalent one-hot one may not.
Given an output representation, for example [0.05, 0.01, 0.02, 0.1], we adopt the categorical level
with the maximum value as the explanation i.e., 4 in this case. Given this level, we encode the feature
back into the proper one-hot representation i.e., [0, 0, 0, 1]. We assess Validity and Coverage
of generative examples given the new representations and study this behavior in DiCE (Mothilal et al.,
2020) and Feasible VAE (Mahajan et al., 2019) - the two baseline methods performing best on these
metrics. Table 5 reveals that on some datasets, the performance of these methods deteriorates when
evaluated on the equivalent one-hot representations.

B.3    E FFECT OF SPARSITY THRESHOLDS

Figure 4 illustrates that increasing the sparsity thresholds imposed on the numerical features boosts
time efficiency and diversity without compromising too much of sparsity. Here we also want to
highlight the flexibility of our framework in controlling the quality of counterfactual generations
during inference. Users can now freely set additional constraints to filer out unsatisfactory examples
based on their preferences without re-training or re-optimization like the previous methods.


                                                              14
   Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Table 5: Analysis of Validity and Coverage of DiCE and Feasible-VAE given the original Output and
  its Reverted one-hot representation. Bold highlights severe drops in performance. ↑ Higher is better.
                                   Method              Version              German Credit                          Graduate Admission                         Student Performance                                SBA
                                                                                                                 Validity (%)↑
                                                       Output                     100.00                                           100.00                                         100.00                        100.00
                                   DiCE
                                                      Reverted                     58.20                                            91.28                                         98.12                          98.93
                                                       Output                     100.00                                100.00                                                    100.00                        96.59
                                   F-VAE
                                                      Reverted                    100.0 0                                99.95                                                    99.33                         57.85
                                                                                                                 Coverage (%)↑
                                                       Output                     100.00                                           100.00                                         100.00                        100.00
                                   DiCE
                                                      Reverted                     99.90                                           100.00                                         100.00                        100.00
                                                       Output                     100.00                                           100.00                                         100.00                        97.33
                                   F-VAE
                                                      Reverted                    100.00                                           100.00                                         100.00                        72.10


                                                                  German Credit                   Graduate Admission                           Student Performance                       SBA
Inference Time/Sample (s)


                            0.25                                                                          50                                                                      40
                                                                                      Harmonic Mean (%)


                            0.20                                                                          45                                                                      35


                                                                                                                                                                  Diversity (%)
                                                                                                          40                                                                      30
                            0.15
                                                                                                          35                                                                      25
                            0.10
                                                                                                          30                                                                      20
                            0.05
                                                                                                          25                                                                      15
                                   0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7     0.8   0.9   1.0                            0.3   0.4    0.5    0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1.0                        0.3   0.4    0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0
                                               Sparsity Threshold                                                          Sparsity Threshold                                                      Sparsity Threshold
 Figure 4: Effect of various sparsity thresholds on (left) time efficiency, measured via average inference
 time per sample (in seconds), (middle) the “balanced score” Harmonic mean(Diversity, 1
- Sparsity) and (right) diversity. The current levels reported in the main paper are denoted as
 square markers.


    B.4                            ROLE OF THE FEATURE SELECTOR


   Here we validate the importance of learning the local feature-based selection distribution via the
   feature selector S. In this regard, we try removing S from L2C framework and replace the probability
   vector π(z) with a binary mask vector m ∈ [0, 1]N where mi = 1 if i ∈ K (i.e., a mutable
   feature) and mi = 0 otherwise. We thus use mi in substitution of si to update the counterfactual
   representations zei as previously done. We now only optimize the generator G to learn the feature-
   based perturbation distribution, and the training objective Eq. (3) excludes the regularization term for
   sparsity accordingly. Table 6 investigates the performance of L2C under this alternative setup, in
   comparison with the proposed method that jointly optimizes S and G. L2C now still achieves 100%
   of Validity and Coverage, so we only report the relevant metrics that remain.
   In this study, we do not impose any sparsity threshold because without the Selector S, we lose the
   flexibility in tailoring the quality of counterfactual generations to potential user preferences. This is
   the first drawback. Second, though taking more time to infer explanations, the selector introduces
   significant sparsity to gain an effective balance of the trade-off against diversity. Furthermore, these
   results support our claim about the role of the generator G in that the perturbation distribution alone
   can yield impressively diverse explanations with sparsity remaining under the required maximum
   level. This is a benefit of learning an entire feature distribution in which sometimes the feature sample
   falls into the original input value i.e., zei = zi while combining adequately with other features.


                                                                                                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Analysis of L2C capacity to balance the trade-off between diversity and sparsity when
optimized without the selector S. ↓ Lower is better. ↑ Higher is better. Bold indicates the best
performance for each dataset. Time records total inference time in seconds.
 Method              Prox Num ↓       Prox           Diversity        Sparsity        Harmonic       Time(s)↓
                                      Cat(%)↓        (%)↑             (%)↓            Mean (%)↑
                            German Credit (Logistic Regression) - Max. Sparsity: 80.00%
 Without Selector    1.41             55.84          52.66           62.47            43.83                 5
 Proposed method     0.82             29.56          42.73           33.13            52.14                13
                            Graduate Admission (Neural Network) - Max. Sparsity: 85.71%
 Without Selector    1.54            58.67            48.71           76.38            31.81                   1
 Proposed method     1.25            31.85            41.51           47.79            46.25                   5
                         Student Performance (Logistic Regression) - Max. Sparsity: 71.43%
 Without Selector    1.37            46.32          41.03            54.52            43.14                    4
 Proposed method     1.14            32.93          40.97            43.43            47.52                    8
                                   SBA (Neural Network) - Max. Sparsity: 75.00%
 Without Selector    2.89             12.74          36.79            70.91           32.49                15
 Proposed method     1.77             6.26           27.90            37.64           38.55                30



C    BASELINE E XPERIMENT
We tune the base generative models of amortized baselines under various different hyper-parameter
settings. We determine the best settings via two metrics: Coverage and Diversity. When there
is a trade-off, Coverage is chosen to be the deciding criterion.
For Feasible-VAE (Mahajan et al., 2019), we tune the hidden dimensions of the VAE encoder within
{10, 30, 50, 70, 90} and regularization term on Validity within {42, 62, 82, 102, 122}. For CRUDS
(Downs et al., 2020), the base model is a Conditional Subspace Variational Auto-encoder (Klys et al.,
2018). In the original paper, the network only has 1 hidden layer of 64 nodes, which we find to be of
low capacity. We thus experiment with 2 layers and different hidden dimensions within {16, 32, 64}.
For FastAR (Verma et al., 2022), the hyper-parameters include manifold distance λ and entropy loss
coefficient. Across datasets, Verma et al. (2022) shows the best Coverage under λ = 0.1. We
thus set λ = 0.1 as well in our experiments, while focus on tuning the latter hyper-parameter within
{0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0}. For the remaining hyper-parameters, we adopt the best values reported by
the authors. Table 7 reports the best settings of these methods on each dataset.

FastAR Specifics. A pre-trained FastAR model can only interpret one decision outcome chosen
as the desired one (often the positive label). We must therefore train separate FastAR models
on the positive and negative subsets and combine the results. We further find that although it is
straightforward to obtain multiple generations in a single model, FastAR algorithm is optimized for
one optimal counterfactual state for a given input. Thus in the hope of achieving better diversity,
we train 100 different model initializations and accordingly collect a set of 100 explanations for
evaluation. The inference time accumulates as a result, which is the reason why our reported results
on time efficiency for FastAR are different from what are reported in the authors’ paper.


                    Table 7: The best hyper-parameter settings for amortized methods.
  Method     Hyper-parameter           German Credit      Graduate Admission       Student Performance   SBA
             Encoder hidden size           10                     30                        10            70
  F-VAE
             Validity coefficient          42                     62                        62            42
             Layer 1 hidden size              16                   16                          64         16
  CRUDS
             Layer 2 hidden size              16                   16                          16         16
  FastAR      Entropy coefficient             0.01                0.01                         0.1       1.0


                                                        16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Table 8: Discretization of numerical features in each dataset.
                 Feature name                  Bucket values             No. Data points
                                              German Credit
                                               ( 4 , 12 ]                           359
                 Duration (Months)             ( 12 , 24 ]                          411
                                               ( 24 , 72 ]                          230
                                               ( 248 , 1570 ]                       334
                 Credit Amount                 ( 1,570 , 3,410 ]                    333
                                               ( 3,410 , 18,425 ]                   333
                                               ( 19 , 28 ]                          334
                 Age                           ( 28 , 38 ]                          346
                                               ( 38 , 75 ]                          320
                                           Graduate Admission
                                               ( 290 , 312 ]                        189
                 GRE score                     ( 312 , 323 ]                        148
                                               ( 323 , 340 ]                        162
                                               ( 92 , 104 ]                         176
                 TOEFL score                   ( 104 , 110 ]                        175
                                               ( 110 , 120 ]                        149
                                               (7,8]                                170
                 Undergraduate GPA             (8,9]                                163
                                               ( 9 , 10 ]                           167
                                           Student Performance
                                               ( 15 , 16 ]                          289
                 Age                           ( 16 , 17 ]                          179
                                               ( 17 , 22 ]                          181
                                               ( -0 , 4 ]                           466
                 School absences
                                               ( 4 , 32 ]                           183
                                               ( -0 , 10 ]                          252
                 First period grade            ( 10 , 13 ]                          245
                                               ( 13 , 19 ]                          152
                                               ( -0 , 10 ]                          228
                                               ( 10 , 11 ]                          103
                 Second period grade
                                               ( 11 , 13 ]                          166
                                               ( 13 , 19 ]                          152
                                                   SBA
                                               ( -0 , 60 ]                          575
                                               ( 60 , 84 ]                          671
                 Loan term in months
                                               ( 84 , 240 ]                         544
                                               ( 240 , 306 ]                        312
                                               ( -0 , 2 ]                           842
                                               (2,3]                                221
                 No. employees
                                               (3,8]                                540
                                               ( 8 , 650 ]                          499
                                               ( -0 , 2 ]                          1658
                 No. jobs created
                                               ( 2 , 130 ]                          444
                                               ( -0 , 1 ]                           881
                 No. jobs retained             (1,4]                                619
                                               ( 4 , 535 ]                          602
                                               ( -107 , 15,074 ]                   1576
                 Charged off amount
                                               ( 15,074 , 1,509,538 ]               526
                                               ( 4,260 , 30,026 ]                   588
                                               ( 30,026 , 60,946 ]                  463
                 Gross amount approved
                                               ( 60,946 , 300,056 ]                 537
                                               ( 300,056 , 2,350,015 ]              514
                                               ( 2,092 , 14,943 ]                   550
                 SBA’s guaranteed amount       ( 14,943 , 41,541 ]                  501
                 approved                      ( 41,541 , 239,682 ]                 525
                                               ( 239,682 , 2,115,002 ]              526
                                               ( 0.30 , 0.50 ]                     1052
                 Proportion of gross amount
                                               ( 0.50 , 0.75 ]                      458
                 guaranteed by SBA
                                               ( 0.75 , 1.00 ]                      592

                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D      Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLES
Here we illustrate some examples of our generated counterfactuals for each dataset. As discussed,
we report the discretized values for numerical features, since we believe it provides more useful and
flexible suggestions to human users. For illustration purpose only, we round the edge values of the
numerical intervals to the nearest whole number. Immutable features are italicized.

        Table 9: Counterfactual examples from German Credit dataset. *DM: Deutsche Mark
                            Original input
 German Credit                                                             Counterfactuals (Good credit risk)
                           (Bad credit risk)
 Duration (months)                  24 - 72               4 - 12           12 - 24             24 - 72           12 - 24           12 - 24
 Credit amount (DM)         3,410 - 18,425       1,570 - 3,410      1,570 - 3,410      1,570 - 3,410     3,410 - 18,425      1,570 - 3,410
 Age                                28 - 38            38 - 75             28 - 38             38 - 75           38 - 75           28 - 38
 Checking account (DM)          No account                200+        No account                 200+              200+              200+
 Credit history             Paid back duly      Paid back duly     Paid back duly     Paid back duly     Paid back duly     Paid back duly
 Purpose                         Retraining         Retraining          Retraining         Retraining         Retraining        Retraining
 Savings account (DM)           Under 100              1,000+           Under 100          500 - 1,000         100 - 500       Under 100
 Present employment                7+ years         4 - 7 years     Unemployed             4 - 7 years          7+ years        1 - 4 years
 Installment rate                 Under 20           Under 20                 35+              25 - 25           20 - 25              35+
                                    Female             Female              Female             Female             Female            Female
 Personal status
                                 not single         not single          not single          not single        not single        not single
 Other debtors                Co-applicant        Co-applicant          guarantor      Co-applicant         Co-applicant             None
 Present residence                 7+ years           7+ years           7+ years            7+ years       Under 1 year     Under 1 year
 Property                             None        Car or other              None                None               None              None
 Other installments                   None                 bank             None                None               None              None
 Housing                               Rent                Rent              own              For free             Rent           For free
 No. existing credits                     1                   1              4-5                    1                 1               4-5
 Job                                Skilled            Skilled      Unemployed         Unemployed                Skilled           Skilled
 No. people being liable               0-2                 0-2               0-2                 0-2               0-2                0-2
 Telephone                              No                  No                Yes                  No               Yes                Yes
 Foreign worker                         No                  No                 No                  No                No                No


                     Table 10: Counterfactual examples from Graduate Admission dataset.
                                     Original input
  Graduate Admission                                                           Counterfactuals (High chance)
                                     (Low chance)
  GRE Score                                  290 - 312      290 - 312       312 - 323         290 - 312       290 - 312       290 - 312
  TOEFL Score                                  92 - 104     104 - 110       104 - 110         110 - 120       110 - 120        92 - 104
  Undergraduate GPA                               7-8              8-9           9 - 10            9 - 10           8-9           9 - 10
  University Rating                               2/5              2/5               2/5            2/5             2/5             2/5
  Statement of Purpose                            2/5              2/5               5/5            2/5             2/5             2/5
  Letter of Recommendation                      2.5 / 5            4/5          2.5 / 5           2.5 / 5         2.5 / 5           2/5
  Research Experience                               No              No               No              Yes              No             Yes


                                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Table 11: Counterfactual examples from Student Performance dataset.
                                  Original input
 Student Performance                                                          Counterfactuals (Pass)
                                      (Fail)
 Age                                     16 - 17         16 - 17         16 - 17        16 - 17         16 - 17         15 - 16
 School absences                            0-4             0-4             0-4           4 - 32           0-4            4 - 32
 First period grade                      10 - 13         10 - 13         10 - 13        10 - 13         10 - 13         10 - 13
 Second period grade                      0 - 10         13 - 19         13 - 19        13 - 19         13 - 19         13 - 19
 Mother’s education                     Primary         Primary         Primary        Primary         Primary         Primary
 Father’s education                        None            None            None           None            None            None
 Weekly study time                   2 - 5 hours      2 - 5 hours     2 - 5 hours    2 - 5 hours    5 - 10 hours     2 - 5 hours
 Family educational support                  No              No              No             No              No              No
 Wanting higher education                    Yes             Yes             No             No              Yes             Yes
 Internet access at home                     Yes             No              Yes            Yes             No              Yes
 In a romantic relationship                  Yes             No              No             No              Yes             Yes
 Free time                            Moderate             High        Moderate       Moderate        Moderate             Low
 Going out frequency                 Very often       Very often      Very often         Rarely      Very often           Often
 Health status                             Good            Good            Good      Very good            Good            Good


                              Table 12: Counterfactual examples from SBA dataset.
                                   Original input
 SBA                                                                      Counterfactuals (High default risk)
                                 (Low default risk)
 Loan term in months                       60 - 84          60 - 84        60 - 84        60 - 84       84 - 240         60 - 84
 No. employees                                3-8             3-8             3-8            3-8         8 - 650         8 - 650
 No. jobs created                             0-2             0-2          2 - 130           0-2         2 - 130           0-2
 No. jobs retained                            0-1           4 - 535           0-1            1-4            0-1          4 - 535
 Charged off amount                        0 - 15K         0 - 15K     Above 15K      Above 15K      Above 15K           0 - 15K
 Gross amount approved                 61K - 300K      61K - 300K        4K - 30K      30K - 61K     61K - 300K       30K - 61K
 Approved guaranteed amount            42K - 240K      42K - 240K      42K - 240K     42K - 240K      15K - 42K      42K - 240K
 % gross amount guaranteed                75 - 100        75 - 100        75 - 100        50 - 75        50 - 75        75 - 100
 From Urban or Rural                        Urban           Urban           Urban          Urban          Urban           Urban
 New or Existing business                      No              No              No             No                No           No
 Loan backed by real estate                    No              No              No             No                No           No
 Active loan in recession                      No              No              No             No                No           No


                                                              19
