Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


BANDIT L EARNING WITH G ENERAL F UNCTION
C LASSES : H ETEROSCEDASTIC N OISE AND VARIANCE -
DEPENDENT R EGRET B OUNDS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         We consider learning a stochastic bandit model, where the reward function be-
         longs to a general class of uniformly bounded functions, and the additive noise
         can be heteroscedastic. Our model captures contextual linear bandits and general-
         ized linear bandits as special cases. While previous works (Kirschner & Krause,
         2018; Zhou et al., 2021) based on weighted ridge regression can deal with linear
         bandits with heteroscedastic noise, they are not directly applicable to our general
         model due to the curse of nonlinearity. In order to tackle this problem, we pro-
         pose a multi-level learning framework for the general bandit model. The core
         idea of our framework is to partition the observed data into different levels ac-
         cording to the variance of their respective reward and perform online learning at
         each level collaboratively. Under our framework, we first design an algorithm that
         constructs the variance-aware confidence set based on empirical risk minimiza-
         tion and prove a variance-dependent regret bound. For generalized linear bandits,
         we further propose an algorithm based on follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL)
         subroutine and online-to-confidence-set conversion, which can achieve a tighter
         variance-dependent regret under certain conditions.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Over the past decade, stochastic bandit algorithms have found a wide variety of applications in
online advertising, website optimization, recommendation system and many other tasks (Li et al.,
2010; McInerney et al., 2018). In the model of stochastic bandits, at each round, an agent selects
an action and observes a noisy evaluation of the reward function for the chosen action, aiming to
maximize the sum of the received rewards. A general reward function governs the reward of each
action from the eligible action set.
A common assumption used in stochastic bandit problems is that the observation noise is condition-
ally independent and satisfies a uniform tail bound. In real-world applications, however, the variance
of observation noise is likely to be dependent on the evaluation point (chosen action) (Kirschner &
Krause, 2018). Moreover, due to the dynamic environment in reality, the variance of each action may
also be different at each round. This motivates the studies of bandit problems with heteroscedastic
noise. For example, Kirschner & Krause (2018) introduced the heteroscedastic noise setting where
the noise distribution is allowed to depend on the evaluation point. They proposed weighted least
squares to estimate the unknown reward function more accurately in the setting where the under-
lying reward function is linear or lies in a separable Hilbert space (Section 5, Kirschner & Krause
2018).
In this paper, we consider a general setting, where the unknown reward function belongs to a known
general function class F with bounded eluder dimension (Russo & Van Roy, 2013). This captures
multi-armed bandits, linear contextual bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011) and generalized linear
bandits (Filippi et al., 2010) simultaneously. Since weighted least squares highly depends on the
linearity of the function class, we propose a multi-level learning framework for our general setting.
The underlying idea of the framework is to partition the observed data into various levels according
to the variance of the noise. The agent then estimates the reward function at each level independently
and then exploit all the levels when selecting an action at each round.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


While previous work by Kirschner & Krause (2018) considered sub-Gaussian noise with nonuniform
variance proxies, we only assume nonuniform variances of noise (Zhou et al., 2021; Zhang et al.,
2021), which brings a new challenge of exploiting the variance information of the noise to obtain
tighter variance-aware confidence sets.
Under our multi-level learning framework, we first design an algorithm based on empirical risk
minimization and Optimism-in-the-Face-of-Uncertainty (OFU) principle, and prove a variance-
dependent regret bound. For a special class of bandits namely generalized linear bandits with het-
eroscedastic noise, we further propose an algorithm using follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) as
an online regression subroutine and adopting the technique of online-to-confidence-set conversion
(Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012; Jun et al., 2017). This algorithm achieves a provaly tighter regret
bound when the range of the reward function is relatively wide compared to the magnitude of noise.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

вҖў We develop a new framework called multi-level regression, which can be applied to heteroscedas-
  tic bandits, even when the reward function class does not lie in a separable Hilbert space.
вҖў Under our framework, we design tighter variance-aware upper confidence bounds for bandits
  with general reward functions, and propose an bandit learning algorithm based on empirical risk
  minimzation. We show that our algorithm enjoys variance-dependent regret upper bounds which
  can be regarded as a strict extension of previous algorithms which obtain variance-dependent
  regret bounds on simpler bandit models (Zhou et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021).
вҖў For generalized linear bandits (Filippi et al., 2010; Jun et al., 2017), which is a special case of
  our model class, we further propose an algorithm based on online-to-confidence-set conversion.
  We first prove a variance-dependent regret bound for follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) for
  the online regression problem derived from generalized linear function class, and then convert the
  online learning regret bound to the bandit learning confidence set. We show that our algorithm
  can achieve a tighter regret bound for generalized linear bandits.
                                                                                          e 2 R2 )
вҖў As a by-product, our regret bound for FTRL improves the state-of-the-art regret result O(d
                                                                                 2
  obtained by stochastic online linear regression (Ouhamma et al., 2021) to O(dПғ
                                                                            e    max ) (omitting the
  terms without dependence on d), where d is the dimension of contexts, R is the upper bound of
  the sub-Gaussian norm of the noises at each step, and Пғmax is the upper bound of the variances of
  the noises.
       Table 1: A summary of our regret results and previous results under different settings.
  Function Class         Algorithm                 Regret                  Efficiency       Unknown VAR
                      Weighted OFUL
                                                  вҲҡ       вҲҡ             Computationally
      Linear                                  O
                                              e d J + R dT
                     (Zhou et al., 2021)                                   efficient
                         VOFUL
                                                    вҲҡ
      Linear                                  e d4.5 J + d5 R
                                              O                            Inefficient             X
                    (Zhang et al., 2021)
                                                   p
                        ML2 + ERM             O(
                                               e dimE log(NОұ )J                 Oracle
      General                                   p
                        (This work)          + dimE log(NОұ )RT )               efficient
                                                            вҲҡ
                        ML2 + GLOC                    e Kd J
                                                     O(                   Computationally
       G-Lin                                             Оә      вҲҡ
                         (This work)         +K  Оә
                                                   (KAB    + R)   dT  )        efficient
 Refer to Section 3 for the definitions of dimE , Пғt , J and R, Section 6 for the definitions of Оә, K, A, B. We
write general function class with eluder dimension dimE as вҖҳGeneralвҖҷ and generalized linear function class as
   вҖҳG-LinвҖҷ for short. Oracle efficiency refers to the computational efficiency given a regression oracle (i.e.,
empirical risk minimization) for the involved function class and an optimization oracle which maximizes the
                      reward function f (x) for a fixed x under some constraint set of f .

Notation. We use lower case letters to denote scalars, and use lower and upper case bold face
letters to denote vectors and matrices respectively. We denote by [n] the set {1, . . . , n}. For a vector
x вҲҲ Rd and matrix ОЈ вҲҲ RdГ—d , a positive   вҲҡ     semi-definite matrix, we denote by kxk2 the vectorвҖҷs
                                             >
Euclidean norm and define kxkОЈ = x ОЈx. For two positive sequences {an } and {bn } with
n = 1, 2, . . . , we write an = O(bn ) if there exists an absolute constant C > 0 such that an вүӨ Cbn
holds for all n вүҘ 1 and write an = в„Ұ(bn ) if there exists an absolute constant C > 0 such that
an вүҘ Cbn holds for all n вүҘ 1. Let N (F, Оұ, k В· kвҲһ ) denote the Оұ-covering number of F in the


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


sup-norm k В· kвҲһ . If there is no ambiguity, we may write N (F, Оұ, k В· kвҲһ ) as NОұ for short. We use
O(В·)
 e to further hide the polylogarithmic factors other than log-covering numbers.

2   R ELATED WORK
Learning with heteroscedastic noise. Heteroscedastic noise has been studied in many different
settings such as active learning Antos et al. (2010), regression (Aitken, 1936; Goldberg et al., 1997;
Chaudhuri et al., 2017; Kersting et al., 2007), principle component analysis (Hong et al., 2016; 2018)
and Bayesian optimization (Assael et al., 2014). However, only a few works have considered het-
eroscedastic noise in bandit settings. Cowan et al. (2015) considered a variant of multi-armed bandits
where the noise at each round is a Gaussian random variable with unknown variance. Kirschner &
Krause (2018) is the first to formally introduce the concept of stochastic bandits with heteroscedas-
tic noise. In their model, the variance of the noise at each round t is a function of the evaluation
point xt , ПҒt = ПҒ(xt ), and they further assume that the noise is ПҒt -sub-Gaussian. ПҒt can either be
observed at time t or either be estimated from the obsevations. Zhou et al. (2021) considered linear
bandits with heteroscedastic noise and generalized the heteroscedastic noise setting in Kirschner &
Krause (2018) in the sense that they no longer assume the noise to be ПҒt -sub-Gaussian, but only
requires the variance of noise to be upper bounded by ПҒ2t and the variances are arbitrarily decided
by the environment, which is not necessarily a function of the evaluation point. In the same setting
as in Zhou et al. (2021), Zhang et al. (2021) further considered a strictly harder setting where the
noise has unknown variance. They proposed an algorithm which can deal with unknown variance
through a computationally inefficient clip technique. Our work basically considers the noise setting
proposed by Zhou et al. (2021) and further generalizes their setting to bandits with general function
classes. We will consider to extend it to the harder setting as Zhang et al. (2021) as future work.
Bandits with known function classes. Moving beyond multi-armed bandits, there have been
significant theoretical advances on stochastic bandits with function approximation. Among them,
there is a huge body of literature on linear bandit problems where the reward function is assumed to
be a linear function of the feature vectors attached to the actions (Dani et al., 2008; Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2011; Chu et al., 2011; Li et al., 2019; 2021b). Generalizing the restrictive linear rewards,
there has also been a flurry of studies on generalized linear bandit problems (Filippi et al., 2010; Jun
et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Kveton et al., 2020).
As for stochastic bandits with general function classes, the seminal work by Russo & Van Roy
(2013) introduced the notion of eluder dimension to measure the complexity of the function class
and provided a general UCB-like algorithm that works for any given class of reward functions with
                                                                                вҲҡ
bounded eluder dimension. They further proved a regret upper bound of order O(e dimE log N В· T )
for their proposed algorithm where dimE is the eluder dimension and log N stands for the log-
covering number of the funciton class. Linear bandits and generalized linear bandit problems can be
seen as special cases as their proposed general model.
Online-to-confidence-set conversion. Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2012) may be the first one to intro-
duce the technique that takes in an online learning subroutine and turns the output of it into a con-
fidence set at each round. While Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2012) considered applying this technique
in linear bandits, Jun et al. (2017) generalized and introduced the previous approach to Generalized
Linear Online-to-confidence-set Conversion (GLOC) and applied it to generalized linear bandits.
Online regression for linear functions. Online linear regression has long been studied in the
setting where the response variables (or labels) are bounded and chosen by an adversary (Bartlett
et al., 2015; Cesa-Bianchi et al., 1996; Kivinen & Warmuth, 1997; Littlestone et al., 1991; Malek &
Bartlett, 2018), to mention a few. A recent work (Ouhamma et al., 2021) considers the stochastic
setting where the response variables are unbounded and revealed by the environment with additional
random noise on the true labels. Ouhamma et al. (2021) discussed the limitations of online learning
algorithms in the adversarial setting and further advocates for the need of complementary analyses
for existing algorithms under stochastic unbounded setting.

3   M ULTI - LEVEL LEARNING FRAMEWORK
We introduce the Multi-level learning framework in this section.



                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.1   P RELIMINARIES

General function class Following (Russo & Van Roy, 2013), we introduce the  -dependence and
eluder dimension notion, which are used to measure the complexity of a general function class F.
Definition 3.1 ( -dependence, Russo & Van Roy 2013). An action a вҲҲ A is  -dependent on actions
                                                                                           Pn
{a1 , a2 , В· В· В· , an } вҲҲ A with respect to F if any pair of functions f, fe вҲҲ F satisfying i=1 (f (ai ) вҲ’
fe(ai ))2 вүӨ  2 also satisfies f (a) вҲ’ fe(a) вүӨ  . Further, a is  -independent of {a1 , В· В· В· , an } with
respect to F if a is not  -dependent on {a1 , В· В· В· , an }.
Definition 3.2 (eluder dimension, Russo & Van Roy 2013). The  -eluder dimension dimE (F,  ) is
the length d of the longest sequence of elements in A such that, for some  0 вүҘ  , every element is
 0 -independent of its predecessors.

In this work we focus on general function class F with bounded eluder dimension, and we consider
generalized linear function class as a special case. We would like to point out that the function class
with small eluder dimension is strictly larger than linear and generalized linear bandits (Li et al.,
2021a), while neural networks with ReLU activation do not have a small eluder dimension (their
eluder dimension has an exponential dependence on the input dimension) (Dong et al., 2021). We
leave it as future work to consider even more general function classes.

Definition 3.3 (width). Let wFe (a) = supf ,f вҲҲFe f (a) вҲ’ f (a) . For an action set Ae вҠҶ A, we use
w e (A)
 F
      e to denote sup e w e (a).
                       aвҲҲA   F

To deal with infinite or continuous action sets, we make the following assumption that the reward
function class is known in advance by the agent. Notice that for the finite multi-armed bandit case,
we can choose F as the set that includes all the eligible functions.
Assumption 3.4 (Known Reward Function Class). The unknown reward function f вҲ— belongs to an
accessible function class F = {fОё : A вҶ’ R|Оё вҲҲ Оҳ}.

Bandit models We consider a heteroscedastic variant of the classic stochastic bandit problem with
general function classes. At each round t вҲҲ [T ] (T вҲҲ N), the agent observes a decision set Dt вҠҶ A
which is chosen by the environment. The agent then selects an action at вҲҲ Dt and observes reward
rt together with a corresponding variance upper bound Пғt2 . We assume that rt = f вҲ— (at ) +  t where
f вҲ— : A вҶ’ R is an underlying real-valued reward function which is unknown to the learner and  t is
a random noise. We make the following assumption on  t .
Assumption 3.5. For each t,  t satisfies that  t |a1:t ,  1:tвҲ’1 is a R-sub-Gaussian random variable
(R > Пғt ) and E[ t |a1:t ,  1:tвҲ’1 ] = 0, E[ 2t |a1:t ,  1:tвҲ’1 ] вүӨ Пғt2 := Пғt2 (a1:t , r1:tвҲ’1 ).

where Пғt can be either a constant or a random variable dependent on a1:t and r1:tвҲ’1 .
Remark 3.6. Пғt can be seen as either a given information from the environment, or an estima-
tor of the noise variance at t-th round based on all past observations, as discussed in the in-
formation directed sampling bandit (Kirschner & Krause, 2018). For instance, we consider a
bandit problem with a two-point action distribution, where the variance of an action can be es-
timated through the estimation of the mean of the action. Similar estimation procedure has
been studied in Lattimore et al. (2015). The details are in Appendix C. We can further con-
sider the MDP setting. With a confidence set P that includes the true transition dynamic, the
conditional
        nPvariances of the value P    functions VМ„ at state s oand action a can be estimated by
                              2 0                0           0 2

suppвҲҲP       s0 вҲҲS p(s|s, a)VМ„ (s ) вҲ’   s0 вҲҲS p(s |s, a)VМ„ (s )  . So the variances of value functions
can be efficiently estimated for the MDP setting.
                         PT
For simplicity, let J = t=1 Пғt2 . This assumption on  t is a slightly generalized version of that in
Zhou et al. (2021) in the sense that the noise is not necessarily bounded by R. The goal of the agent
is to minimize the following cumulative regret:
                                               PT
                              Regret(T ) := t=1 [f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at )],                        (3.1)
where the optimal action aвҲ—t at round t вҲҲ [T ] is defined as aвҲ—t := argmaxaвҲҲDt f вҲ— (a).


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 ML2 with OFU principle
 1: Input: T, A, F, R, Пғ > 0.
 2: Initialize: Set L вҶҗ dlog2 R/Пғe and C1,l вҶҗ F, ОЁ1,l вҶҗ вҲ… for all l вҲҲ [L].
 3: for t = 1 В· В· В· T do
 4:   Observes Dt .
 5:   Choose action at = argmaxaвҲҲDt minlвҲҲ[L] maxf вҲҲCt,l f (a).
 6:   Observe stochastic reward rt and Пғt2 .
 7:   Find lt such that 2lt +1 Пғ вүҘ max(Пғ, Пғt ) вүҘ 2lt Пғ.
 8:   Update ОЁt+1,lt вҶҗ ОЁt,lt вҲӘ {t} and ОЁt+1,l вҶҗ ОЁt,l for all l вҲҲ [L]\{lt }.
 9:   Update Ct+1,l according to ОЁt+1,l through a regression subroutine (e.g., Algorithm 2).
10: end for

3.2   M ULTI - LEVEL L EARNING FRAMEWORK

Existing approach. To tackle the heteroscedastic bandit problem, for the case where the F is
the linear function class (i.e., f (a) = hОё вҲ— , ai for some Оё вҲ— вҲҲ Rd ), a weighted linear regression
framework (Kirschner & Krause, 2018; Zhou et al., 2021) has been proposed. Generally speaking, at
each round t вҲҲ [T ], weighted linear regression constructs a confidence set Ct based on the empirical
risk minimizarion (ERM) for all previous observed actions as and rewards rs as follows:

Оёt вҶҗ argmin О»kОёk22 +                               2                 Pt
                                                              Оё вҲҲ Rd                                2
                       P
                          sвҲҲ[t] ws (hОё, as i вҲ’ rs ) , Ct вҶҗ            s=1 ws (hОё, as i вҲ’ hОёt , as i) вүӨ ОІt ,
        ОёвҲҲRd


 where ws is the weight, and ОІt , О» are some parameters to be specified. ws is selectedвҲҡin the order
of the inverse of the variance Пғs2 at round s to let the variance of the rescaled reward ws rs upper
bounded by 1. Therefore, after the weighting step, one can regard the heteroscedastic bandits prob-
lem as a homoscedastic bandits problem and apply existing theoretical results to it. To deal with the
general function case, a direct attempt is to replace the hОё, ai appearing in above construction rules
with f (a). However, such an approach requires that F is close under the linear mapping, which
does not hold for general function class F.
Multi-level Learning framework (ML2 ). To deal with the nonlinearity issue, we propose a novel
framework M L2 in Algorithm 1. At the core of our design is the idea of partitioning the observed
data into several levels and вҖҳpackingвҖҷ data with similar variance upper bounds into the same level as
shown in line 7-8 of Algorithm 1. Note that we use a small real number Пғ to ensure that the number
of levels is bounded. Specifically, for any two data belong to the same level with variaces larger
than Пғ, their variance will be at most twice larger than the other. Next in line 9, our framework
calls a subroutine to estimate f вҲ— according to the data points in ОЁt+1,l . Since the variances of the
data in the same level are nearly the same, we let algorithms that work for homoscedastic bandit
problem run on the data in the same level. Particularlly, we use the Empirical risk minimization
(ERM) algorithm as described in Algorithm 2 for Sections 4 and 5. In Section 6, we show the
power of using Algorithm 4 as the regression subroutine. Then in line 5, the agent makes use of L
confidence sets simultaneously to select an action based on the optimism-in-the-face-of-uncertainty
(OFU) principle over all L levels. More specifically, the algorithm chooses the action opmimisticly
according to each confidence set but inclines to select the confidence set with the most pessimistic
evaluation. In the following sections, we will consider several different settings to show the power
of ML2 .

4     WARMUP : NOISE WITH ADDITIONAL SUB -G AUSSIAN ASSUMPTION
We first consider a simplified variant of our problem, where each noise is also sub-Gaussian.
Assumption 4.1 (Sub-Gaussianity of noise).  t is conditionally Пғt -sub-Gaussian on a1:t ,  1:tвҲ’1 .

Such a sub-Gaussian assumption on noise has been considered by Kirschner & Krause (2018). Next
we show the regret upper bound for ML2 with ERM. For simplicity, in the following results, let
dimE denote dimE (F, 1/T 2 ).
Theorem 4.2 (Gap-independent regret bound for bandits with heteroscedastic sub-Gaussian noise).
Suppose Assumption 3.4 and 4.1 hold and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ C for all a вҲҲ A. For all t вҲҲ [T ], l вҲҲ [L] and
Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), Оұ > 0, Пғ > 0, if we apply Algorithm 2 as a subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 Empirical risk minimization (ERM) for partitioned data
 1: Input: Level l, time t and set of data points ОЁt+1,l .
                                    P                          2
 2: Compute fbt+1,l вҶҗ argminf вҲҲF sвҲҲОЁt+1,l (f (as ) вҲ’ rs ) .
                                           h                      i2
                               P
 3: Return Ct+1,l вҶҗ f вҲҲ F         sвҲҲОЁt+1,l   f (as ) вҲ’ f
                                                       b      (a
                                                         t+1,l s )   вүӨ ОІ t+1,l


ОІt,l as the square root of
                                                q
             8(2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) + 4tОұ C + (2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(4t(t + 1)L/Оҙ) ,                  (4.1)
where NОұ = N (F, Оұ, k В· kвҲһ ) and L = dlog2 R/Пғe (recall the definition of L in Algorithm 1), then
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the regret for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                                    q
             Regret(T ) вүӨ L + 2C dimE L + 8 2L dimE (J + Пғ 2 T ) log(2NОұ L/Оҙ)
                                 p             q           p
                             + 4 L dimE Оұ C + 2R log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ)T.
Corollary 4.3. Let the  вҲҡ same    conditions as in Theorem 4.2 hold. Set Оұ = T вҲ’2 and Пғ =
     вҲ’1                     вҲ’1
dimE (log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) T ) . Then with probability at least     p1 вҲ’ Оҙ, when T is large enough,  the
regret for the first T rounds is bounded as Regret(T ) = O
                                                         e      dimE log(N (F, T вҲ’2 , k В· kвҲһ ))J .
                                                        p
                                                    e R dimE log(N (F, T вҲ’2 , k В· kвҲһ ))T regret
Remark 4.4. Our result is strictly tighter than the O
                                                      PT      2       2
achieved by Russo & Van Roy (2013) since J =            t=1 Пғt вүӨ R T . In the worst case, when
Пғ1 = В· В· В· = ПғT = R, our result degrades to their result. Our improvement in regret is due to the
utilization of variance information. When the variance information is provided or can be estimated,
our algorithm can achieve better regrets for bandits with general function classes studied in this
paper, while existing algorithms cannot.
Remark 4.5. When restricted to linear contextual bandits with dimension d, since log N вҲҡ (F, T вҲ’2 , kВ·
kвҲһ ) = O(d),
         e      dimE = O(d)
                          e    (Russo & Van Roy, 2013), our result can be written as O(d
                                                                                     e     J), which
matches the result of using weighted linear ridge regression for heteroscedastic linear bandit under
our assumptions on noise (Kirschner & Krause, 2018; Zhou et al., 2021).

We also provide a gap-dependent regret bound for general function class setting in section D, gen-
eralizing the previous gap-dependent regret bound in linear bandits (Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2011).

5     G ENERAL RESULTS FOR BANDITS WITH HETEROSCEDASTIC NOISE
In this section, we consider the original setting introduced in Section 3 without Assumption 4.1. In
the following subsections, we will show that Algorithm 2 still works with refined value of ОІ.

5.1   VARIANCE - AWARE CONFIDENCE SET

In this genral setting, directly applying the confidence set used in the previous work (Russo &
Van Roy, 2013) gives no improvement since our confidence sets Ct,l do not adopt the variance
information. We show in the following theorem that our new designed Ct,l with a new confidence
radius ОІ still ensures that the confidence set is large enough to contain f вҲ— with high probability, and
exploits the variance information at the same time.
Theorem 5.1 (Variance-dependent confidence sets). Suppose that |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ C for all a вҲҲ A. For
any Оұ > 0 and Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1/2), if we set ОІt,l as the square root of
             12CОұt + 4ОұRt + 8/3 В· CR log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ) + 16 В· (2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ),
               p
where R = R 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ), NОұ = N (F, Оұ, k В· kвҲһ ), then f вҲ— вҲҲ Ct,l with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ
for any fixed t, l.
Remark 5.2. With a small Оұ, we have ОІt,l = O(2      e 2l Пғ 2 log NОұ + CR log NОұ ). Compared with
                                        2
the corresponding previous result O(R
                                   e      log NОұ ) (Russo & Van Roy, 2013; Ayoub et al., 2020), our
confidence set is tighter when C is relatively small compared to R.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.2   R EGRET UPPER BOUNDS FOR ML2 WITH ERM

We derive our general results with the variance-aware confidences sets described in the last subsec-
tion. In this part, we write dimE (F, T вҲ’1 ) as dimE for short.
Theorem 5.3 (Gap-independent regret bound for bandits with heteroscedastic noise). Suppose As-
sumption 3.4 holds and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ 1 for all a вҲҲ A. For all t вҲҲ [T ], l вҲҲ [L] and Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), Оұ > 0, Пғ >
0, if we apply Algorithm 2 as a subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l as the square root
of 12Оұt + 4ОұRt + 8/3 В· R log(2NОұ t2 L/Оҙ)               l+1 2             2
                                         p + 16 В· (2 Пғ) log(2NОұ t L/Оҙ), where L = dlog2 R/Пғe,
NОұ = N (F, Оұ, k В· kвҲһ ) and R = R 2 log(4t2 L/Оҙ) (with a slight abuse of notation), then with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, the regret for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
             вҲҡ   вҲҡ                    p                  p
Regret(T ) вүӨ L 2 dimE T + 1 + 4 L dimE (log T + 1)Оұ 3 + RT
    r
       8                                          p                                   p
 +2      L dimE (log T + 1)R log(2NОұ t2 L/Оҙ)T + 16 L dimE (log T + 1) log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ) J + T Пғ 2 .
       3
Corollary 5.4. Assume R = в„Ұ(1). Let the same conditions as in Theorem 5.3 hold. Set Оұ =
T вҲ’2 , Пғ = 1. Then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, when T is large enough, the  regret for the first T
                                        вҲҡ                   вҲҡ
rounds is bounded as Regret(T ) = O  e dimE log NОұ J + R dimE log NОұ T .
Remark 5.5. Compared with the result shown in Corollary 4.3, the additional term of order
  вҲҡ
O(
e dimE log NОұ RT ) is due to a larger confidence set by the absence of Assumption 4.1.
Remark 5.6. When restricted вҲҡto heteroscedastic
                                   вҲҡ вҲҡ          linear contextual bandits of dimension d, our regret
bound can be written as O(d
                        e     J + Rd T ). WithвҲҡa slightlyвҲҡmore restricted assumption on noise,
Zhou et al. (2021) achieved a result of order O(d
                                               e     J + R dT ). Our result is appealing when
the sub-Gaussian parameter of noise R is much larger than 1 (or the range of the reward function,
equivalently). When R is small, our result becomes sub-optimal due to the property of our variance-
aware confidence set.

We also provide a gap-dependent regret bound in Appendix D.

6     T IGHTER BOUNDS FOR GENERALIZED LINEAR BANDITS
                                                                                 вҲҡ
Our general result shown in Theorem 5.3 has an additional term of order O(     e dimE log NОұ RT )
which makes the result sub-optimal when R is close to the range of the reward function. In this
section, we consider a special case, generalized linear bandits with heteroscedastic noise. We show
                          вҲҡ
how to get rid of the O(
                       e dimE log NОұ RT ) term in the upper bound of the regret, and achieve a
better result when R is relatively small or close to the bound of the reward function.

6.1   G ENERALIZED LINEAR BANDITS

Following Filippi et al. (2010); Jun et al. (2017), we consider the generalized linear function class
defined as follows.
Assumption 6.1 (Generalized linear function class). Action set A and Оҳ in Assumption 3.4 are
subsets of Rd . There exists a known link function h, such that вҲҖa вҲҲ A and fОё вҲҲ F, fОё (a) =
h(Оё > a). Let f вҲ— = fОёвҲ— . Assume that kОё вҲ— k2 вүӨ B, supaвҲҲA kak2 вүӨ A.

To make the problem tractable, we need the following assumption on h.
Assumption 6.2 (Assumption 1, Jun et al. 2017). h is K-Lipschitz on [вҲ’A В· B, A В· B] and con-
tinuously differentiable on (вҲ’A В· B, A В· B). Furthermore, inf zвҲҲ(вҲ’AВ·B,AВ·B) h0 (z) = Оә for some
Оә > 0.

Next we propose the follow-the-regularized-leader (FTRL) framework (Shalev-Shwartz & Singer,
2007; Xiao, 2010; Hazan, 2019) in Algorithm 3, which is the key component of our final algo-
rithm. Note that when dealing with bandit setting, we maintain an independent process executing
Algorithm 3 for each variance level instead of feeding all the data points into a single FTRL online
learner. Here we number the data points with t = 1, 2, В· В· В· for simplicity with a slight abuse of
notation. In Algorithm 3 we will use a loss function ` and a regularized function ПҶ. ПҶ is defined as


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 3 Follow The Regularized Leader (FTRL)
 1: Input: F, R.
 2: for t вүҘ 1 do                     PtвҲ’1
 3:   Output Оёt вҶҗ argminОёвҲҲRd ПҶ(Оё) + s=1 `(Оё > as , rs ).
 4:   Observe at , rt .
 5: end for

ПҶ(Оё) = c В· kОёk22 where c is a constant which will be specified later in Theorem 6.5. To align with
our Assumption 6.1, we select the loss function as follows, following Jun et al. (2017):
Assumption 6.3 (Loss function, Jun et al. 2017). The loss function ` in Algorithm 3 is selected as
follows: `(z, r) = вҲ’rz + m(z), `t (Оё) = `(Оё > at , rt ), where m(z) satisfies m0 (z) = h(z).

6.2   VARIANCE - DEPENDENT REGRET FOR FTRL

Before proposing our final algorithm for generalized linear bandits, we first propose a variance-
dependent complexity result for FTRL, since it is already nontrivial and reveals some interesting
properties about our setting. We define a notion of regret of online regression, named by regt ,
as follows. The concept of regret of online regression has been introduced in the previous work
(Abbasi-Yadkori et al., 2012; Jun et al., 2017). In detail, it is used to characterize the complexity for
FTRL to learn the generalized linear function.
                           Pt                        Pt
Definition 6.4. Let regt = s=1 `(a>    s Оёs , rs ) вҲ’
                                                                > вҲ—
                                                      s=1 `(as Оё , rs ).

Our definition of regret for online regression is slightly different that in prior works (Abbasi-Yadkori
et al., 2012; Jun et al., 2017). Here Оё вҲ— is choosen to be the true parameter for the bandit model,
while Оё вҲ— is often chosen as arg inf ОёвҲҲОҳ `s (Оё) in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2012); Jun et al. (2017).
From the perspective of online learning, the algorithms and the corresponding analyses are usually
introduced for either the realizable setting where there exists an underlying Оё вҲ— that incurs zero loss,
or the adversarial setting where the bounded label rs in each round s can be arbitrarily chosen
by the adversary. As a result, the previous approaches by Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2012); Jun et al.
(2017) do not exploit the вҖҳstochasticвҖҷ property of the labels. Provided that the labels are sequentially
generated with additional stochastic noise, our definition is more reasonable and natural. A recent
work focusing on stochastic online linear regression also discussed the limitation of adversarial
setting (Section 2.2, Ouhamma et al. 2021).
Next we propose a bound for regt which adopts the variance information.
Theorem 6.5 (Regret of FTRL). Set ПҶ(Оё) = 2A2 K 2 kОёk22 /Оә and assume that all the data points
                                                             2
fed into the algorithm are of noise variance bounded by Пғmax     , then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ,
вҲҖt вүҘ 1, the regret of Algrithm 3 for the first t rounds is bounded as follows:
                       8A2 K 2 B 2                             Пғ2                tAОә2

                                       9 2
                regt вүӨ             +     R log2 (4t2 /Оҙ) + 3 max d log 1 +                 .
                           Оә          2Оә                         Оә               4dK 2
Remark 6.6. Jun et al. (2017) analyzed the online learning regret for the same function class and
                                                                           e K 2 A2 B 2 +R2 d). Our result
loss function with our setting. Their result yields a regt in the order of O(       Оә
improves their result in two aspects. First, R is strictly larger than Пғmax since a R-sub-Gaussian
                                                           2
random variable is definitely of variance lower than R . Second, when we consider cases where
the bound of reward functions (i.e., KAB) is extremely large compared to R, their result becomes
 e 2 A2 B 2 d/Оә), which has an additional linear dependence on d.
O(K
Remark 6.7. Consider a special case where Оә = K = 1. Our result degrades to O(A               e 2B2 +
        2
R + Пғmax d). This is essentially a regret upper bound for stochastic online linear regression with
square loss. Recently Ouhamma et al. (2021) studied this stochastic setting and managed to get
            e 2 B 2 d) term in classic result for online linear regression considering adversarial set-
rid of the O(A
ting. Ouhamma et al. (2021) derived a high probability regret bound of O(R      e 2 d2 ) after omitting
               2
the o(log(T ) ) terms (Theorem 3.3, Ouhamma et al. 2021). Unlike their result, our result does
                                                                                2
not suffer from the quadratic dependence on d, and our result depends on Пғmax        d rather than R2 d2 .
Therefore, our result is better than that in Ouhamma et al. (2021) when d is large. We also notice
that the discussion in Sec. 3.3 in Ouhamma et al. (2021) yields an improved expected regret of or-
der O(R2 d log2 T + R2 d2 log T log log T ), but the first term dominates the regret in the asymptotic
sense, i.e., only when T is very large (T вүҘ (log T )d ).


                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 4 GLOC with multi-level FTRL learners
 1: Initialize: V0,l вҶҗ О»I for all l вҲҲ [L].
 2: while input t, lt , at , rt do
      Set Оёt,lt following Algorithm 3, where Оёt,lt вҶҗ argminОёвҲҲRd ПҶ(Оё) + sвҲҲОЁt+1,l `(Оё > as , rs ).
                                                                      P
 3:
                                                                                             t

             0
 4:    Find t = max ОЁt,lt .
 5:    Update Vt,lt вҶҗ Vt0 ,lt + at a>              >
                                    t , zt,lt вҶҗ at Оёt,l t .
                          вҲ’1
                                P
 6:    Compute Оёt,l вҶҗ V
                b
                      t      t,lt             zs,l В· as .
                                      sвҲҲОЁt+1,lt    t

 7:    Define Ct,lt вҶҗ {Оё вҲҲ Rd : kОё вҲ’ Оёbt,lt k2VвҲ’1 вүӨ ОІt,l }.
                                                   t,lt
 8:   Define Ct,l вҶҗ CtвҲ’1,l for all l вҲҲ [L]\{lt }.
 9:   Return Ct,l вҶҗ {fОё вҲҲ F|Оё вҲҲ Ct,l } for all l вҲҲ [L].
10: end while

6.3   R EGRET BOUND OF A LGORITHM 1 WITH GLOC

With our new technical tool presented in the last subsection, we now show our final algorithm for
the generalized linear bandit setting. We propose our algorithm in Algorithm 4. Generally speaking,
Algorithm 4 is a multi-level version of the generalized linear online-to-confidence-set conversion
(GLOC) algorithm proposed by Jun et al. (2017), equipped with FTRL.
As shown in Algorithm 4, we maintain L FTRL online learners in parallel. Under our framework,
a single learner only receives data with similar variances of noise. As a result, we can make use of
the variance-dependent result shown in Theorem 6.5 to derive a tighter regret bound for generalized
linear bandits with heteroscedastic noises.
Theorem 6.8 (Regret bound for generalized linear bandits, informal). Suppose that Assumption 6.1
and 6.2 hold for the known reward function class F. If we apply Algorithm 4 as a subroutine of
Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l to

                 32A2 K 2 B 2                              22(l+1) Пғ 2             tAОә2

                                26 2     2     2
           1+                 +    R log   (4t   L/Оҙ) + 12             d log   1 +         + О»B 2
                    Оә2          Оә2                             Оә2                  4dK 2
                                                         вҲҡ
for all t вҲҲ [T ], l вҲҲ [L], where L = dlog2 R/Пғe, Пғ = R/ d, then with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ, the regret
of Algorithm 1 for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                               K вҲҡ                  вҲҡ

                                                      K
                          Regret(T ) = O
                                       e         d J+   (K В· AB + R) dT             .
                                               Оә      Оә
                                                                                      вҲҡ
Remark 6.9. In the worst case, i.e. Пғ1 = В· В· В· = ПғT = R, our result degraded to O(KRd
                                                                                e       T /Оә +
  2
        вҲҡ                                                    вҲҡ
K AB dT /Оә), which still improves the O  e K(KAB + R)d T /Оә result provided by Jun et al.
(2017).
Remark 6.10. Applying  the regret bound in  Corollary 5.4 in generalized linear bandits, we obtain
                       вҲҡ        вҲҡ
                  e K(d J + d RT )/Оә for the case where K В· A В· B = 1 and R = в„Ұ(1). Our
a regret bound of O
bound here improved the general result when R = o(d).
Remark 6.11. When  restrictedвҲҡto the heteroscedastic
                                       вҲҡ                                  вҲҡ Оә = KвҲҡ =  1, our
                                                     linear bandits by setting
result becomes O (R + A В· B) dT + d J , which is the same as the O R dT + d J regret
               e                                                      e
in Zhou et al. (2021) when R = в„Ұ(AB).

7     C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work we study heteroscedastic stochastic bandits problem for a general reward function class.
We propose a multi-level regression framework ML2 to deal with the heteroscedastic noises. Under
three different settings with additional assumptions on the noise and the function class, we study the
performance of ML2 and propose corresponding variance-dependent regret bounds, which strictly
improves previous algorithms for homoscedastic bandit setting. We leave to study the optimal regret
bound of heteroscedastic stochastic bandits for a general reward function class for future work.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, DaМҒvid PaМҒl, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Improved algorithms for linear stochastic
  bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 24:2312вҖ“2320, 2011.

Yasin Abbasi-Yadkori, David Pal, and Csaba Szepesvari. Online-to-confidence-set conversions and
  application to sparse stochastic bandits. In Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1вҖ“9. PMLR,
  2012.

Alexander C Aitken. Iv.вҖ”on least squares and linear combination of observations. Proceedings of
  the Royal Society of Edinburgh, 55:42вҖ“48, 1936.

AndraМҒs Antos, Varun Grover, and Csaba Szepesvari. Active learning in heteroscedastic noise. Theor.
  Comput. Sci., 411:2712вҖ“2728, 2010.

John-Alexander M Assael, Ziyu Wang, Bobak Shahriari, and Nando de Freitas. Heteroscedastic
  treed bayesian optimisation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.7172, 2014.

Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  463вҖ“474. PMLR, 2020.

Peter L Bartlett, Wouter M Koolen, Alan Malek, Eiji Takimoto, and Manfred K Warmuth. Minimax
  fixed-design linear regression. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 226вҖ“239. PMLR, 2015.

Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Philip M Long, and Manfred K Warmuth. Worst-case quadratic loss bounds
  for prediction using linear functions and gradient descent. IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-
  works, 7(3):604вҖ“619, 1996.

Kamalika Chaudhuri, Prateek Jain, and Nagarajan Natarajan. Active heteroscedastic regression. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.

Wei Chu, Lihong Li, Lev Reyzin, and Robert Schapire. Contextual bandits with linear payoff func-
 tions. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
 Statistics, pp. 208вҖ“214. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.

Wesley Cowan, Junya Honda, and Michael N Katehakis. Normal bandits of unknown means and
 variances: Asymptotic optimality, finite horizon regret bounds, and a solution to an open problem.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.05823, 2015.

Varsha Dani, Thomas P Hayes, and Sham M Kakade. Stochastic linear optimization under bandit
  feedback. 2008.

Kefan Dong, Jiaqi Yang, and Tengyu Ma. Provable model-based nonlinear bandit and reinforce-
  ment learning: Shelve optimism, embrace virtual curvature. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:26168вҖ“26182, 2021.

Sarah Filippi, Olivier Cappe, AureМҒlien Garivier, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Parametric bandits: The
  generalized linear case. In NIPS, volume 23, pp. 586вҖ“594, 2010.

David A Freedman. On tail probabilities for martingales. the Annals of Probability, pp. 100вҖ“118,
  1975.

Paul W Goldberg, Christopher KI Williams, and Christopher M Bishop. Regression with input-
  dependent noise: A gaussian process treatment. Advances in neural information processing sys-
  tems, 10:493вҖ“499, 1997.

Elad Hazan. Introduction to online convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05207, 2019.

David Hong, Laura Balzano, and Jeffrey A Fessler. Towards a theoretical analysis of pca for het-
  eroscedastic data. In 2016 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and
  Computing (Allerton), pp. 496вҖ“503. IEEE, 2016.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David Hong, Jeffrey A Fessler, and Laura Balzano. Optimally weighted pca for high-dimensional
  heteroscedastic data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12862, 2018.
Kwang-Sung Jun, Aniruddha Bhargava, Robert Nowak, and Rebecca Willett. Scalable generalized
 linear bandits: online computation and hashing. In Proceedings of the 31st International Confer-
 ence on Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 98вҖ“108, 2017.
Kristian Kersting, Christian Plagemann, Patrick Pfaff, and Wolfram Burgard. Most likely het-
  eroscedastic gaussian process regression. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference
  on Machine learning, pp. 393вҖ“400, 2007.
Johannes Kirschner and Andreas Krause. Information directed sampling and bandits with het-
  eroscedastic noise. In Conference On Learning Theory, pp. 358вҖ“384. PMLR, 2018.
Jyrki Kivinen and Manfred K Warmuth. Exponentiated gradient versus gradient descent for linear
  predictors. information and computation, 132(1):1вҖ“63, 1997.
Branislav Kveton, Manzil Zaheer, Csaba Szepesvari, Lihong Li, Mohammad Ghavamzadeh, and
  Craig Boutilier. Randomized exploration in generalized linear bandits. In International Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 2066вҖ“2076. PMLR, 2020.
Tor Lattimore, Koby Crammer, and Csaba SzepesvaМҒri. Linear multi-resource allocation with semi-
  bandit feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 28, 2015.
Gene Li, Pritish Kamath, Dylan J Foster, and Nathan Srebro. Eluder dimension and generalized
  rank. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.06970, 2021a.
Lihong Li, Wei Chu, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. A contextual-bandit approach to
  personalized news article recommendation. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference
  on World wide web, pp. 661вҖ“670, 2010.
Lihong Li, Yu Lu, and Dengyong Zhou. Provably optimal algorithms for generalized linear contex-
  tual bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2071вҖ“2080. PMLR, 2017.
Yingkai Li, Yining Wang, and Yuan Zhou. Nearly minimax-optimal regret for linearly parameterized
  bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2173вҖ“2174. PMLR, 2019.
Yingkai Li, Yining Wang, Xi Chen, and Yuan Zhou. Tight regret bounds for infinite-armed linear
  contextual bandits. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 370вҖ“
  378. PMLR, 2021b.
Nicholas Littlestone, Philip M Long, and Manfred K Warmuth. On-line learning of linear functions.
  In Proceedings of the twenty-third annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 465вҖ“475,
  1991.
Alan Malek and Peter L Bartlett. Horizon-independent minimax linear regression. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 31:5259вҖ“5268, 2018.
James McInerney, Benjamin Lacker, Samantha Hansen, Karl Higley, Hugues Bouchard, Alois Gru-
  son, and Rishabh Mehrotra. Explore, exploit, and explain: personalizing explainable recommen-
  dations with bandits. Proceedings of the 12th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, 2018.
Reda Ouhamma, Odalric-Ambrym Maillard, Vianney Perchet, et al. Stochastic online linear regres-
  sion: the forward algorithm to replace ridge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34, 2021.
Daniel Russo and Benjamin Van Roy. Eluder dimension and the sample complexity of optimistic
  exploration. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2256вҖ“2264. Citeseer,
  2013.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Yoram Singer. A primal-dual perspective of online learning algorithms.
  Machine Learning, 69(2):115вҖ“142, 2007.
Lin Xiao. Dual averaging methods for regularized stochastic learning and online optimization. 2010.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       GLOC-ONS
                           300
                                       ML2
                           250


                           200


                  regret
                           150


                           100


                           50


                            0
                                 0          1000           2000             3000       4000           5000
                                                      number of rounds
      Figure 1: Cumulative regret comparison between ML2 and GLOC on a synthetic data.
Zihan Zhang, Jiaqi Yang, Xiangyang Ji, and Simon S Du. Variance-aware confidence set: Variance-
  dependent bound for linear bandits and horizon-free bound for linear mixture mdp. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.12745, 2021.
Dongruo Zhou, Quanquan Gu, and Csaba Szepesvari. Nearly minimax optimal reinforcement learn-
  ing for linear mixture markov decision processes. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4532вҖ“
  4576. PMLR, 2021.

A    E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we conduct some experiments of the proposed ML2 +FTRL algorithm for generalized
linear bandits. We compare our results with GLOC proposed by Jun et al.p(2017).        p For each trial,
the dimension of Оё вҲ— is set to d = 20, and Оё вҲ— is sampled uniformly from [вҲ’ 1/d, 1/d]d . At each
round, the action set is of cardinality 100, where each action is uniformly sampled from [вҲ’1, 1]d
and normalized to have a unit `2 norm. The link function is set to be the sigmoid function h(z) =
   1
1+eвҲ’z . The variance upper bound at each round is uniformly sampled from [0, 0.75]. To simulate
the variance bounded condition considered in this paper, our reward is not sampled from Bernoulli
distribution. Instead, at each round t, we sample a random variable  0t from Poisson distribution, i.e.,
 t вҲј Pois(Пғt2 ) and  0t = min{e
e                                 t , R} where R is set to 10. Our zero-mean noise  t is computed by
 t =  0t вҲ’ E[ 0t ]. With this construction, it is not hard to see that  t satisfies Assumption 3.5 with
sub-Gaussian parameter R. We plot the cumulative regret of ML2 and GLOC in Figure 1. We can
see that by adapting the multi-level and variance-aware scheme, our ML2 algorithm outperforms the
previous GLOC algorithm by a large margin.

B    P ROOF S KECTCH OF T HEOREM 5.3
Proof Sketch. We prove the result by showing the validity of the confidence sets and bounding the
sum of single-step regret incurred by each variance level. Step 1: Construction of confidence sets
We first show that the construction of Ct,l is big enough to contain f вҲ— with high probability. Recall
the definition of Ct,l as follows
                                           X h                        i2
                          Ct,l вҶҗ f вҲҲ F            f (as ) вҲ’ ft,l (as ) вүӨ ОІt,l
                                                            b                                    (B.1)
                                                   sвҲҲОЁt,l

Thus, it only suffices to show that f вҲ— satisfies the inequality in (B.1). According to our ERM sub-
routine, we have
                       X                                   X
                            (fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 + 2    s [f вҲ— (as ) вҲ’ fbt l (as )]         ,
                      sвҲҲОЁt,l                                         sвҲҲОЁt,l
                                 X                         2        X                         2
                      =                fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ rs        вҲ’            (f вҲ— (as ) вҲ’ rs ) вүӨ 0,
                             sвҲҲОЁt,l                                sвҲҲОЁt,l



                                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the inequality holds since fbt,l is the function which minimizes the cumulative squared loss
                                        2
at level l, i.e., sвҲҲОЁt,l (f (as ) вҲ’ rs ) . Therefore, to bound sвҲҲОЁt+1,l (fbt+1,l (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 , it
                 P                                                  P

                                                  s [f вҲ— (as ) вҲ’ fbt l (as )]. Since fb suffers from the mea-
                                          P
suffices to bound the absolute value of       sвҲҲОЁt,l                      ,

surability issue, we use the concentration of self-normalized process with an Оұ-cover discretization
argument to bound this term, which can finally show that f вҲ— satisfies (B.1). Step 2: Regret decom-
position With the confidence sets corresponding to different variance levels constructed in Step 1,
we decompose the final regret in the following way:
                                      X X
                        Regret(T ) вүӨ                (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
                                          lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                                          X       X
                                                                                  вҲ—
                                      вүӨ                         max f (at ) вҲ’ f (at )
                                                                f вҲҲCt,l
                                          lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                                          X       X
                                      вүӨ                     wCt,l (at )                                      (B.2)
                                          lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l

where the second inequality holds due to the optimism principle for arm selection, the last one
holds due to the definition of width wCt,l (a) := maxf вҲҲCt,l f (a) вҲ’ minf вҲҲCt,l f (a) and the fact that
f вҲ— вҲҲ Ct,l from Step 1. Step 3: Bounding the sum of widths From Step 2, the last step to bound
the regret is to bound the summation of the width wCt,l (at ). According to the definition of eluder
dimension, we can further bound wCt,l (at ) in terms of the eluder dimension of F and the value of ОІ
(See Lemma E.3 for morep details). According to the decomposition, we can first bound the regret at
                     l
each level l by a O(2 |ОЁT +1,l |) term (omitting the dependencies on d, R and ПғМ„) and then naturally
                  e
bound the total regret by Lemma E.3 and the Cauchy Schwartz inequality. The full proof is given in
Section F.

C    E XAMPLE : VARIANCE - DEPENDENT R EGRET B OUNDS FOR B ERNOULLI
     BANDITS
In this section, we consider the following specific Bernoulli multi-armed bandits with general func-
tion approximation, where the observed reward rt incurred by action at is subject to the following
Bernoulli distribution:
                          1/f вҲ— (at ),       with probability f вҲ— (at )

       rt = f вҲ— (at ) +                вҲ—                                , Оҫ вүӨ f вҲ— (at ) вүӨ 1/2. (C.1)
                          вҲ’1/(1 вҲ’ f (at )), otherwise
It is easy to see that the noise  t satisfies R = 1/f вҲ— (at ) вүӨ 1/Оҫ and Пғt2 = 1/f вҲ— (at )+1/(1вҲ’f вҲ— (at )).
As discussed in Remark 3.6, we can use estimators of variance in Algorithm 1 instead of the true
variance at each round.
The following corollary is an illustration on how to apply Algorithm 1 when variance information is
not accessible but can be estimated through past observation.
Corollary C.1. Let the same conditions as in Theorem 5.3 hold. Set Оұ = T вҲ’2 , ПғМ„ = 1. At each
round, set Пғt2 (at ) to min{1, Пғ
                               b2 (at ) + 2/Оҫ 2 В· wCt,lt (at )} where Пғ
                                                                      b2 (at ) := 1/fbt,lt (at ) вҲ’ 1/(1 вҲ’
ft,lt (at )). Then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, when T is large
 b
                                                                       q enough, the P   regret of Algo-
rithm 1 for the first T rounds is bounded as Regret(T ) = O(         e dimE log NОұ T Var[rt ] +
                                                                                            t=1
                            вҲҡ
Оҫ вҲ’3 dimE log NОұ + Оҫ вҲ’1/2 dimE log NОұ T ).

Proof. We suppose the event described in Theorem 5.1 holds and the conditions of Theorem 5.3
hold without the given variance at each round.
At each round t, we can upper bound the variance of  t := rt вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ) by making use of Ct,l and
fbt,l returned by Algorithm 2. Specifically, we estimate Var[rt ] = Пғt2 = 1/f вҲ— (at ) + 1/(1 вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
         t                    t                                  b2 and Var[rt ]:
as 1/fbt,l (at ) вҲ’ 1/(1 вҲ’ fbt,l (at )) and bound the gap between Пғ            t

        Пғt2 (at ) вҲ’ Var[rt ]| вүӨ |1/fbt,lt (at ) вҲ’ 1/f вҲ— (at )| + |1/(1 вҲ’ fbt,l (at )) вҲ’ 1/(1 вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))|
       |b


                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                            вүӨ 2/Оҫ 2 В· |fbt,lt (at ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at )|
                            вүӨ 2/Оҫ 2 В· wCt,lt (at ).                                              (C.2)
where the first inequality follows from the distribution of reward, and the last inequality holds ac-
cording to Theorem 5.1.
Therefore, it is valid to replace Пғt2 by min{1, Пғ
                                                bt2 + 2/Оҫ 2 В· wCt,lt (at )} in Algorithm 1.
Similar to the proof of Theorem 5.3, we have
                              T
                              X
                        J=                 bt2 + 2/Оҫ 2 В· wCt,lt (at )}
                                    min{1, Пғ
                              t=1
                              T
                              X
                          вүӨ         min{1, Var[rt ] + 4/Оҫ 2 В· wCt,lt (at )}
                              t=1
                              T
                              X                          X         X
                          вүӨ         Var[rt ] + 4/Оҫ 2 В·                     wCs,l (as )
                              t=1                        lвҲҲ[L] sвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                              T
                              X                                         вҲҡ
                          вүӨ         Var[rt ] + 4/Оҫ 2 В· L 1/T + d + 4ОІT,L dT
                              t=1

where the first equality follows from the definition of J, the first inequality follows from (C.2), the
last inequality holds due to Lemma E.2.
                                               вҲҡ
Hence J is of order O(e PT Var[rt ] + 1/Оҫ 3 В· d log NОұ T ).
                           t=1

According to Theorem 5.3, the regret bound of Algorithm 1 for this Bernoulli bandit problem is of
order
      q
   e dimE log NОұ PT Var[rt ] + 1/Оҫ 3/2 В· dim3/4 (log NОұ )3/4 T 1/4 + Оҫ вҲ’1 dimE log NОұ T )
                                                                       p
   O(                 t=1                       E
        q
      e dimE log NОұ PT Var[rt ] + Оҫ вҲ’3 dimE log NОұ + Оҫ вҲ’1/2 dimE log NОұ T ).
                                                                 p
   вүӨ O(                   t=1

This completes the proof.

D    G AP - DEPENDENT R EGRET B OUNDS
In this section, we provide gap-dependent regret bounds for Algorithm 1 with various subroutines.
Denote вҲҶt as the smallest gap between the reward of an optimal action and the reward of a sub-
optimal action:
                                    вҲҶt :=       min       [f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (a)],                (D.1)
                                                   / tвҲ—
                                            aвҲҲDt ,aвҲҲD

where DtвҲ— := argmaxaвҲҲDt f вҲ— (a). Let вҲҶ be the smallest gap in all the rounds: вҲҶ := mintвҲҲ[T ] вҲҶt .
Theorem D.1 (Gap-dependent regret bound for bandits with heteroscedastic sub-Gaussian noise).
Suppose Assumption 3.4 and 4.1 hold and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ C for all a вҲҲ A. Let Пғmax = maxtвҲҲ[T ] Пғt and
suppose Пғmax > Пғ. If we apply Algorithm 2 as a subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l
as the same value in Theorem 4.2, then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the regret of Algorithm 1 for
the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                 L                           LT ОұC
                     4 dimE C 2 + 1/T + 16

Regret(T ) вүӨ                                          dimE (log T + 1)
                 вҲҶ                              вҲҶ
            L 2                                           L            p
    + 128 Пғmax      log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) dimE (log T + 1) + 32 T ОұПғmax log(8T 2 L/Оҙ) dimE (log T + 1).
            вҲҶ                                             вҲҶ
Corollary D.2. Let the same conditions as in Theorem D.1 hold. Set Оұ = T вҲ’2 . Then with proba-
bility at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, when T is large enough, the regret for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                         2
                                         Пғmax                       вҲ’2
                       Regret(T ) = Oe         dimE log(N (F, T , k В· kвҲһ )) .
                                          вҲҶ

                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Remark D.3. Corollary D.2 immediately suggests an O(R   e 2 dimE log(N (F, T вҲ’2 , kВ·kвҲһ ))/вҲҶ) gap-
dependent regret by the fact Пғmax = O(R), which provides a novel instance-dependent bound for
the original problem considered by Russo & Van Roy (2013). To our knowledge, this is the first
result of its kind for the general bandit model.
Remark D.4. When restricted to linear contextual bandits with dimension d, our result reduces to
     2
O(Пғ
 e max   d2 /вҲҶ), which matches the previous result derived in Abbasi-Yadkori et al. (2011).
Theorem D.5 (Gap-dependent regret bound for bandits with heteroscedastic noise, informal). Sup-
pose Assumption 3.4 holds and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ 1 for all a вҲҲ A. Let Пғmax = maxtвҲҲ[T ] Пғt (suppose
Пғmax > Пғ) and d = dimE (F, 1/T ). If we apply Algorithm 2 as a subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in
line 9) and set ОІt,l as the same value in Theorem 5.3, then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, the regret
of Algorithm 1 for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                              2
                                              Пғmax             R
                            Regret(T ) = Oe        d log NОұ + d log NОұ
                                               вҲҶ               вҲҶ
if T is large enough and we set Оұ = T вҲ’2 .
Remark D.6. Similar to Remark 5.5, compared with the regret in Corollary D.2, the regret in The-
orem D.5 has an additional term that depends on R.

E    P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 4
Lemma E.1 (Proposition 3, Russo                  If (ОІt вүҘ 0|t вҲҲ N) is a nondecreasing sequence
                                & Van Roy 2013).
                  PtвҲ’1   b                2
and Ft := f вҲҲ F : s=1 ft (as ) вҲ’ f (as ) вүӨ ОІt2 , then

                             T
                                                             4ОІT2
                             X
                                   1(wFt (at ) >  ) вүӨ             + 1 dimE (F,  )
                             t=1
                                                               2

for all T вҲҲ N and   > 0.
Lemma E.2    (Lemma 2, Russo                      (ОІt вүҘ 0|t вҲҲ N) is a nondecreasing sequence
                              & Van Roy 2013). If
                     PtвҲ’1   b             2
and Ft := f вҲҲ F : s=1 ft (as ) вҲ’ f (as ) вүӨ ОІt2 , then

               T
               X                   1                                 p
                     wFt (at ) вүӨ     + wF (A) В· dimE (F, T вҲ’2 ) + 4ОІT dimE (F, T вҲ’2 )T
               t=1
                                   T

for all T вҲҲ N.

Instead of using the previous approach that bounds the sum of widths, we take another approach to
bound the sum of squared widths, which can further provide a novel gap-dependent result later.
Lemma E.3 (Bounding    the sum of the                  2        t вүҘ 0|t вҲҲ N) is a nondecreasing
                                        square of widths). If (ОІ
                               PtвҲ’1   b
sequence and Ft := f вҲҲ F : s=1 ft (as ) вҲ’ f (as ) вүӨ ОІt2 , then

         T
         X
                2
                                       вҲҡ    2
                                                                        вҲҡ
               wF t
                    (at ) вүӨ dimE (F, 1/ T )wF (A) + 1 + 4ОІT2 dimE (F, 1/ T )(log T + 1)
         t=1

for all T вҲҲ N.

Proof. Following a similar approach as Russo & Van Roy (2013), we reorder the set {wFt (at )}tвҲҲ[T ]
to {wt }tвҲҲ[T ] , such that w1 вүҘ w2 вүҘ В· В· В· вүҘ wT .
Let T 0 = max{t вҲҲ [T ], wt вүҘ T1 }. By Lemma E.1,
                                      4ОІT2

                            tвүӨ               + 1 dimE (F, wt вҲ’ Оҙ)                                 (E.1)
                                   (wt вҲ’ Оҙ)2


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for any Оҙ вҲҲ (0,  ). Taking Оҙ вҶ’ 0, we have
                                                     4ОІT2 dimE (F, wt )
                                            wt2 вүӨ                       .                                       (E.2)
                                                     t вҲ’ dimE (F, wt )
Hence,
       T
       X                    T
                            X
              2
             wF t
                  (at ) =         wt2                                                                           (E.3)
       t=1                  t=1
                                                                               0
                                                                             T
                                                                             X
                                       2
                      вүӨ dimE (F, 1/T )wF (A) + 1/T +                                      wt2
                                                                     t=dimE (F ,1/T )+1
                                                                               0
                                                                             T
                                       2
                                                                             X            4ОІT2 dimE (F, 1/T )
                      вүӨ dimE (F, 1/T )wF (A) + 1/T +
                                                                                          t вҲ’ dimE (F, 1/T )
                                                                     t=dimE (F ,1/T )+1
                                       2
                      вүӨ dimE (F, 1/T )wF (A) + 1/T + 4ОІT2 dimE (F, 1/T )(log T + 1),
                                        PT
where the first inequality holds due to t=T 0 +1 wt2 вүӨ 1/T under our definition of T 0 , the second
inequality follows from (E.2), the third inequality is derived by taking the integral.

With Assumption 4.1, we can directly apply the previous result on confidence set by replacing the
                                `+1
sub-Gaussianity О· parameterpby 2 Пғ. Previous result by Russo & Van Roy (2013) achieved a
                              2
confidence set of radius O( О· log NОұ + Оұt(C + О·)). Ayoub et al. (2020) later provides a result
                         e
of the same order with improvement in terms of smaller constants.
Lemma E.4 (Theorem 5, Ayoub et al. 2020). Suppose that |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ C for all a вҲҲ A. For any
Оұ > 0, if we set
                                             q                                  1/2
   ОІt,l = 8(2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) + 4tОұ(C + (2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(4t(t + 1)L/Оҙ))        , (E.4)

then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for all t вүҘ 1, l вҲҲ [L], f вҲ— вҲҲ Ct,l .
Theorem E.5 (Restatement of Theorem 4.2). Suppose Assumptions 3.4 and 4.1 hold and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ
C for all a вҲҲ A. For all t вҲҲ [T ], l вҲҲ [L] and Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), Оұ > 0, Пғ > 0, if we apply Algorithm 2 as a
subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l as the square root of
                                                       q
             8(2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) + 4tОұ(C + (2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(4t(t + 1)L/Оҙ)),

where NОұ = N (F, Оұ, k В· kвҲһ ) and L = dlog2 R/Пғe (recall the definition of L in Algorithm 1), then
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the regret for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                                    q
             Regret(T ) вүӨ L + 2C dimE L + 8 2L dimE (J + Пғ 2 T ) log(2NОұ L/Оҙ)
                                 p             q           p
                             + 4 L dimE Оұ C + 2R log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ)T.

Proof. For simplicity, let d = dimE (F, 1/T 2 ).
With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                            T
                                            X
                            Regret(T ) =          (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))                                      (E.5)
                                            t=1
                                            X         X
                                        =                     (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
                                            lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                                            X         X
                                        вүӨ                         max f (at ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at )
                                                                  f вҲҲCt,l
                                            lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l


                                                           16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                             X                   q
                                           вүӨ   1 + 2C В· d + 4ОІT,l d|ОЁT +1,l |
                                             lвҲҲ[L]
                                                                s       X
                                           вүӨ L + 2CdL + 2                        2 d|ОЁ
                                                                    L           ОІT,l   T +1,l |,   (E.6)
                                                                        lвҲҲ[L]
                                                                |                {z           }
                                                                                 I0

where the first equality holds by the definition in (3.1), the second equality holds since ОЁT +1,В· forms
a partition of [T ], the first inequality holds due to Lemma E.4, the second inequality follows from
Lemma E.3, the third inequality is obtained by applying Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
Then we continue to bound I0 ,
     s X X
I0 = L                 2 d
                      ОІT,l
               lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
       вҲҡ     sX            X
   вүӨ       Ld                       8(2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(2NОұ L/Оҙ)
                  lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
           вҲҡ     sX          X                    p
       +       Ld                      4T Оұ(C +       (4R2 В· log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ))
                    lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                пЈ«                                                                                пЈ¶
       вҲҡ            sX       X                                         q
                                                                           вҲҡ  p
   вүӨ       Ld пЈӯ                        8(2l+1 В· Пғ)2 log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) + 2 ОұT C + 2R log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ)пЈё
                     lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
        пЈ«v
         u T                                                             пЈ¶
    вҲҡ    uX                                 вҲҡ
                                               q      p
   вүӨ Ld пЈӯt   32(Пғt2 + Пғ 2 ) log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) + 2 ОұT C + 2R log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ)пЈё
                     t=1
       q                                    вҲҡ   q      p
   вүӨ       32Ld(J + Пғ 2 T ) log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) + 2 LdОұ C + 2R log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ)T,                       (E.7)

where the first inequality follows from the definition of ОІT,l , the third inequality holds due to the
fact that
                                                                q                     q
  вҲҖl вҲҲ [L], t вҲҲ ОЁT +1,l , 2l+1 Пғ = 2 В· 2l Пғ вүӨ 2 max{Пғ, Пғt } = 4 max{Пғ 2 , Пғt2 } вүӨ 4(Пғ 2 + Пғt2 ),
the fourth inequality follows from the definition of J.
Substituting (E.7) into (E.6), we obtain
                                                 q
                        Regret(T ) вүӨ L + 2CdL + 8 2Ld(J + Пғ 2 T ) log(2NОұ L/Оҙ)
                                        вҲҡ    q      p
                                     + 4 LdОұ C + 2R log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ)T,
which completes the proof.
Theorem E.6 (Restatement of Theorem D.1). Suppose Assumptions 3.4 and 4.1 hold and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ
C for all a вҲҲ A. Let Пғmax = maxtвҲҲ[T ] Пғt . If we apply Algorithm 2 as a subroutine of Algorithm
1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l as the same value in Theorem 4.2, then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the
regret of Algorithm 1 for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                       L                         LT ОұC
                                           4 dimE C 2 + 1/T + 16

                    Regret(T ) вүӨ                                         dimE (log T + 1)
                                       вҲҶ                           вҲҶ
                                             L 2
                                       + 128 Пғmax   log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) dimE (log T + 1)
                                             вҲҶ
                                            L         p
                                       + 32 T ОұПғmax log(8T 2 L/Оҙ) dimE (log T + 1).
                                            вҲҶ

Proof. For simplicity, let d = dimE (F, 1/T 2 ).


                                                           17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Suppose the event described in Lemma E.4 holds. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
    Regret(T )
        T
        X
    =         (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
        t=1
        X         X
    =                     (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
        lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
        X         X                                  2
    вүӨ                     (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at )) /вҲҶ
        lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
        X         X                                         2
    вүӨ                         max f (at ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at )            /вҲҶ
                              f вҲҲCt,l
        lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
        1 X           X
                                2
    вүӨ                          wC     (Dt )
        вҲҶ                         t,l
           lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
        1 X
            4dC 2 + 1/T + 4ОІT,l
                            2

    вүӨ                           d(log T + 1)
        вҲҶ
           lвҲҲ[L]
      L
         В· 4dC 2 + 1/T

    вүӨ
      вҲҶ
          L
                                2
                                                                       p
                                                                          2

      + 4 d(log T + 1) 32Пғmax         log(2NОұ L/Оҙ) + 4T Оұ(C + 2 Пғmax           log(4T (T + 1)L/Оҙ))
          вҲҶ
where the first equality follows from the definition in (3.1), the second equality holds by the fact
that ОЁT +1,l (l вҲҲ [L]) forms a partition of [T ], the first inequality holds due to the definition of вҲҶ in
Subsection 3.1, the second inequality follows from Lemma E.4, the fourth inequality holds due to
Lemma E.3 and the last inequality is derived by directly substituting the value of ОІT,l .

F    P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 5
Lemma F.1 (Freedman 1975). Let M, v > 0 be fixed constants. Let {xi }ni=1 be a stochastic process,
{Gi }i be a filtration so that for all i вҲҲ [n], xi is Gi -measurable, while most surely E[xi |GiвҲ’1 ] = 0,
|xi | вүӨ M and
                                                         n
                                                         X
                                                               E(x2i |Gi ) вүӨ v.
                                                         i=1

Then, for any Оҙ > 0, with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for all t вҲҲ [n],
                                 t
                                 X             p
                                        xi вүӨ       2v log(2t2 /Оҙ) + 2/3 В· M log(2t2 /Оҙ).
                                  i=1

Lemma F.2. Suppose a, b вүҘ 0. If x2 вүӨ a + b В· x, then x2 вүӨ 2b2 + 2a.

     вҲҡ By solving the root of quadratic polynomial
Proof.                                       вҲҡ     q(x) := x2 вҲ’bВ·xвҲ’a, we obtain max{x1 , x2 } =
       2                                       2
(b + b + 4a)/2. Hence, we have x вүӨ (b + b + 4a)/2 provided that q(x) вүӨ 0. Then we further
have
                        1       p          2   1
                 x2 вүӨ      b + b2 + 4a вүӨ В· 2 b2 + b2 + 4a вүӨ 2b2 + 2a.

                                                                                          (F.1)
                        4                      4


Theorem F.3 (Restatement of Theorem 5.1). Suppose that |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ C for all a вҲҲ A. For any
Оұ > 0 and Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1/2), if we set ОІt,l as the square root of
                                 8
                   12CОұt + 4ОұRt + CR log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ) + 16 В· (2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ)
                                 3

                                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where
                                                       p
                                                 R=R       2 log(4t2 /Оҙ),
then f вҲ— вҲҲ Ct,l for all t with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ for any fixed l.

Proof. By simple calculation, for all f вҲҲ F we have
 X                              X                              X                   X
     (f (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 + 2      s [f вҲ— (as ) вҲ’ f (as )] =   (rs вҲ’ f (as ))2 вҲ’   (rs вҲ’ f вҲ— (as )2 .
sвҲҲОЁt,l                                  sвҲҲОЁt,l                         sвҲҲОЁt,l                      sвҲҲОЁt,l
|                                {z                              }
                                I(f )
                                                                                                                       (F.2)
By sub-Gaussianity of  t we have
                                      X                              X
                          p                        p
                                 2
P вҲғt вүҘ 1, max | s | вүҘ R 2 log(4t /Оҙ) вүӨ  P(| s | вүҘ R 2 log(4s2 /Оҙ)) вүӨ   Оҙ/(2s2 ) вүӨ Оҙ.
             1вүӨsвүӨt
                                                         sвүҘ1                                           sвүҘ1
                                                                                                                       (F.3)
                                  n                          p             o
For simplicity, let event EsubG := вҲҖt вүҘ 1, max1вүӨsвүӨt | s | вүӨ R 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ) .

Let G(Оұ) вҠӮ F be an Оұ-cover of F in k В· kвҲһ .
From the definition of fbt,l , we have
             X                                   X
                  (fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 + 2    s [f вҲ— (as ) вҲ’ fbt, l (as )] = I(fbt,l ) вүӨ 0.                      (F.4)
              sвҲҲОЁt,l                                  sвҲҲОЁt,l

Let g = argminG(Оұ) kfbt,l вҲ’ gkвҲһ .

We then bound the gap I(g) вҲ’ I(fbt,l ) under event EsubG ,
                   X h                                                   i    X
I(g) вҲ’ I(fbt,l ) =     (g(as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 вҲ’ (fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 + 2    s [fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ g(as )]
                     sвҲҲОЁt,l                                                             sвҲҲОЁt,l
                       X                                                                       X             p
                 вүӨ            (g(as ) вҲ’ fbt,l (as ))(g(as ) + fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ 2f вҲ— (as )) + 2            ОұR        2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)
                     sвҲҲОЁt,l                                                                   sвҲҲОЁt,l
                             p
                 вүӨ 4CОұt + 2ОұR 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)t.                                                                          (F.5)
Fix an f вҲҲ F. Applying FreedmanвҖҷs inequality (Lemma F.1), with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we
have
   X                                               p
         s В· 1(EsubG )[f вҲ— (as ) вҲ’ f (as )] вүҘ вҲ’2/3R 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)C log(2t2 /Оҙ)
    sвҲҲОЁt,l
                                                     s              X
                                                    вҲ’ 2 В· (2l+1 Пғ)2   (f (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 log(2t2 /Оҙ).
                                                                        sвҲҲОЁt,l
                                                                                                                       (F.6)
for all t вүҘ 1.
Using a union bound on all the f вҲҲ G(Оұ) and EsubG , we further obtain that
 X
       t [f вҲ— (as ) вҲ’ f (as )] вүҘ
sвҲҲОЁt,l

        2 p
                                                         s                          X
       вҲ’ R 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)C log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ) вҲ’                2(2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ)   (f (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2
        3
                                                                                          sвҲҲОЁt,l
                                                                                                                       (F.7)
for all f вҲҲ G(Оұ) with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ.


                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Substituting (F.7) into the definition of I(f ), we have that for g, it holds for probability at least 1вҲ’2Оҙ
that
                p
  4CОұt + 2ОұR 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)t вүҘ I(g)                                                                      (F.8)
                                        4   p
                                   вүҘ вҲ’ R 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)C log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ)                                  (F.9)
                                        3
                                        s                                  X
                                     вҲ’ 8 В· (2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ)             (g(as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 (F.10)
                                                                                  sвҲҲОЁt,l
                                             X
                                        +            (g(as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2                                              (F.11)
                                            sвҲҲОЁt,l

where the first inequality is obtained by substituting (F.5) and (F.4) into the inequality below
                                      I(g) вүӨ I(g) вҲ’ I(fbt,l ) + I(fbt,l ),
the second inequality follows from the definition of I(f ) and (F.7).
Using Lemma F.2, we can deduce that
  X                                      p                8  p
       (g(as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 вүӨ 8CОұt + 4ОұR 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)t + RC 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ) log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ)
                                                          3
 sвҲҲОЁt,l

                                 + 16 В· (2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ).
                                                                                                               вҲ—
                                                                                                                   (as ))2 and
                                                                                  P
Then we can complete the proof by bounding the gap between                           sвҲҲОЁt,l (g(as ) вҲ’ f
                         вҲ—      2
P
  sвҲҲОЁt,l (ft,l (as ) вҲ’ f (as )) :
           b
 X                                X
     (fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 вүӨ   (g(as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2
sвҲҲОЁt,l                            sвҲҲОЁt,l

                                       X                                     X
                                  +            (g(as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2 вҲ’            (fbt,l (as ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (as ))2
                                      sвҲҲОЁt,l                             sвҲҲОЁt,l
                                              p                 8 p
                             вүӨ 12CОұt + 4ОұR 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)t + RC 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ) log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ)
                                                                3
                               + 16 В· (2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ t2 /Оҙ).


Theorem F.4 (Restatement of Theorem 5.3). Suppose Assumption 3.4 holds and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ 1 for
all a вҲҲ A. For all t вҲҲ [T ], l вҲҲ [L] and Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), Оұ > 0, Пғ > 0, if we apply Algorithm 2 as a
subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l as the square root of
                                 8
               12Оұt + 4ОұRt + R log(2NОұ t2 L/Оҙ) + 16 В· (2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ t2 L/Оҙ)
                                 3
                                              p
where NОұ = N (F, Оұ, k В· kвҲһ ) and R = R 2 log(4t2 L/Оҙ) (with a slight abuse of notation), then
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, the regret for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                                           r
                p                         p                   8
Regret(T ) вүӨ 4 L dimE (log T + 1)Оұ 3 + RT + 2                   L dimE (log T + 1)R log(2NОұ t2 L/Оҙ)T
                                                              3
                     p                                          p             вҲҡ   p
               + 16 L dimE (log T + 1) log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ) J + T Пғ 2 + L 2 dimE T + 1 .

Proof. For simplicity, let d = dimE (F, 1/T ).
Based on Theorem 5.1, for any fixed l, we have f вҲ— вҲҲ Ct,l with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ/L. Applying a
union bound on all l вҲҲ [L], we have f вҲ— вҲҲ Ct,l for all t, l with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ.
Then we further obtain, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ,
                           T
                           X
           Regret(T ) =          (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
                           t=1


                                                            20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                              X        X
                          =                      (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
                              lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                              X        X
                                                                            вҲ—
                          вүӨ                          max f (at ) вҲ’ f (at )
                                                     f вҲҲCt,l
                              lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                                                                                   q
                              X        X                                                                     1
                          =                          max f (at ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at )              |ОЁT +1,l | В· p
                              lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                                                     f вҲҲCt,l                                               |ОЁT +1,l |
                              вҲҡ        sX                        X
                          вүӨ       LВ·             |ОЁT +1,l |                wC2t,l (Dt )
                                        lвҲҲ[L]                  tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                              вҲҡ        sX
                          вүӨ       LВ·                                     2 d(log T + 1)
                                                 |ОЁT +1,l | 4d + 1/T + 4ОІT,l
                                        lвҲҲ[L]

where the first equality follows from the definition in (3.1), the second equality holds by the fact
that ОЁT +1,l (l вҲҲ [L]) forms a partition of [T ], the second inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality and Definition in (3.3), the third inequality follows from Lemma E.3.
Following the definition of ОІt,l , we further calculate
              вҲҡ   вҲҡ                вҲҡ sX X
Regret(T ) вүӨ L 2 dT + 1 + L В·                                               64(2l+1 Пғ)2 log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ)d(log T + 1)
                                                          lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                                             r
                      p                             8
             + 2 Ld(log T + 1)T 12ОұT + 4ОұRT + R log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ)
                                                    3
             вҲҡ   вҲҡ               p                p
            вүӨ L 2 dT + 1 + 4 Ld(log T + 1)Оұ 3 + RT
                r
                  8
             +2     Ld(log T + 1)R log(2NОұ t2 L/Оҙ)T
                  3
                                               v
                                               u T
               p                               uX
                                        2
             + Ld(log T + 1) log(2N T L/Оҙ)t         256(Пғ 2 + Пғ 2 )
                                                      Оұ                              t
                                                                      t=1
                вҲҡ   вҲҡ               p                p
            вүӨ     L 2 dT + 1 + 4 Ld(log T + 1)Оұ 3 + RT
                   r
                     8
                +2     Ld(log T + 1)R log(2NОұ t2 L/Оҙ)T
                     3
                    p                              p
                + 16 Ld(log T + 1) log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ) J + T Пғ 2 ,
                                                                             вҲҡ          вҲҡ      вҲҡ
where the first inequality holds by the definition of ОІt,l and the fact that a + b вүӨ a + b for
a, b > 0, the second inequality follows from the definition of lt , the third inequality follows from
the definition of J.
Theorem F.5 (Formal version of Theorem D.5). Suppose Assumption 3.4 holds and |f вҲ— (a)| вүӨ 1
for all a вҲҲ A. Let Пғmax = maxtвҲҲ[T ] Пғt and d = dimE (F, 1/T ). If we apply Algorithm 2 as
a subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l as the same value in Theorem 5.3, then with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, the regret of Algorithm 1 for the first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                L                 LОұT                                32 L
Regret(T ) вүӨ (4d + 1/T ) +              d(log T + 1)(12 + 4R) +           Rd(log T + 1) log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ)
                вҲҶ                   вҲҶ                                3 вҲҶ
                       L 2
               + 256 Пғmax     d(log T + 1) log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ).
                      вҲҶ

Proof. For simplicity, let d = dimE (F, 1/T ).
Basically following the previous approach in Theorem D.1, with probability 1 вҲ’ 2Оҙ, we have
                T
                X
Regret(T ) =          (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
                t=1


                                                                21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



               X       X
           =                     (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at ))
               lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
               X       X                                    2
           вүӨ                     (f вҲ— (aвҲ—t ) вҲ’ f вҲ— (at )) /вҲҶ
               lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
               X       X                                   2
                                                           вҲ—
           вүӨ                         max f (at ) вҲ’ f (at ) /вҲҶ
                                   f вҲҲCt,l
               lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
               1 X         X
           вүӨ                         wC2t,l (Dt )
               вҲҶ
                  lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
             1 X             2

           вүӨ     4 + 1/T + 4ОІT,l d(log T + 1)
             вҲҶ
                  lвҲҲ[L]
             L
           вүӨ    В· (4d + 1/T )
             вҲҶ
                 L                                  8
             + 4 d(log T + 1) 12ОұT + 4ОұRT + R log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ) + 64Пғmax   2
                                                                               log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ)
                 вҲҶ                                  3
             L                LОұT                          32 L
           = (4d + 1/T ) +         d(log T + 1)(12 + 4R) +      Rd(log T + 1) log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ)
             вҲҶ                 вҲҶ                           3 вҲҶ
                    L 2
             + 256 Пғmax   d(log T + 1) log(2NОұ T 2 L/Оҙ),
                    вҲҶ
where the first equality holds by the definition in (3.1), the second equality holds by the fact that
ОЁT +1,l (l вҲҲ [L]) forms a partition of [T ], the first inequality follows from the definition of вҲҶ in
(D.1), the third inequality follows from Definition (3.3), the fourth inequality holds by Lemma E.3,
the fifth inequality follows from the definition of ОІT,l .

G    P ROOFS FROM S ECTION 6
                                 Pt         >
                                                                Pt          > вҲ—
Lemma G.1. Let regt :=               s=1 `(as Оё, rs ) вҲ’              s=1 `(as Оё , rs ).   Following Algorithm 3, with
probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                            t
                            X                                   4       8R2
                                  (a>        вҲ— 2
                                    s (Оёs вҲ’ Оё )) вүӨ                regt + 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)                          (G.1)
                            s=1
                                                                Оә        Оә

for all t вүҘ 1. We denote the corresponding event by E1 .

Proof.
                          t
                          X                         t
                                                    X
                regt =          `(a>
                                   s Оё, rs ) вҲ’            `(a>  вҲ—
                                                             s Оё , rs )
                          s=1                       s=1
                          t
                          X                                               `00 (Оҫs , rs ) >
                     =          `0 (a>  вҲ—       >        вҲ—
                                     s Оё , rs )as (Оёs вҲ’ Оё ) +                           (as Оёs вҲ’ a>  вҲ— 2
                                                                                                  s Оё )
                          s=1
                                                                                2
                           t
                           X                                    Оә >
                     вүҘвҲ’            s a>        вҲ—
                                      s (Оёs вҲ’ Оё ) +              (a Оёs вҲ’ a>  вҲ— 2
                                                                          s Оё )
                            s=1
                                                                2 s

where the first equality follows from Definition 6.4, the second equality holds by Taylor series
expansion and Оҫs is a point between a>         > вҲ—
                                     s Оё and as Оё , the first inequality follows from Assumption
6.2 and Assumption 6.3.
Further we obtain
                t                        t
               X                      2X                      2
                   (a>
                     s (Оё s вҲ’ Оё вҲ— 2
                                 )) вүӨ        s a >        вҲ—
                                                 s (Оёs вҲ’ Оё ) + regt
               s=1
                                      Оә s=1                   Оә


                                                                22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                           v
                                           u t
                                        2 u X >                               2
                                       вүӨ R t2     (as (Оёs вҲ’ Оё вҲ— ))2 log(2/Оҙ) + regt
                                        Оә     s=1
                                                                              Оә
with probability 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, where the second inequality follows from the sub-Gaussianity of  s .
Applying Lemma F.2, we obtain that with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                        t
                      X                       4          8
                          (a>         вҲ— 2
                            s (Оёs вҲ’ Оё )) вүӨ      regt + 2 R2 log(2/Оҙ).
                      s=1
                                              Оә          Оә
Applying union bound on all t вүҘ 1, we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                        t
                      X                       4        8
                          (a>         вҲ— 2
                             s (Оёs вҲ’ Оё )) вүӨ     regt + 2 R2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)                              (G.2)
                      s=1
                                              Оә       Оә
for all t вүҘ 1.
Lemma G.2 (Lemma 11, Abbasi-Yadkori et al. 2011). For any О» > 0 and sequence {xt }Tt=1 вҠӮ Rd
                                            Pt
for t вҲҲ {0, 1, В· В· В· , T }, define Zt = О»I + i=1 xi x>
                                                     i . Then, provided that kxt k2 вүӨ M for all
t вҲҲ [T ], we have
                            T
                            X                                                dО» + T M 2
                                  min{1, kxt k2ZвҲ’1 } вүӨ 2d log                           .
                            t=1
                                                      tвҲ’1                        dО»
Lemma G.3. For any О» > 0 and sequence {xt }Tt=1 вҠӮ Rd for t вҲҲ {0, 1, В· В· В· , T }, define Zt =
    Pt
О»I + i=1 xi x>
             i . Then, provided that kxt k2 вүӨ M for all t вҲҲ [T ], we have
                                  T
                                  X                                dО» + T M 2
                                        kxt k2ZвҲ’1 вүӨ 2d log                    .
                                  t=1
                                                  t                    dО»

Proof. Applying matrix inversion lemma,
                    XT               T
                                     X
                                            вҲ’1
                         kxt k2ZвҲ’1 =    x>
                                         t Zt x t
                                   t
                      t=1                   t=1
                                            T
                                                                                            !
                                            X                   ZвҲ’1      > вҲ’1
                                                                 tвҲ’1 xt xt ZtвҲ’1
                                        =         x>
                                                   t     ZвҲ’1
                                                          tвҲ’1 вҲ’           вҲ’1                    xt
                                            t=1
                                                                1 + x>t ZtвҲ’1 xt
                                            T
                                            X         kxt k2ZвҲ’1
                                                             tвҲ’1
                                        =
                                            t=1
                                                1 + kxt k2ZвҲ’1
                                                                 tвҲ’1

                                            T
                                            X
                                        вүӨ         min{1, kxt k2ZвҲ’1 }
                                                                       tвҲ’1
                                            t=1
                                         dО» + T M 2
                                        вүӨ 2d log      ,
                                              dО»
where the second equality follows from matrix inversion lemma, the second inequality holds by
Lemma G.2.
Lemma G.4. Let
                                                               t
                                                  4A2 K 2     X
                                       ОЈt :=              I+Оә     ai В· a>
                                                                        i ,
                                                    Оә         i=1
                                  Пғmax := max Пғt .
                                                  tвүҘ1


Suppose Rt is an upper bound of max1вүӨsвүӨt | s |. Then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, it holds
simultaneously for all t вүҘ 1 that
                                      s
  t
                                                  tAОә2

X
      2      2
                      2       Пғmax Rt                          2 /Оҙ) +
                                                                        2   2        2

                                                                                               2
     s вҲ’ E[ s ] kas kОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ              d log 1 +     2
                                                        log(2t             Пғ max + R t log(2t /Оҙ).
s=1
                         s        K               4dK                  3Оә


                                                            23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. To bound the sum of variance of each term, we caulculate
                     t
                     X                                   t
                                                         X
                           Var  2s вҲ’ E[ 2s ] kas k4ОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ   E[ 4s ]kas k4ОЈвҲ’1

                                                       s                     s
                     s=1                                       s=1
                                                                t
                                                               X  Оә           2
                                                           вүӨ        2
                                                                      E[ 2s ]Rt kas k2ОЈвҲ’1
                                                             s=1
                                                                 4K                    s


                                                                    2
                                                                                      tAОә2

                                                              2    Rt
                                                           вүӨ Пғmax      d log    1 +          ,
                                                                  2K 2               4dK 2
where the second inequality follows from the definition of ОЈt , the third inequality holds by Lemma
G.2.
Also note that
                                                                      2 1

                                max  2s вҲ’ E[ 2s ] kas k2ОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ Пғmax
                                                               2

                                                                   + Rt
                               1вүӨsвүӨt                     s                Оә
                 2   2
since ОЈt   4AОәK I + Оәas В· a>
                           s .

Then we apply FreedmanвҖҷs inequality, which gives for arbitrary t вүҘ 1,
                                    s
 t
                                                  tAОә2

X
     2      2
                     2     Пғmax Rt                                            1  2      2

     s вҲ’ E[ s ] kas kОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ            d log 1 +             log(1/Оҙ)  + 2/3 В·   Пғ   + R t log(1/Оҙ)
s=1
                       s     K                    4dK 2                       Оә max
with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.
Applying a union bound on all t вүҘ 1, we have with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ,
                                      s
  t
                                                   tAОә2

X
      2      2        2     Пғ max R t                                       2   2        2

                                                                                             log(2t2 /Оҙ)

      s вҲ’ E[ s ] kas kОЈвҲ’1 вүӨ             d log 1 +          log(2t  2 /Оҙ) +     Пғ     + R
                                                       2                         max     t
s=1
                        s       K                 4dK                      3Оә
                                                                                              (G.3)
since tвүҘ1 2tОҙ2 вүӨ Оҙ.
      P


                                                                              2   2
Theorem G.5 (Restatement of Theorem 6.5). If we set ПҶ(Оё) = 2AОәK kОёk22 and assume that all the
                                                                          2
data points fed into the algorithm are of noise variance bounded by Пғmax     , then with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ, вҲҖt вүҘ 1, the regret of Algrithm 3 for the first t rounds is bounded as follows:
                      8A2 K 2 B 2                              Пғ2               tAОә2

                                      9 2
              regt вүӨ               +    R log2 (4t2 /Оҙ) + 3 max d log 1 +                .
                           Оә         2Оә                          Оә              4dK 2
                                           PtвҲ’1
                                           >
Proof. For simplicity, let Lt (Оё) =s=1 `(Оё as , rs ) + ПҶ(Оё) and losst (Оё) = Lt (Оё) вҲ’ ПҶ(Оё).
                                 n                             p              o
Suppose event E1 , event EsubG := вҲҖt вүҘ 1, max1вүӨsвүӨt | s | вүӨ R 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ) and the event de-
scribed in Lemma G.4 (denoted by E2 ) simultaneously hold in the following proof.
By sub-Gaussianity of  t we have
                                       X                              X
                          p                         p
P вҲғt вүҘ 1, max | s | вүҘ R 2 log(4t2 /Оҙ) вүӨ  P(| s | вүҘ R 2 log(4s2 /Оҙ)) вүӨ   Оҙ/(2s2 ) вүӨ Оҙ.
              1вүӨsвүӨt
                                                           sвүҘ1                                   sвүҘ1
                                                                                                       (G.4)
Hence, P(EsubG ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.           Applying Lemma G.1 and Lemma G.4, we have that
P(EsubG вҲ© E1 вҲ© E2 ) вүҘ 1 вҲ’ 3Оҙ by union bound.
From the update rule of Algorithm 3, we calculate
        t
        X                        t
                                 X
              `(a>
                 s Оёs , rs ) вҲ’         `(a>  вҲ—
                                          s Оё , rs )
        s=1                      s=1


                                                            24
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            t
            X
        =         [losss (Оёs ) вҲ’ losss+1 (Оёs+1 ) + `(a>                                          вҲ—
                                                      s Оёs , rs )] + losst+1 (Оёt+1 ) вҲ’ losst+1 (Оё )
            s=1
            Xt
        =         [Ls+1 (Оёs ) вҲ’ Ls+1 (Оёs+1 )] вҲ’ ПҶ(Оё1 ) + ПҶ(Оё вҲ— ) + Lt+1 (Оёt+1 ) вҲ’ Lt+1 (Оё вҲ— )
            s=1
                                    t
                                    X
        вүӨ 2 max |ПҶ(Оё)| +                  [Ls+1 (Оёs ) вҲ’ Ls+1 (Оёs+1 )] .                                                   (G.5)
              ОёвҲҲОҳ                         |            {z           }
                                    s=1
                                                             I1

where the first equality follows from the definition of loss, the second equality holds by the definition
of L, the first inequality holds since Lt+1 (Оёt+1 ) = minОёвҲҲRd Lt+1 (Оё).
Then we continue to bound I1 .
              t
              X
      I1 =          [Ls+1 (Оёs ) вҲ’ Ls+1 (Оёs+1 )]
              s=1
               t
              X                 вҲӮLs+1                                                  >
          =             вҲ’             (Оёs ), Оёs+1 вҲ’ Оёs                вҲ’ (Оёs+1 вҲ’ Оёs )       Hs+1 (Оёs0 )(Оёs+1 вҲ’ Оёs )
              s=1
                                 вҲӮОё
              Xt
                     вҲ’(h(a>                                             >       0

          =               s Оёs ) вҲ’ rs ) has , Оёs+1 вҲ’ Оёs i вҲ’ (Оёs+1 вҲ’ Оёs ) Hs+1 (Оёs )(Оёs+1 вҲ’ Оёs )
              s=1
                    t
              1X
          вүӨ         (h(a>            2     2
                        s Оёs ) вҲ’ rs ) kas kHвҲ’1 (Оё 0 )
              4 s=1                          s+1 s


                 t                                              t
              1X                                             1X 2
          вүӨ         (h(a>           > вҲ— 2       2
                        s Оёs ) вҲ’ h(as Оё )) kas kHвҲ’1 (Оё 0 ) +        kas k2HвҲ’1 (Оё0 )
              2 s=1                               s+1 s      2 s=1 s       s+1  s


                    t                                         t
              1 2X >                                      1X 2
          вүӨ     K     (as Оёs вҲ’ a>
                                s Оё вҲ— 2
                                     )  ka k2
                                          s H вҲ’1    0   +        s kas k2HвҲ’1 (Оё0 )                                        (G.6)
              2                               s+1 (Оёs )   2               s+1  s
                  s=1                                       s=1
                  |               {z                  }     |        {z         }
                                             I2                                             I3

where the second equality holds due to Taylor Expansion, (Let H be the Hessian matrix and
                                                                            вҲӮLs+1
Оёs0 вҲҲ Rd ), the third equality follows from the fact that вҲӮL
                                                           вҲӮОё (Оёs ) = 0 and
                                                             s                          вҲӮLs
                                                                             вҲӮОё (Оёs ) = вҲӮОё (Оёs ) +
вҲӮ`(Оё > as ,rs )
     вҲӮОё         (Оёs )the first inequality is obtained by solving the quadratic function with respect to
Оёs+1 вҲ’ Оёs , the second inequality follows from (a + b)2 вүӨ 2a2 + 2b2 .
From the definition of H, we calculate
                                      вҲӮ
                        Hs+1 (Оё) =      [вҲҮОё Ls+1 ]                                                                        (G.7)
                                     вҲӮОё "                                #
                                          s
                                      вҲӮ X         >
                                  =          (h(ai Оё) вҲ’ ri ) В· ai + вҲҮОё ПҶ                                                  (G.8)
                                     вҲӮОё i=1
                                                                s
                                                   4A2 K 2     X
                                                           I+Оә     ai В· a>
                                                                         i = ОЈs .                                         (G.9)
                                                     Оә         i=1
From Lemma G.1,
                                             8R2

                                   4                    2        Оә
                          I2 вүӨ       regt + 2 log(4t /Оҙ)
                                   Оә          Оә                 4K 2
                                                 2
                                   1          2R
                              вүӨ 2 regt +           log(4t2 /Оҙ).                                                          (G.10)
                                 K            ОәK 2
We bound I3 by decomposing it into its expected value and a zero-mean term.
                                 t
                                 X                                    t
                                                                      X
                                       Пғs2 kas k2HвҲ’1 (Оё0 ) +                 2s вҲ’ E[ 2s ] kas k2HвҲ’1 (Оё0 )

                        I3 вүӨ
                                                   s+1   s                                       s+1   s
                                 s=1                                  s=1


                                                                      25
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          t
                          X                       t
                                                  X
                                Пғs2 kas k2ОЈвҲ’1 +          2s вҲ’ E[ 2s ] kas k2ОЈвҲ’1

                      вүӨ
                                         s                                   s
                          s=1                     s=1
                          2                        t
                                        tAОә2
                                                X
                         Пғmax
                                                      2s вҲ’ E[ 2s ] kas k2ОЈвҲ’1 ,

                      вүӨ2      d log 1 +     2
                                               +                                              (G.11)
                          Оә             4dK      s=1
                                                                          s

                                                 |          {z              }
                                                                             I4

where the second inequality follows from (G.9), the third inequality holds by Lemma G.3.
Substituting (G.11) and (G.10) into (G.6), we have
                                R2              Пғ2             tAОә2

                       1                                                1
                I1 вүӨ     regt +    log(4t2 /Оҙ) + max d log 1 +     2
                                                                       + I4 .                 (G.12)
                       2        Оә                Оә             4dK      2
Applying Lemma G.4 to bound I4 , we calculate
              s
                          tAОә2

      Пғmax Rt                              2 /Оҙ) +
                                                    2   2          2

                                                                           2
 I4 вүӨ           d log 1 +           log(2t              Пғ     + R  t log(2t /Оҙ)
         K                4dK 2                    3Оә max
             s
                           tAОә2

      Пғmax R                                                                      1
    вүӨ          2d log 1 +            log(4t2 /Оҙ) + 2/3 В· Пғmax
                                                           2
                                                                + 2R2 log(4t2 /Оҙ)   log(4t2 /Оҙ)
        K                 4dK 2                                                   Оә
             s
                           tAОә2                    2R2

      Пғmax R
    вүӨ          2d log 1 +       2
                                     log(4t2 /Оҙ) +      log2 (4t2 /Оҙ),                   (G.13)
        K                 4dK                        Оә
where the second inequality holds due to event EsubG , the third inequality follows from Пғmax вүӨ R.
Substituting (G.13) into (G.12) , we have
                            R2                  Пғ2                 tAОә2

                   1
               I1 вүӨ  regt +      log(4t2 /Оҙ) + max d log 1 +
                   2         Оә                    Оә                4dK 2
                             s
                                              tAОә2                    R2

                      Пғmax R
                   +            2d log 1 +         2
                                                       log(4t2 /Оҙ) +      log2 (4t2 /Оҙ)
                        2K                    4dK                      Оә
                            2R2                     2
                                                                     tAОә2

                   1                 2    2       Пғmax
                  вүӨ regt +        log (4t /Оҙ) +          d log 1 +
                   2          Оә                      Оә               4dK 2
                                                2

                       1 2                  tAОә         1 2
                   +     Пғmax d log 1 +         2
                                                    +      R log2 (4t2 /Оҙ)
                      2Оә                   4dK         4Оә
                                                        2
                                                                         tAОә2

                   1         9 2       2    2       3 Пғmax
                  = regt +      R log (4t /Оҙ) +              d log 1 +           .            (G.14)
                   2        4Оә                      2 Оә                 4dK 2
Substituting the upper bound of I1 above to (G.5),
                                                                2
                                                                              tAОә2

                               1         9 2                 3 Пғmax
        regt вүӨ 2 max |ПҶ(Оё)| + regt +       R log2 (4t2 /Оҙ) +        d log 1 +
                 ОёвҲҲОҳ           2       4Оә                    2 Оә              4dK 2
               8A2 K 2 B 2                          Пғ2               tAОә2

                              9 2
             вүӨ             +     R log2 (4t2 /Оҙ) + 3 max d log 1 +          ,         (G.15)
                   Оә         2Оә                      Оә              4dK 2
from which we can further complete the proof by the arbitrariness of t.



In the following lemma, we formally introduce the conversion from online learning regret to confi-
dence set in our setting. For simplicity in analysis, we omit the level subscript and suppose all the
data is fed into the same level.
Lemma G.6. Suppose we feed loss function {`s (Оё)}ts=1 into a single online learner B. Assume
that B has an online learning (OL) regret bound regt : вҲҖt вүҘ 1,
                                       t
                                       X
                                             `s (Оёs ) вҲ’ `s (Оё вҲ— ) вүӨ regt .                    (G.16)
                                       s=1


                                                        26
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Define Xt as the design matrix consisting of a1 , В· В· В· , at , zt = [z1 , В· В· В· , zt ]. Then, with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ,
                                4       8R2
   вҲҖt вүҘ 1, kОё вҲ— вҲ’ Оёbt k2Vt вүӨ 1 + regt + 2 log 4t2 /Оҙ + О»B 2 вҲ’ kzt k22 вҲ’ Оёbt> X>

                                                                                              t zt . (G.17)
                                Оә        Оә

Proof. With Lemma G.1, we can prove this lemma by following nearly the same proof for Theorem
                                                                              2
1 in Jun et al. (2017). (We can set ОІt0 in their proof to be 1 + Оә4 regt + 8R        2

                                                                            Оә2 log 4t /Оҙ according to
Lemma G.1. )
Lemma G.7. For all t, with zt and Xt defined as in Lemma G.8, we have
                                   kzt k2 вҲ’ Оёb> X> zt вүҘ 0.
                                               2     t    t

                                          вҲ’1
Proof. After ridge regression, Оёbt = Vt X>                      >
                                         t zt where Vt := О»I + Xt Xt .

Then we have
                                                           вҲ’1       >
                           kzt k22 вҲ’ Оёbt X>           2       >
                                          t zt = kzt k2 вҲ’ Vt Xt zt    X>
                                                                       t zt
                                                                    вҲ’1
                                               = kzt k22 вҲ’ z>           >
                                                            t X t V t X t zt                          (G.18)

We consider

                              О»I + X>t Xt      X>t              >
                                                       [Xt    I] [Xt      I]   0.                     (G.19)
                                  Xt            I

From Schur complement theorem, we have
                                                                     вҲ’1
                                  I   (I + X>
                                            t Xt )
                                                   вҲ’1 >
                                                     Xt = Xt V t X>
                                                                  t .                                 (G.20)

Then we can complete the proof by substituting (G.20) into (G.18).
Lemma G.8 (Variance-dependent confidence set for generalized linear bandits). Suppose that As-
sumption 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 hold. For any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1/4), if we set
               32A2 K 2 B 2                                22(l+1) Пғ 2           tAОә2

                                26 2     2    2
   ОІt,l := 1 +               + 2 R log (4t L/Оҙ) + 12                   d log 1 +         + О»B 2 ,
                     Оә2         Оә                              Оә2                4dK 2
                                                                                            (G.21)
then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ, we have Оё вҲ— вҲҲ Ct,l for all t вүҘ 1, l вҲҲ [L].

Proof. For any l вҲҲ [L], with probability at least 1 вҲ’ LОҙ ,
                                     4         8R2
                      kОё вҲ— вҲ’ Оёbt,l k2V regt,l + 2 log 4t2 L/Оҙ + О»B 2 ,

                                         вүӨ1+
                             t,l    Оә           Оә
making use of Lemma G.8 and Lemma G.7.
From Theorem 6.5, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ 3 LОҙ , we can set
                   8A2 K 2 B 2                           22(l+1) Пғ 2           tAОә2

                                  9 2
       regt,l :=               +    R log2 (4t2 L/Оҙ) + 3             d log 1 +         .              (G.22)
                       Оә         2Оә                          Оә                 4dK 2
By Union Bound, with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ, for all l вҲҲ [L],
                         32A2 K 2 B 2                              22(l+1) Пғ 2             tAОә2

   вҲ—                                     18 2     2
kОё вҲ’ Оёbt,l k2V       вүӨ1+                               2
                                      + 2 R log (4t L/Оҙ) + 12                  d log 1 +
                 t,l        Оә2           Оә                             Оә2                  4dK 2
                          2
                       8R
                      + 2 log 4t2 L/Оҙ + О»B 2

                        Оә
                         32A2 K 2 B 2                              22(l+1) Пғ 2             tAОә2

                                         26 2     2    2
                     =1+              +     R log   (4t  L/Оҙ) + 12             d log   1 +         + О»B 2 .
                            Оә2           Оә2                            Оә2                  4dK 2



                                                     27
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem G.9. Suppose that Assumptions 6.1 and 6.2 hold for the known reward function class F.
If we apply Algorithm 4 as a subroutine of Algorithm 1 (in line 9) and set ОІt,l to

              32A2 K 2 B 2                               22(l+1) Пғ 2             tAОә2

                              26 2      2    2
         1+                 +    R  log   (4t  L/Оҙ) + 12             d log   1 +         + О»B 2
                    Оә2        Оә2                             Оә2                  4dK 2
                                  вҲҡ
for all t вҲҲ [T ], l вҲҲ [L], Пғ = R/ d, then with probability 1 вҲ’ 4Оҙ, the regret of Algorithm 1 for the
first T rounds is bounded as follows:
                                            K вҲҡ                            вҲҡ

                                                      K
                        Regret(T ) = Oe        d J+      (K В· AB + R) dT .
                                            Оә         Оә

Proof.
                        X
         Regret(T ) =            h(x>    вҲ—       > вҲ—
                                    t,вҲ— Оё ) вҲ’ h(xt Оё )
                        tвҲҲ[T ]
                            X
                     вүӨK            (x>    вҲ—   > вҲ—
                                     t,вҲ— Оё вҲ’ xt Оё )
                           tвҲҲ[T ]
                            X
                     вүӨK                   max          x>      > вҲ—
                                                        t Оё вҲ’ xt Оё
                                     ОёвҲҲвҲ©lвҲҲ[L] CtвҲ’1,l
                           tвҲҲ[T ]
                            X        X
                     вүӨK                          max x>       > вҲ—
                                                       t Оё вҲ’ xt Оё
                                                ОёвҲҲCt,l
                           lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                            X        X
                     вүӨK                        min 2AB, kxt kVвҲ’1                max         kОё1 вҲ’ Оё2 kVtвҲ’1,l
                                                                     tвҲ’1,l Оё1 ,Оё2 вҲҲCtвҲ’1,l
                           lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l

                                                    1/2
                             X        X
                     вүӨ 2K                      min ОІt,l kxt kVвҲ’1 , AB ,                                            (G.23)
                                                                     tвҲ’1,l
                             lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l

where the first equality holds by the definition in (3.1), the first inequality follows from Assumption
6.2, the second inequality holds by Lemma G.8.
                                       n                                o
For an arbitrary l вҲҲ [L], let I1 (l) := t вҲҲ ОЁT +1,l kxt kVвҲ’1 вүӨ 1 and I2 (l) := ОЁT +1,l \I1 (l).
                                                                      tвҲ’1,l


                        1/2                  1/2
            X                                    X
                   min ОІt,l kxt kVвҲ’1 , AB вүӨ ОІT,l   min(1, kxt kVвҲ’1 )
                                      tвҲ’1,l                                             tвҲ’1,l
            tвҲҲI1                                              tвҲҲI1
                                                     s                X
                                                    вүӨ ОІT,l |ОЁT +1,l |   [min(1, kxt kVвҲ’1 )]2
                                                                                                     tвҲ’1,l
                                                                              tвҲҲI1
                                                        r
                                                                                       dО» + T A2
                                                    вүӨ     2ОІT,l |ОЁT +1,l |d log                  ,                 (G.24)
                                                                                          dО»
where the second inequality holds by Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, the third inequality follows from
Lemma G.2.
Similarly, we calculate

                        1/2
           X                               X
               min ОІt,l kxt kVвҲ’1 , AB вүӨ AB   min(1, kxt kVвҲ’1 )
                                       tвҲ’1,l                                            tвҲ’1,l
            tвҲҲI2                                              tвҲҲI2
                                                            s                 X
                                                    вүӨ AB        |ОЁT +1,l |           [min(1, kxt kVвҲ’1 )]2
                                                                                                     tвҲ’1,l
                                                                              tвҲҲI1
                                                            r
                                                                                       dО» + T A2
                                                    вүӨ AB        2|ОЁT +1,l |d log                 .                 (G.25)
                                                                                          dО»


                                                         28
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Substituting (G.24) and (G.25) into (G.23), we obtain
                                     r
                 X          p                         dО» + T A2
 Regret вүӨ 2K          (AB + ОІT,l ) 2|ОЁT +1,l |d log
                                                         dО»
                lвҲҲ[L]
                v
                                                         dО» + T A2
                u X                p
          вүӨ 2K tL        2(AB + ОІT,l )2 d|ОЁT +1,l | log
                u
                                                            dО»
                     lвҲҲ[L]
                v
              вҲҡ u              dО» + T A2   X                      dО» + T A2
          вүӨ 4K LtA2 B 2 dT log           +   ОІT,l d|ОЁT +1,l | log
                u
                                  dО»                                 dО»
                                                   lвҲҲ[L]
                             вҲҡ                                      !r
                вҲҡ      4 2AKB        6         2
                                                         вҲҡ                      dО» + T A2
          вүӨ 4K L 1 +              + R log(4T L/Оҙ) + О»B + AB              dT log
                             Оә       Оә                                             dО»
                   v
                 вҲҡ u
                   u X d2 l+1 2                      dО» + T A2           tAОә2

            + 4K Lt        12 2 (2 Пғ) |ОЁT +1,l | log           log 1 +
                              Оә                         dО»               4dK 2
                     lвҲҲ[L]
                         вҲҡ                                          !r
               вҲҡ       4 2AKB        6         2
                                                         вҲҡ                      dО» + T A2
          вүӨ 4K L 1 +              + R log(4T L/Оҙ) + О»B + AB              dT log
                             Оә       Оә                                             dО»
                 s                                  v
                       dО» + T A2          tAОә2 u X X                 d2 l+1 2
                                                    u
            + 4K L log            log 1 +                         12    (2 Пғ)
                                          4dK 2                      Оә2
                                                    t
                            dО»
                                                             lвҲҲ[L] tвҲҲОЁT +1,l
                             вҲҡ                                  !r
                вҲҡ      4 2AKB       6               вҲҡ                        dО» + T A2
          вүӨ 4K L 1 +             + R log(4T 2 L/Оҙ) + О»B + AB          dT log
                           Оә        Оә                                           dО»
                s                               v
                       dО» + T A2         tAОә2 u X       d2
                                                u
            + 4K L log           log 1 +     2
                                                t     48 2 (Пғt2 + Пғ 2 )
                          dО»             4dK            Оә
                                                             tвҲҲ[T ]
                             вҲҡ                                                 !r
                вҲҡ     4 2AKB       6               вҲҡ                                         dО» + T A2
          вүӨ 4K L 1 +            + R log(4T 2 L/Оҙ) + О»B + AB                         dT log
                          Оә        Оә                                                            dО»
                  s
                         dО» + T A2         tAОә2 p

                K
            + 24 d L log           log 1 +         J + Пғ2 T
                Оә           dО»             4dK 2
where the second inequality holds due to Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, the fourth inequality fol-
lows from the definition of ОІt,l , the sixth inequality holds since lt in Algorithm 1 satisfies 2lt Пғ вүӨ
max{Пғt , Пғ}, the last inequality follows from the definition of J.


                                                  29
