Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C ONVERGENCE OF THE MINI - BATCH SIHT ALGORITHM
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
         The Iterative Hard Thresholding (IHT) algorithm has been considered extensively
         as an effective deterministic algorithm for solving sparse optimizations. The IHT
         algorithm benefits from the information of the batch (full) gradient at each point
         and this information is a crucial key for the convergence analysis of the generated
         sequence. However, this strength becomes a weakness when it comes to machine
         learning and high dimensional statistical applications because calculating the batch
         gradient at each iteration is computationally expensive or impractical. Fortunately,
         in these applications the objective function has a summation structure that can
         be taken advantage of to approximate the batch gradient by the stochastic mini-
         batch gradient. In this paper, we study the mini-batch Stochastic IHT (SIHT)
         algorithm for solving the sparse optimizations. As opposed to previous works
         where increasing and variable mini-batch size is necessary for derivation, we fix
         the mini-batch size according to a lower bound that we derive and show our work.
         To prove stochastic convergence of the objective value function we first establish a
         critical sparse stochastic gradient descent property. Using this stochastic gradient
         descent property we show that the sequence generated by the stochastic mini-batch
         SIHT is a supermartingale sequence and converges with probability one. Unlike
         previous work we do not assume the function to be a restricted strongly convex.
         To the best of our knowledge, in the regime of sparse optimization, this is the first
         time in the literature that it is shown that the sequence of the stochastic function
         values converges with probability one by fixing the mini-batch size for all steps.


1    I NTRODUCTION
We consider the following sparse optimization problem:
                                                    PN
                         (P) :    min f (x, Ξ) := N1 i=1 f (i) (x, ξ (i) )                              (1)
                                  s.t. x ∈ Cs
where f (i) : Rn × Ξ → R for i = 1, . . . , N , Ξ = {ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (N ) }, and Cs = {x ∈ Rn | ∥x∥0 ≤ s}
(sparsity constraint) is the union of finitely many subspaces whose dimension is less than or equal
to the sparsity level s such that 1 ≤ s < n. The importance of the Problem (P) is due to the fact
that finding a sparse network whose accuracy is on a par with a dense network amounts to solving a
bi-level, constrained, stochastic, nonconvex, and non-smooth sparse optimization problem Damadi
et al. (2022). Thus finding efficient algorithms that solve Problem (P) can be beneficial for addressing
compression of deep neural networks.
Among algorithms for solving sparse optimization the Iterative Hard Thresholding (IHT) algorithm
has been a very successful one due to the simplicity of its implementation. The IHT algorithm not
only has been practically efficient, but also shows theoretical promising results. It was originally
devised for solving compressed sensing problems in 2008 Blumensath & Davies (2008; 2009). Since
then, a large body of literature has been studying it from different perspectives. For example, Beck
& Eldar (2013); Lu (2014; 2015); Pan et al. (2017); Zhou et al. (2021) consider convergence of
iterations, Jain et al. (2014); Liu & Foygel Barber (2020) study the limit of the objective function value
sequence, Liu et al. (2017); Zhu et al. (2018) address duality, Zhou et al. (2020); Zhao et al. (2021)
extend it to Newton’s-type IHT, Blumensath (2012); Khanna & Kyrillidis (2018); Vu & Raich (2019);
Wu & Bian (2020) address accelerated IHT, and Wang et al. (2019); Bahmani et al. (2013) solve
logistic regression problem using the IHT algorithm. Recently Damadi & Shen (2022) introduced
the concepts of HT-unstable stationary points (saddle points in the sense of sparse optimization) and


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 The mini-batch stochastic iterative hard thresholding
Require: x0 ∈ Cs such that ∥x0 ∥0 ≤ s, a stepsize 0 < γ < L1s , and 1 ≤ SB ∈ N such that
                                                         N
                                           SB ≥
                                                  1 + 1−L s γ N −1
                                                      1+Ls γ Nc
                                                                −1

      for some c > 0.
 1: for k = 0, 1, . . . do
 2:   Construct B k by selecting SB elements from {1, . . . , N } uniformly without replacement such
        that |B k | = SB .
        Calculate the stochastic mini-batch gradient as G(Xk , Ξ, B k ) = S1B i∈B k ∇f (i) (Xk , ξ (i) ).
                                                                             P
 3:
 4:     Xk+1 ∈ Hs (Xk − γG(Xk , Ξ, B k ).


showed the escapability property of the HT-unstable stationary points as one of the crucial properties
of the IHT algorithm. Also, they showed Q-linearly convergence of the IHT algorithm towards strictly
HT-stable stationary points. However, these desirable properties, requires to compute the batch (full)
gradient at each iteration which is computationally expensive or impractical with current GPUs.
On the other hand, almost all training for deep neural networks are done using the mini-batch
stochastic gradient which is a combination of the stochastic approximation Robbins & Monro (1951)
implemented by the backpropagation algorithm Rumelhart et al. (1986). By taking the mini-batch
stochastic approximation, we consider solving Problem (P) using the mini-batch Stochastic Iterative
Hard Thresholding algorithm outlined in Algorithm 1. Similar to practice where the mini-batch size
is fixed beforehand, we fix the mini-batch size at the beginning which is different from previous work
Zhou et al. (2018) in this area. Also, for showing our theoretical results we directly use the mini-batch
stochastic gradient and derive our theoretical results which is different from previous works Chen
& Gu (2016); Li et al. (2016) where the batch (full) gradient is used to show the theoretical results.
As opposed to other works where restricted strong convexity is necessary for deriving convergence
results Liang et al. (2020); Zhou et al. (2018), here the only assumption we make is the restricted
strong smoothness on the objective function not on each individual one. Also, we assume that the
objective function is a bounded below function which is the case for objective functions used in
machine learning applications. Similar to practice where the mini-batch size is fixed beforehand, we
fix the mini-batch size at the beginning which is different from previous works Zhou et al. (2018).

S UMMARY OF C ONTRIBUTIONS

By considering the mini-batch SIHT Algorithm 1 for Problem (P), we develop the following results:

        • We establish a new critical sparse stochastic gradient descent property of the hard threshold-
          ing (HT) operator that has not been found in the literature.
        • For a given step-size 0 < γ < L1s , we find a lower bound on the size of the mini-batch that
          guarantees the expected descent of the objective value function after hardthresholding.
        • Using the sparse stochastic gradient descent property we show that the sequence generated
          by the mini-batch SIHT algorithm is supermartingale and converges with probability one.
        • We show that for a certain class of functions in Problem (P) where f (x, ξ i ) := f (i) (Vi• x)
          f (i) : Rn → R, the sum of norm squared of individual gradients restricted to a set of some
                            PN
          elements J , i.e., i=1 ∥∇J f (i) ∥22 , evaluated at every point is proportionate to the norm of
          the batch gradient ∥∇J f ∥22 where the proportionality constant only depends on the data.
          Moreover, dependency of the proportionality constant on the data is restricted to the set of
          J not the entire data.


2     R ELATED WORK
In order improve computational efficiency of the IHT algorithm, algorithms based on stochastic
hard thresholding try to use the finite-sum structure of problem (P) Nguyen et al. (2017); Li et al.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2016); Shen & Li (2017). The StoIHT algorithm is introduced in Nguyen et al. (2017) where at
each iteration a random element from the sum in Problem (P) is drawn and the associated gradient is
calculated. Basically, the gradient is approximated by a mini-batch stochastic gradient with size one.
The StoIHT algorithm defines a sparse subspace and then projects the updated vector into that. To
show the theoretical results in Nguyen et al. (2017), the restricted strong smoothness condition for
each individual function in Problem (P) is required as well as the restricted strong convexity for the
objective function. In addition, the StoIHT algorithm needs the restricted condition number be to
4/3 which is hard to meet in practice. The stochastic variance reduced gradient hard thresholding
(SVRG-HT) algorithm Li et al. (2016); Shen & Li (2017) tries to mitigate the variance with a
cost of calculating the (batch) full gradient at some stages. This information of the batch gradient
is the key for reducing the variance. Similar to the StoIHT algorithm, the SVRG-HT algorithm
requires the restricted strong smoothness condition for each individual function in Problem (P) as
well as the restricted strong convexity for the objective function. The Accelerated Stochastic Block
Coordinate Gradient Descent with Hard Thresholding (ASBCDHT) algorithm in Chen & Gu (2016) is
a randomized version of the StoIHT algorithm which suffers the drawbacks of the StoIHT algorithm,
i.e., calculating the full gradient and requirement of the restricted strong conditions. The Hybrid
Stochastic Gradient Hard Thresholding (HSG-HT) algorithm in Zhou et al. (2018) is a variant of
stochastic IHT algorithms that uses a mini-batch stochastic gradient at each step. However, from the
theoretical perspective, the size of a mini-batch has to increase as the algorithm progresses. This
makes the algorithm almost deterministic in calculating the gradient and defeats the purpose of using
the mini-batch stochastic gradient. The stochastically controlled stochastic gradients (SCSG-HT)
algorithm in Liang et al. (2020) uses mini-batch stochastic gradients with large batch size as opposed
to the SVRG-HT and the ASBCDHT algorithms to reduce the variance with less computation, i.e.,
not calculating the batch gradient at some steps.
We present the mini-batch stochastic IHT algorithm and show that the stochastic sequence of the
function value is a supermartingale sequence and it converges with probability one. To show our
result, we assume the objective function has the restricted strong smoothness property and is bounded
below which is the case for objective functions used machine learning applications. Also, to the best
of our knowledge, in the regime of sparse optimization, this is the first time in the literature that it is
shown that the sequence of the stochastic function values converges with probability one by fixing
the mini-batch size for all steps.


3    D EFINITIONS

We provide some definitions that will be used throughout the paper.
Definition 1 (Restricted Strong Smoothness (RSS)). A differentiable function f : Rn → R is said to
be restricted strongly smooth with modulus Ls > 0 or is Ls -RSS if
                                       Ls
 f (y) ≤ f (x) + ⟨∇f (x), y − x⟩ +        ∥y − x∥22     ∀x, y ∈ Rn such that ∥x∥0 ≤ s, ∥y∥0 ≤ s. (2)
                                       2
Definition 2 (The HT operator). The HT operator Hs (·) denotes the orthogonal projection onto
multiple subspaces of Rn with dimension 1 ≤ s < n, that is,
                                     Hs (x) ∈ arg min ∥z − x∥2 .                                        (3)
                                                   ∥z∥0 ≤s

Claim 1. The HT operator keeps the s largest entries of its input in absolute values.

For a vector x ∈ Rn , Isx ⊂ {1, . . . , n} denotes the set of indices corresponding to the first s largest
elements of x in absolute values. For example H2 ([1, −3, 1]⊤ ) is either [0, −3, 1]⊤ or [1, −3, 0]⊤
where I2y = {2, 3} and I2y = {1, 2}, respectively. Therefore, the output of it may not be unique.
This clearly shows why HTO is not a convex operator and why there is an inclusion in (3) not an
inequality.
Definition 3 (Convergence with probability one). A random sequence (xk ∈ Rn ) in a sample space
Ω converges to a random variable x∗ with probability one if
                               h                            i
                             P ω ∈ Ω : lim ∥xk (ω) − x∗ ∥ = 0.
                                             k→∞


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     R ESULTS

We consider solving Problem (1) using the mini-batch SIHT Algorithm 1 and develop results that
guarantee the convergence of the sequence of function values generated by the SIHT Algorithm. To
do so, we present our results in two separate subsections. The first part provides stochastic results
characterizing expectation of functions involving the sample average of given vectors. Then, in the
subsequent subsection we use the aforementioned results to show Theorem 3 which establishes a
stochastic gradient result that is the foundation for the convergence of the function value sequence.

4.1   S TOCHASTIC RESULTS FOR SAMPLE AVERAGE

In this subsection, we consider a sample average whose elements are drawn uniformly and without
replacement. Then, we prove Lemma 2 that calculates the expected value of the norm squared of the
sample average based on the covariance matrix of a random vector whose elements are Bernoulli
random variable determining elements of the sample average. Next, in Corollary 1 using Lemma 2
we calculate the expected value of the squared distance between the sample average and the overall
average. This result is extended in Theorem 1 where the expected value is calculated so that one is
able to find the mentioned expectation based on each individual vector and the overall average. We
start with the following well-known lemma.
Lemma 1 (Mathai & Provost (1992)). Let Λ ∈ Rn×n be a deterministic matrix and ξ ∈ Rn be a
random vector that is distributed according to some probability distribution P. Then,
                            h      i                          h i       h i
                        Eξ ξ ⊤ Λξ = trace(ΛCov(ξ)) + E⊤    ξ   ξ  ΛE  ξ  ξ .          (4)

To invoke the above lemma, notice that one can define a random vector whose elements are Bernoulli
random variables determining whether the associated vector is in the sample average or not. Thus we
prove the following lemma.
Lemma 2. Let g(1) , . . . , g(N ) ∈ Rn be N deterministic vectors
                                                                h and B ⊆ {1, . . . , iN } be a random
               1
                 PN (i)                    1        (i)
set. Let ḡ := N i=1 g , G(B) := |B| i∈B g , G := g(1) . . . g(N ) ∈ Rn×N , and
                                             P

z(B) = [z1 (B), . . . , zN (B)]⊤ where zi (B) is a Bernoulli
                                                             random
                                                                     variable such that zi (B) = 1 if
i ∈ B otherwise zi (B) = 0 for i = 1, . . . , N . Assume EB G(B) = ḡ, then for any random set B with
fixed size |B|, the following holds:
                                            1
                                                        ⊤

                         EB ∥G(B)∥2 =                                   + ∥ḡ∥2 .

                                               trace   G  GCov Z(B)                               (5)
                                         |B|2

Once the above result is established, it is straightforward to show the following by
                                                                                    observing
                                                                                              the fact
that the sample average is an unbiased estimator of the overall average, i.e., EB G(B) = ḡ.
Corollary 1. Assume all the assumptions in Lemma 1 hold. Then for any random set B with fixed
size |B|, the following holds:
                                            1
                                                         ⊤

                         EB ∥G(B) − ḡ∥2 =

                                                trace   G  GCov Z(B)                       (6)
                                           |B|2

Finally, we use the above results to prove the following which calculates the expected squared
distance between the sample average and the overall average based on individual vectors and the
overall average. The following result is critical because later we will see that Equation (7) connects
the mini-batch stochastic gradient, the batch gradient, and individual gradients in Problem (P).
Theorem 1. Assume all the assumptions in Lemma 1 hold. If elements of the random set B are drawn
uniformly and without replacement, then
                                     N                                N
                          N − |B|   X (i) 2              N − |B| 1 X
EB ∥G(B) − ḡ∥2 =                       ∥g ∥2 − N ∥ḡ∥2 =                ∥g(i) − ḡ∥22 .

                       |B|N (N − 1) i=1                   |B|N N − 1 i=1
                                                                                    (7)


                                                  4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.2   S TOCHASTIC RESULTS FOR H ARD T HRESHOLDING OPERATOR

The goal of this subsection is to show the random sequence f (xk )k≥1 generated by the mini-batch
SIHT algorithm converges with probability one. To show this we prove that the random sequence of
the function value is a supermartingale sequence so the expected value of the function value sequence
is decreasing. To achieve our goal, we prove the following lemma that provides an upper bound on
the function value evaluated at a thresholded vector. Notice that the following result does not require
the input be an updated vector by the gradient.
Lemma 3. Let f : Rn → R be in C 1 and Ls-RSS. Then for a fixed x ∈ Cs with any Isx , any
0 < γ ≤ L1s , and any given vector g ∈ Rn , either of the following holds for any y ∈ Hs (x − γg)
with any Isy :
                          γ                      γ
        f (y) ≤ f (x) − (1 − Ls γ)∥gIsy ∥22 − ∥gIsx ∥22 + γ⟨δIsy , gIsy ⟩ + γ⟨δI\Isy , xI\Isy ⟩     (8)
                          2                      2
where I = Isx ∪ Isy and δ = g − ∇f (x).

Observe that in the above lemma the vector g can be any vector in Rn . It need not be the gradient
nor the mini-batch gradient. However, in the following lemma we prove that if g is designated to be
an unbiased stochastic approximation of the gradient at an arbitrary point, then the following result
holds.
Lemma 4. Let f : Rn → R be in C 1 and Ls-RSS. Assume g(x, ω) be an unbiased stochastic
approximation of the gradient at x ∈ Rn where ω ∼ D for some distribution D, i.e., Eω [g(x, ω)] =
∇f (x). Then for a fixed x ∈ Cs with any Isx and 0 < γ ≤ L1s , either of the following holds for any
                                         y(ω)
y(ω) ∈ Hs (x − γg(x, ω)) with any Is :
                       γ                                 γ
 Eω [f (Y(ω))] ≤ f (x)− (1−Ls γ)Eω [∥gI Y(ω) (x, ω)∥22 ]− ∥∇Isx f (x)∥22 +γEω [∥δI Y(ω) (ω)∥22 ] (9)
                       2               s                 2                        s

                        Y(ω)
where I(ω) = Isx ∪ Is          and δ(ω) = g(x, ω) − ∇f (x).

The following Theorem is the climax of our technical results because it establishes a stochastic
gradient descent property for the expectation of the function value. Later we will see how Inequality
(11) is used in Theorem 3 to show the sequence of the function values generated by the mini-batch
SIHT is a supermartingale sequence.
Theorem 2. Let f (i) : Rn × Ξ → R be in C 1 1 for i = 1, . . . , N and Ξ = {ξ (1) , . . . , ξ (N ) } be a
                                 PN
given set such that f (x, Ξ) = N1 i=1 f (i) (x, ξ (i) ) be an Ls -RSS function. Assume there exists a
c > 0 2 such that
                          hX N                         i      h               i
                       EJ      ∥∇J f (i) (x, ξ (i) )∥22 ≤ cEJ ∥∇J f (x, Ξ)∥22                        (10)
                               i=1
    all x ∈ Rn and any random index set J ⊆ {1, . . . , n} with |J | ≤ s. Let G(x, Ξ, B) =
for P
 1                (i)
|B|      i∈B ∇f       (x, ξ (i) ) be the mini-batch stochastic gradient at any x ∈ Rn where B ⊆
{1, . . . , N } be a random set whose elements are drawn randomly and uniformly from {1, . . . , N }
without replacement and its size is |B|. For a fixed 0 < γ < L1s , assume the size of B is fixed such

                                                         N −|B|
that |B| ≥ N/ 1 + 1−L      1+Ls γ
                                 s γ N −1
                                     c
                                       −1 and let ζ := |B|(N −1) for N ≥ 2. Then for a fixed x ∈ Cs with
                               N
                                                                                    Y(B)
any Isx the following holds for any Y(B) ∈ Hs (x − γg(x, Ξ, B)) with any Is                :

         h           i            γ
       EB f (Y(B), Ξ) ≤ f (x, Ξ) − ∥∇Isx f (x)∥22
                                  2
                        γ                  c     1 − Ls γ 1          h                    i            (11)
                       − (1 + Ls γ)ζ 1 −     +                EI Y(B) ∥∇I Y(B) f (x, Ξ)∥2
                        2                 N      1 + Ls γ ζ     s        s


where 1 − Nc + 1−L sγ 1
               1+Ls γ ζ ≥ 0.
   1
    The class consisting of all differentiable functions whose derivative is continuous.
   2
    In Remark 1, we explain why such a c always exist for widespread objective functions in machine learning
applications


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A crucial assumption for proving the results in Theorem (11) is the assumption made in Inequality
(10). In the following Claim we show that for a certain class of functions c > 0 always exists and it
does not depend on the function. We will prove that for these special classes of functions the value of
c only depends on the data.
Claim 2. Let the given set Ξ in Problem (P) be defined such that Ξ := {V1• , . . . , VN • } where each
Vi• is the i-th row of a given matrix V ∈ RN ×n . Then the objective function in Problem (P) can be
                           PN
defined as f (x, Ξ) := N1 i=1 f (i) (Vi• x) f (i) : Rn × Ξ → R and the following holds:
    N
    X                                     N2                        n
                                                                         ⊤
                                                                                   o
          ∥∇J f (i) (Vi• x)∥22 ≤                            max      ∥(V r• )J ∥ 2
                                                                                 2    ∥∇J f (x, V)∥22 (12)
    i=1
                                    2
                                   σmin (VI⊤         ⊤
                                           J • IJ • V )
                                                          r=1,...,N


where J ⊆ {1, . . . , n} with |J | ≤ s, IJ • ∈ R|J |×n is a restriction of the Identity matrix whose
                                                       P|J |
rows are associated with indices in J , VI⊤ J • IJ • =
                                                                  ⊤
                                                        i=1 V•i V•i , σmin (·) is the smallest singular
value, V•i is the i-th column of V, and (·)J is a vector restricted to indices in J .
                                                                                 PN
Remark 1. The above claim shows that for a class of functions f (x, Ξ) := N1 i=1 f (i) (Vi• x) the
constant c > 0 in Theorem 3 always exists and it does not depend on the value of x or its gradient
whether it is batch (full) gradient or individual one. For an example of functions belonging to this
class one can think of the mean square error loss used for linear regression as follows:
                                                           N
                                          1             1 X
                            f (x, V) =      ∥Vx − y∥2 =       (Vi• x − yi )2
                                          N             N i=1

where V ∈ RN ×n , Vi• is the i-th row of V, x ∈ Rn is the optimization variable, and y ∈ RN is
the target. Also, the logistic regression loss (binary cross entropy) is a function for which c > 0 in
Inequality (12) always exists since it can be written as follows:
                                            N
                                        1 X
                          f (x, V) =          − y (i) (Vi• x) + log 1 + eVi• x
                                        N i=1

where V ∈ RN ×n whose last column is all one, Vi• is the i-th row of V, Rn ∋ x = [w, b]⊤ such
that w ∈ Rn−1 and b ∈ R are the optimization variables, and y (i) ∈ {0, 1} for i = 1, . . . , N .

Now we can provide a result showing that by fixing a sparse point, one can use the stochastic
mini-batch gradient with a fixed mini-batch size determined in Theorem 3 and decrease the function
value in expectation.
Theorem 3. Assume all the assumptions in Theorem 2 hold. Then for a fixed x ∈ Cs with any Isx the
following holds for any Y(B) ∈ Hs (x − γG(x, Ξ, B)):

                              h             i            γ
                            EB f (Y(B), Ξ) x ≤ f (x, Ξ) − ∥∇Isx f (x)∥22 .                             (13)
                                                         2

The above result is the analogue result to (Damadi & Shen, 2022, Corollary 1).
Theorem 4. Assume all the assumptions in Theorem 2 hold. Let f be a bounded below differential

function and Xk Xk−1 )k≥0 be the stochastic IHT sequence. Then, f (Xk , Ξ, B) Xk          is a
                                                                                                 k≥1
supermartingale sequence and converges to a random variable f ∗ with probability one.

5     C ONCLUSION
We showed the stochastic sequence generated by the mini-batch stochastic IHT is a supermartingale
sequence converging with probability one. To show this result we used the stochastic gradient descent
property that we derived where we utilized the property of the mini-batch stochastic gradient as the
sample sum of a finite sum.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Sohail Bahmani, Bhiksha Raj, and Petros T Boufounos. Greedy sparsity-constrained optimization.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 14(Mar):807–841, 2013.
Amir Beck and Yonina C Eldar. Sparsity constrained nonlinear optimization: Optimality conditions
 and algorithms. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(3):1480–1509, 2013.
Thomas Blumensath. Accelerated iterative hard thresholding. Signal Processing, 92(3):752–756,
  2012.
Thomas Blumensath and Mike E Davies. Iterative thresholding for sparse approximations. Journal
  of Fourier analysis and Applications, 14(5):629–654, 2008.
Thomas Blumensath and Mike E Davies. Iterative hard thresholding for compressed sensing. Applied
  and computational harmonic analysis, 27(3):265–274, 2009.
Jinghui Chen and Quanquan Gu. Accelerated stochastic block coordinate gradient descent for sparsity
   constrained nonconvex optimization. In UAI, 2016.
Saeed Damadi and Jinglai Shen. Gradient properties of hard thresholding operator. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.08247, 2022.
Saeed Damadi, Erfan Nouri, and Hamed Pirsiavash. Amenable sparse network investigator. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2202.09284, 2022.
Prateek Jain, Ambuj Tewari, and Purushottam Kar. On iterative hard thresholding methods for
  high-dimensional m-estimation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014.
Rajiv Khanna and Anastasios Kyrillidis. Iht dies hard: Provable accelerated iterative hard thresholding.
  In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 188–198. PMLR, 2018.
Xingguo Li, Raman Arora, Han Liu, Jarvis Haupt, and Tuo Zhao. Nonconvex sparse learning via
  stochastic optimization with progressive variance reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.02711,
  2016.
Guannan Liang, Qianqian Tong, Chunjiang Zhu, and Jinbo Bi. An effective hard thresholding method
  based on stochastic variance reduction for nonconvex sparse learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 1585–1592, 2020.
Bo Liu, Xiao-Tong Yuan, Lezi Wang, Qingshan Liu, and Dimitris N Metaxas. Dual iterative hard
  thresholding: From non-convex sparse minimization to non-smooth concave maximization. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2179–2187. PMLR, 2017.
Haoyang Liu and Rina Foygel Barber. Between hard and soft thresholding: optimal iterative
  thresholding algorithms. Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, 9(4):899–933, 2020.
Zhaosong Lu. Iterative hard thresholding methods for l0 regularized convex cone programming.
  Mathematical Programming, 147(1):125–154, 2014.
Zhaosong Lu. Optimization over sparse symmetric sets via a nonmonotone projected gradient method.
  arXiv: Optimization and Control, 2015.
Arakaparampil M Mathai and Serge B Provost. Quadratic forms in random variables: theory and
  applications. Dekker, 1992.
Nam Nguyen, Deanna Needell, and Tina Woolf. Linear convergence of stochastic iterative greedy
  algorithms with sparse constraints. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 63(11):6869–6895,
  2017.
Lili Pan, Shenglong Zhou, Naihua Xiu, and Houduo Qi. A convergent iterative hard thresholding
  for sparsity and nonnegativity constrained optimization. Pacific Journal of Optimization, 13(2):
  325–353, 2017.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Herbert Robbins and Sutton Monro. A stochastic approximation method. The annals of mathematical
  statistics, pp. 400–407, 1951.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by
  back-propagating errors. nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
Jie Shen and Ping Li. A tight bound of hard thresholding. The Journal of Machine Learning Research,
   18(1):7650–7691, 2017.
Trung Vu and Raviv Raich. Accelerating iterative hard thresholding for low-rank matrix completion
  via adaptive restart. In ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 2917–2921. IEEE, 2019.
Rui Wang, Naihua Xiu, and Shenglong Zhou. Fast newton method for sparse logistic regression.
  arXiv, (1901.02768), 2019.
Fan Wu and Wei Bian. Accelerated iterative hard thresholding algorithm for l0 regularized regression
  problem. Journal of Global Optimization, 76(4):819–840, 2020.
Chen Zhao, Naihua Xiu, Houduo Qi, and Ziyan Luo. A lagrange–newton algorithm for sparse
  nonlinear programming. Mathematical Programming, pp. 1–26, 2021.
Pan Zhou, Xiaotong Yuan, and Jiashi Feng. Efficient stochastic gradient hard thresholding. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Shenglong Zhou, Lili Pan, and Naihua Xiu. Subspace newton method for the l0 -regularized optimiza-
  tion. arXiv, (2004.05132), 2020.
Shenglong Zhou, Naihua Xiu, and Hou-Duo Qi. Global and quadratic convergence of newton
  hard-thresholding pursuit. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 22(12):1–45, 2021.
Wenxing Zhu, Zhengshan Dong, Yuanlong Yu, and Jianli Chen. Lagrange dual method for sparsity
 constrained optimization. IEEE Access, 6:28404–28416, 2018.


                                                 8
