Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


TABULAR DATA TO I MAGE G ENERATION : B ENCHMARK
DATA , A PPROACHES , AND E VALUATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                                 A BSTRACT

          In this work, we study the problem of generating a set of images from an arbitrary
          tabular dataset. The set of generated images provides an intuitive visual summary
          of the tabular data that can be quickly and easily communicated and understood
          by the user. More specifically, we formally introduce this new dataset to image
          generation task and discuss a few motivating applications including exploratory
          data analysis and understanding customer segments for creating better marketing
          campaigns. We then curate a benchmark dataset for training such models, which
          we release publicly for others to use and develop new models for other important
          applications of interest. Further, we describe a general and flexible framework that
          serves as a fundamental basis for studying and developing models for this new
          task of generating images from tabular data. From the framework, we propose
          a few different approaches with varying levels of complexity and tradeoffs. One
          such approach leverages both numerical and textual data as the input to our image
          generation pipeline. The pipeline consists of an image decoder and a conditional
          auto-regressive sequence generation model which also includes a pre-trained tabular
          representation in the input layer. We evaluate the performance of these approaches
          through several quantitative metrics (FID for image quality and LPIPS scores for
          image diversity).


1    I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, conditional image generation has been one of the most important directions in the
line of research for generative models, due to both its technical challenges and numerous potential
applications of such technology. However, most of the works that investigates conditional generation
of images consider images (Gatys et al., 2016) or text (Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022) as input. Based
on this fact, it is natural to ask whether we can extend the input to other data types to discover
the potential benefit of image generation models to a larger variety of domains. Hence, in this
work, we study the possibility of generating images from a given tabular data, motivated by its
promising capability to be applied in customer segmentation analysis for marketers and exploratory
data analysis.
More specifically, we consider the following problem. Given a (tabular) dataset, or more generally a
subset of rows and columns of the dataset1 , how can we automatically generate a set of high quality
images that describe it? Additionally, the set of images generated from the dataset should characterize
the key trends, patterns, and segments (clusters) in the data. Such image generation model would
yield interesting possibilities. For instance, suppose we have a dataset of customers and the items
they purchased, then instead of performing a thorough data mining that requires intensive technical
expertise, an image that illustrates a specific segment of customers purchasing specific items already
reveals valuable information about the underlying traits of consumer behaviors, which can be easily
used in future targeted marketing campaigns. Hence, tabular-data-to-image generation can likely
bring up interesting usage.
Tabular data to image generation has many important and practical applications. One important
application is as a fundamental tool for exploratory data analysis. Consider a user that is interactively
    1
      For convenience, the term dataset is used to refer to a subset of rows and columns from a dataset as well as
the full dataset.


                                                        1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


exploring a large dataset of interest using a standard visual analytics platform such as Tableau. In
Figure 1, we provide an intuitive example demonstrating the utility of this problem for real-time
interactive data exploratory and understanding. In this example, the user is exploring a large dataset
using an interactive scatter plot matrix where they can select the data points of interest to explore by
simply brushing over them. The user draws a rectangle around the data points (rows) and attributes
(columns) of interest, which intuitively selects all such rows that satisfy the user-defined constraint.
This selection then triggers a query to our data table to image generation model, resulting in the
top-3 images being generated that are shown on the right in Figure 1. Most importantly, the user can
immediately understand what the data points they selected actually represent by simply examining
the intuitive set of images generated from the tabular data selected. They can then use the interface
to select other groups of points representing a subset of rows in the tabular data, and immediately
understand the essence of what they represent.


                                                   le
                                              a tab
                                             t
                                           da


                                                   Location   Date     Profit (mil.)   Visitors (mil.)   Category   …
                                                    Seattle   1/1/22        5               4.7           Jackets   …
                                                    Seattle   1/2/22       2.8              4.5           Jackets   …
                                                    Seattle   1/3/22       7.2              2.3           Jackets   …
                                                      …        …            …                …              …       …
                                                   San Jose   1/1/12       1.1              5.1            Tees     …
                                                   San Jose   1/2/22       2.8               2             Tees     …
                                                   San Jose   1/3/22        5               3.4            Tees     …
                                                      …        …            …                …              …       …


                                                                                                                        generated
                                                            Data Table to                                                 images
                                                          Image Generation
 User interactively selects rows and                           Model
  columns of interest via brushing

Figure 1: Tabular Dataset to Image Generation for Interactive Exploratory Data Analysis. See text
for detailed discussion.

In this work, we address the problem of tabular-data-to-image generation by analyzing multiple
possible approaches. To evaluate the performance of each of these approaches, we construct a
benchmark dataset consisting of 300 tabular-data and images that are paired up based on a simple
mapping rule. The possible approaches include directly combining existing implementations of
DALL-E and GPT-3, and an end-to-end approach, in which we train a model similar to the architecture
of DALL-E. We measure the performance of these approaches by computing the FID and LPIPS of
the generated images with respect to the benchmark dataset, which captures the generated images’
quality and diversity respectively.
The experiment results show that the approaches combining pre-existing models tend to generate
images with better quality; however in terms of diversity, the end-to-end model we trained yields a
better performance. Nevertheless, the qualitative results indicate that all proposed approaches still
have significant room for improvement, and it is worth investigating if a better performance metric
should be employed.
This work makes the following key contributions. First, we formally introduce the problem of
image generation conditioned on tabular data input, which to the best of our knowledge has not
been considered by any related works before. Second, we curate a benchmark dataset for training
models specifically for the new problem studied in this work. Third, we propose and develop a few
different approaches for solving it, and extensively evaluate them the quality and diversity of the
images generated from such models. Furthermore, the framework proposed in this work is highly
flexible, giving rise to a variety of other models that can be investigated in the future.

Summary of main contributions The key contributions of this work are as follows:

       • Tabular Dataset to Image Generation Problem: To the best of our knowledge, this work
         is the first to study the problem of generating images from a tabular dataset. Furthermore,


                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         we also discuss a number of important applications for interactive exploratory data analysis
         and to better understand segments in an online marketing application.
       • Benchmark dataset: To study this new and important task, we curated a benchmark dataset
         for model training and release it to the public for others to study this new task and develop
         better models for table to image generation, as well as to leverage the trained models for
         other important and novel applications in practice.
       • Framework and Approaches: We present a general framework for studying and developing
         approaches to solve the proposed data table to image generation task. Furthermore, we
         propose and evaluate a few different approaches for solving this task and extensively evaluate
         the quality and diversity of the generated images from such models across a range of different
         categories in our benchmark dataset.
       • Evaluation: Experiments are designed to extensively evaluate the proposed models for a
         variety of data tasks. The proposed models along with the images generated are evaluated
         based on image quality and diversity of the images recommended.

2    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
We aim to generate images describing the underlying segment/trend of the given table. To formulate
this mathematically, let L ⊆ Σ∗ be a language over some finite alphabet Σ (e.g. think of Σ consisting
of all ASCII symbols) and let y ∈ Lm×n be a tabular input with m rows and n columns over the
language L. For simplicity, we also mandate the first row of y, y1: to always be the column names.
Our goal can hence be described as, given a tabular input y ∈ Lm×n , we aim to generate an
                                   b ∈ Nh×w×d , where h, w, d is the height, width and depth that
informative and high-quality image x
resembles real-world images and contains relevant information about y.
In order to achieve our goal, one possible approach is to assume that the real-world images x and the
tables y follow a joint distribution p(x, y), therefore given a table y, we can model the mapping rule
h : y → x by the conditional distribution p(x|y), which can be learned by constructing a training
dataset {(yi , xi )}ni=1 . After training on the dataset, we thus obtain a table-to-image model ĥ : y → x
approximating the true conditional distribution, and we can then use it to infer a set of images for any
new unseen tabular dataset ynew as x      b = ĥ(ynew ). We will implement and analyze this approach in
detail in the later sections.
To evaluate the performance of approaches that generate images given tabular input, we adopt
common metrics that measure the quality and diversity of the images generated, namely FID scores
Heusel et al. (2017) and LPIPS Zhang et al. (2018). However, despite methods for quantifying the
correlations between text and images has been proposed recently (e.g. CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)),
it is not obvious how the relevancy between tables and images should be measured, since merely
considering the textual component within tabular data risks losing structural information contained in
the table, which is in fact a key component we aim to model during the image generation process in
our work. Therefore, we simplify the connection between tables and images based on a simple rule
to be described in the next section, and inspect relevancy qualitatively based on the visual perception
of the image.

3    B ENCHMARK DATASET
We benchmark the performance of table-to-image generation models based on a dataset consisting of
300 pairs of table and images. All images are downloaded from the Internet based on search results
using keywords of common groceries, e.g. meat or fish; and each of the tables contains a subset of
records found in Kaggle’s open dataset ”Marketing Campaign” (Saldanha, 2020), in which we only
include the columns that indicates the amount of sweet, meat, fish, fruit, gold and wine purchased
within a transaction by a consumer. The relevant columns are then standardized based on their
column-wise mean and standard deviation, and we limit the resulting float number representation to 4
decimal points.
Next, we employ the idea of weak supervision (Ratner et al., 2016) in order to construct the dataset
of table-image pairs. Weak supervision is a labeling technique that creates a data-label pair by


                                                    3
 Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


assigning labels based on a simplified mapping rule that can be done efficiently and automatically,
instead of establishing the mapping manually, which can often be expensive and hard to obtain.
Although the idea of weak supervision is first proposed to overcome the difficulty when dealing with
insufficient training data for classification tasks, in this work we explore its possible application in
image generation tasks and adopt its idea in constructing our benchmark dataset.
 Hence, under this paradigm, we identify simple relations between a given table and an image based
 on the following rule: for a table y ∈ Lm×n whose rows are sampled from the aforementioned
 Kaggle dataset and normalized column-wise, we assume the first row y1: consists of column names
 and ⟨yij ⟩ ∈ R for all i ∈ {2, ..., m} and j ∈ {1, ..., n}, where the operator ⟨·⟩ : L → R ∪ {⊥}
 extracts the numerical value of a string in the language L if the string represents a valid decimal
 number, otherwise it returns ⊥. We then associate an image produced by a keyword y1j with the table
 y if ∀k ∈ {2, ..., m}, ykj = arg maxi∈{1,2,...,n} ⟨yki ⟩ and define the column j as the pivot column of
 table y; in other words, we say column j is the pivot column if for every row k, ⟨ykj ⟩ is greater than
 that of any other columns in the same row, and an image produced using the pivot column name as
 the keyword is paired up with y.
With this procedure, we defined 300 table-image pairs across 6 categories: meat, wine, sweet, fish,
gold, fruit, each with 50 table-image pairs. All images are resized to 256 × 256, and all tables consist
of 5 to 20 rows.

 4     A PPROACH
In this section, we formally describe the proposed approaches for our new problem studied in this
work. We discuss the advantages of each and begin by describing the simplest first. Within each
subsections, we will also discuss simple variations of each methods and their possible improvements.
Since generating images based on tabular data is a new problem that has not been investigated before,
we start with straightforward composition of pre-existing models to gain better understanding of the
key technical challenges for table-image generation, as well as setting a baseline for comparing the
strengths and weakness of different approaches. We will also investigate the possibility of directly
designing an end-to-end approach for table-image generation, and compare the results quantitatively
and qualitatively against the simpler composite approaches.

 4.1   DALLE-C OLUMN NAME

 For a given table y ∈ Lm×n generated based on the process described before, we directly input the
 pivot column names to DallE (Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022) and select the top images generated based
 on their CLIP score with respect to the input column name. For example, given a table whose pivot
 column name is ”MntFruits”, we will directly input ”MntFruits” into DallE to generate images.

 4.2   DALLE-GPT3-C APTION

 Similar to the previous approach, we also pick the pivot column name from the input table. However,
 instead of directly feeding it into Dalle, we first input the pivot column name to GPT-3 (Brown et al.,
 2020) along with a textual description asking it to generate a suitable text prompt, and after retrieving
 its reply, we use it as the input to Dalle and finally select the top images with the highest CLIP score.
 For instance, with a table whose pivot column name is ”MntWines”, we input the following text to
 GPT-3: Generate an image caption using ”MntWines.” The GPT-3 model will then sample a reply
 from the underlying conditional distribution, say, A bottle of wine on a mountaintop, with the caption
”MntWines: The best wine for your next adventure.” We will then use its reply directly as the input to
 dalle-mini for image generation.

 4.3   DALLE-TABBIE

 Given the above approaches, it is natural to ask whether we can design an end-to-end process for
 the image generation process (Figure 2). Hence, based on DALL-E and DALLE-mini’s model
 architecture (Ramesh et al., 2021), we design a tabular-data-to-image generation model based on
 two components: a VQGAN image encoder/decoder (Esser et al., 2021) and a BART sequence-
 to-sequence model (Lewis et al., 2019) that outputs image tokens auto-regressively given tabular


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


representations as inputs. We mathematically introduce the objective functions our model is trained
to optimize in the following paragraphs.
Same as we have defined above, let y ∈ Lm×n be a tabular input and x  b ∈ Nh×w×d be a generated
RGB image with height h, width w and color depth d. We also define x ∈ Nh×w×d as a real-world
RGB image and z ∈ Z as the latent representation for an image. Hence, assuming the data generation
process can be modeled by the Markov chain x → z → y, we can lower-bound the log-likelihood of
x, y, p(x, y) by

                            Z                                    Z                  h           i
  log p(x, y) = log           p(x, y, z)dz = log      p(x)p(z|x)p(y|z)dz = log Ez|x p(x)p(y|z)
                        hz∈Z                    i z∈Z
                  ≥ Ez|x log p(x) + log p(y|z)
                        h                                                                     i
                  = Ez|x log p(x) + log p(y|z) − log p(z|x) + log p(z|x) + log p(z) − log p(z)
                        h            i
                  = Ez|x log p(x|z) − DKL (p(z|x)||p(y, z))
                               h            i
                  ≈ Ez∼qψ (z|x) log pθ (x|z) − DKL (qψ (z|x)||pϕ (z|y)p(y))


where DKL is the KL-divergence between two probability distributions, qψ , pθ is the encoder and
decoder of VQGAN respectively, and pϕ is the BART decoder. The last line in the objective
function above is commonly known as ELBO in variational inference literature, and in our model we
approximate those distributions through common neural networks. However, in our problem setup
we have multiple distributions to optimize, therefore we follow a similar training approach to that of
DALL-E mini’s by splitting the training process into 3 stages, which we describe in detail below.

1. Fine-tuning VQGAN Same as previous works, we started with the VQGAN model trained on
ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). We fine-tuned our VQGAN model for 10 epochs to adapt it to our
image dataset’s distribution.

2. Fine-tuning TABBIE Since our model crucially relies on tabular data as input, we need to
produce a good representation for tables. In this work, we utilize TABBIE (Iida et al., 2021) in our
model to extract relevant structural and textual/numerical information for the input table. TABBIE
learns tabular representations through an objective known as corrupt cell detection, which asks the
model to detect if any element within the table was replaced by an inconsistent one. The embeddings
produced by TABBIE has shown to perform well on various tabular data mining tasks, therefore we
utilized the pretrained representation as input to the BART encoder. To ensure the embedding vectors
align with the tables we have, we fine-tuned TABBIE based on the default configurations.


                                                                                               Transformer generates image
                                                                                               representation based on input
                                                                                               tabular (seq2seq)

                                                                     Pretrained tabular
                                       Cluster as tables
                                                                     representation
      Clustered data as input
                                                                                             Auto-regressive
                                                                                             (decoder-only )
                                                                                             transformer


                                                                          Pretrained image
                                Pair up tables with real-world            representation
                                images via weak supervision               (e.g., VQGAN)

      Figure 2: Overview of the end-to-end training process. See text for detailed discussion.



                                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3. Training BART Finally, based on the training procedure of DALL-E mini, we followed a similar
approach for training the transformer. We preprocessed the training data by first encoding the images
into tokens using VQGAN, and paired them up with their corresponding table’s embedding vectors.
The tabular embeddings are then passed into BART, aiming to produce an output sequence that
matches the corresponding image. We trained the model for 30 epochs until the validation loss begins
to deviate from the training loss. We also performed a grid search for the hyperparameters used in
sampling from the conditional distribution for image generation by maximizing the CLIP score of the
generated images with respect to their pivot column names.


4.4   D ISCUSSION

It is also possible to generate images following a similar methodology when textual input is given,
this includes directly inputting the table into Dalle-mini, asking GPT-3 to generate a caption given
the tabular input, and a more comprehensive approach that trains a tabular-image joint representation
similar to CLIP. However, how to define a good paring rule between a table and an image remains the
main challenge for producing a model that generates meaningful images.
Aside from the difficulty of data preparation and bechmarking, since we have only focused on dealing
with tables that mostly contain numerical information, it is also worth investigating for the end-to-end
model approach, whether a latent representation, especially those trained based on tokenization the
input first actually encodes those numerical trends. In fact, it will also be interesting if we can directly
use the numerical values within the table as its embedding vectors, given that we have identified a
reasonable method to ensure the consistency of the embedding dimensions.
However, as we mentioned above, we currently limit the input table to only contain numerical data,
and it is still unclear what we should expect if other data type are also present in the input table.
Furthermore, even for our current task, it is also worth asking if we can do anything beyond merely
generating an image of an item, such as including persons or even backgrounds that also reflects
some information about the input table. We leave these possible improvements as part of our future
directions.


5     R ELATED W ORK

5.1   T EXT- BASED I MAGE G ENERATION

Recently, there has been a lot of work towards generating images from textual prompts. Some of the
most famous results are those of DALLE Ramesh et al. (2021) and DALLE-2 Ramesh et al. (2022).
The model architecture of DALLE consists of an image encoder/decoder and a transformer, and it
learns to generate images by concatenating the textual input token along with the image tokens by
modeling it as a sequence-to-sequence task, thus taking advantage of the powerful capabilities of
transformers to produce an image as the output sequence. On the other hand, DALLE-2 leverages
CLIP embeddings that jointly model text/image pairs for image generation. There are also other
works (Saharia et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021) that investigates text-to-image
generation methods. However, all of these works have focused on generating images from text-based
prompts whereas we focus on image generation from numeric tabular data.


5.2   TABULAR DATA R EPRESENTATION L EARNING

There has been a lot of recent work focused on developing models for learning representations from
tabular data to perform various downstream tasks, including trend detection and tabular question-
answering. We highlight a recent approach known as TABBIE (Iida et al., 2021) that learns the
embedding of tables by training on the objective of detecting corrupted cells. One notable results
of the embdiings learned by TABBIE is that for identifying numeric trends in the input table, it
outperforms multiple previous works and demonstrates the potential of applying these embeddings to
more complex tasks. Nonetheless, all of these approaches have not focused on our specific task of
generating an image or set of images from a given tabular dataset.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first to introduce this task, curate a benchmark dataset
for it, develop techniques for solving it, and evaluating the approaches both in terms of quality and
diversity of the images generated by them from the tabular datasets.

                      Table 1: Image quality (FID) and diversity (LPIPS) results.
      Data    Model                      Image Quality (FID) ↓       Image Diversity (LPIPS) ↑
              DALLE-ColumnName               415.29 ± 18.18                  0.75 ± 0.05
      Gold    DALLE-GPT3-Caption             335.93 ± 16.53                  0.72 ± 0.01
              DALLE-Tabbie                   701.04 ± 29.43                  0.77 ± 0.06
              DALLE-ColumnName               295.94 ± 15.22                  0.77 ± 0.04
      Wine    DALLE-GPT3-Caption             277.66 ± 19.42                  0.79 ± 0.03
              DALLE-Tabbie                   338.90 ± 33.54                  0.86 ± 0.07
              DALLE-ColumnName               492.55 ± 33.32                  0.78 ± 0.03
      Meat    DALLE-GPT3-Caption             358.04 ± 29.98                  0.72 ± 0.05
              DALLE-Tabbie                   515.35 ± 46.32                  0.81 ± 0.06
              DALLE-ColumnName               354.21 ± 20.61                  0.82 ± 0.03
      Fruit   DALLE-GPT3-Caption             426.27 ± 22.28                  0.79 ± 0.02
              DALLE-Tabbie                   359.18 ± 38.66                  0.78 ± 0.05
              DALLE-ColumnName               327.84 ± 17.10                  0.78 ± 0.04
      Sweet   DALLE-GPT3-Caption             465.79 ± 23.07                  0.70 ± 0.04
              DALLE-Tabbie                   437.07 ± 43.15                  0.83 ± 0.07
              DALLE-ColumnName               506.60 ± 12.57                  0.73 ± 0.02
      Fish    DALLE-GPT3-Caption             509.78 ± 13.66                  0.74 ± 0.03
              DALLE-Tabbie                   530.37 ± 26.70                  0.78 ± 0.06



6      E XPERIMENTS

To understand the utility and effectiveness of the proposed approaches for this new problem, we
designed experiments to quantitatively evaluate the quality and diversity of the images generated from
the various approaches. Furthermore, we also show the actual images generated from the proposed
models and provide a detailed discussion on some of the interesting insights observed.

6.1     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

For each approach, we compute its FID with respect to the benchmark dataset as follows: for DALLE-
ColumnName and DALLE-GPT3-Caption, we randomly partition the 20 images into 4 groups, each
with 5 images, and we measure the FID between the 5 images within each partition against all
images in the benchmark dataset under the same category; and for DALLE-Tabbie, we also randomly
partition the 200 images into 4 groups and measure their FID with respect to the benchmark dataset.
Note that since we observed the variance of DALLE-Tabbie to be typically larger than the other
approaches, we reported results of 200 generated images. Nevertheless, similar performance was
observed when using only 20 images as well. To measure LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018), we simply pair
up all the images produced by each approach with those in the benchmark dataset and compute the
mean and variance of the resulting scores.

6.2     Q UANTITATIVE R ESULTS

We quantitatively compare the quality and diversity of the images generated by the proposed models.
For this, we use the FID (Heusel et al., 2017) evaluation metric to quantify the quality of the images
and leverage LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) to evaluate the diversity of the images generated from the
proposed models. Results for various data in our benchmark corpus are reported in Table 1. We
observe that the model generating the highest quality images highly depends on the underlying data
category from the benchmark corpus. Notably, DALLE-GPT3-Caption performed best for Wine,


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) DALLE-ColumnName            (b) DALLE-GPT3-Caption                 (c) DALLE-Tabbie

       Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of the images generated from the different approaches.


Meat, and Gold in terms of the quality of images generated whereas DALLE-ColumnName generated
the highest quality images for Fruit, Sweets, and Fish. Intuitively, Wine and Meat are often purchased
together, and thus this makes sense. Conversely, fruits and sweets are also related. Furthermore, in
nearly all cases, DALLE-Tabbie generates the images with largest diversity. The only exception is for
the fruit dataset where DALLE-ColumnName achieves the best diversity. In this case, DALLE-Tabbie
generates images of very high quality, outperforming DALLE-GPT3-Caption, and relatively close
to the quality of DALLE-ColumnName. Hence, we observe a trade-off between image quality and
diversity.


                                     A   DALLE-ColumnName


                                     B   DALLE-GPT3-Caption


                                         C   DALLE-Tabbie
      Figure 4: Comparison of the diversity of the images generated by the proposed approaches.


6.3     Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

We now compare the images generated from the approaches qualitatively in Figure 3. In particular,
we show images from the fish data generated from each of the approaches described in Section 4.
Interestingly, we see that DALLE-GPT3 generates a painting-like image of a person fishing on a
cloudy day with mountains behind them. However, DALLE-ColumnName generates a more realistic


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


image of a fish whereas DALLE-Tabbie generates an image seemingly in-between these two extremes
in the sense that the fish is realistic looking with some artistic features such as the dorsal fin of
the fish near the top of the generated image in Figure 3. Furthermore, the image genertaed by
DALLE-Tabbie also contains two fish facing in opposite directions. In Figure 4, we investigate the
diversity of the images generated by the proposed approaches. Notably, the images generated by
DALLE-ColumnName are all very similar showing a fish with mostly the same features. Similarly,
DALLE-GPT3-Caption generates images with a very similar scene that includes an individual fishing
with mountains in the background. All of the images have very similar colors as well. Both DALLE-
ColumnName and DALLE-GPT3-Caption suffer in terms of the diversity of images that these models
are capable of generating. However, DALLE-Tabbie is able to generate images that are significantly
more diverse as shown in Figure 4. Notably, the images are even diverse in terms of style, that is,
realistic images as well as those that appear to be drawn, to even those that are a hybrid with some
realistic and artistic features and colors.


7   C ONCLUSION

In this work, we considered the problem of tabular-data-to-image generation motivated by various
real world applications and investigated multiple potential approaches to achieve this task, and to the
best of our knowledge this work is the first to study such problem. We created a benchmark dataset in
order to evaluate the performance of different methods and construct an end-to-end model for image
generation. We identified a framework for developing approaches to solve the proposed problem, and
we evaluated the performance of those approaches quantitatively and qualitatively.
We conclude that future work should develop more sophisticated approaches for this new task and
explore using such techniques for other exciting applications. Furthermore, by releasing an initial
benchmark dataset for this important new learning task in order to facilitate others to work on this
problem and develop new approaches to solve it, we hope that future work will expand and enhance
this initial benchmark dataset with other types of tabular datasets and corresponding image pairs.


R EFERENCES
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.

Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
   248–255, 2009.

Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer. Taming transformers for high-resolution image
  synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 12873–12883, 2021.

Leon A. Gatys, Alexander S. Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolu-
  tional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR), June 2016.

Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. In I. Guyon, U. Von
 Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.

Hiroshi Iida, Dung Thai, Varun Manjunatha, and Mohit Iyyer. Tabbie: Pretrained representations of
  tabular data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02584, 2021.

Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Ves Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training for
 natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.13461,
 2019.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Alexander J Ratner, Christopher M De Sa, Sen Wu, Daniel Selsam, and Christopher Ré. Data
  programming: Creating large training sets, quickly. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg, I. Guyon,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 29. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2016.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
  ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10684–10695, 2022.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Rodolfo Saldanha. Marketing campaign (kaggle dataset), 2020.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
  effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 586–595, 2018.


                                                10
