Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D ETERMINISTIC TRAINING OF GENERATIVE AUTOEN -
CODERS USING INVERTIBLE LAYERS

 Gianluigi Silvestri∗                                                           Daan Roos* †
 OnePlanet Research Center, imec-the Netherlands                                UvA-Bosch Delta Lab
 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour                           d.f.a.roos@uva.nl
 gianluigi.silvestri@imec.nl

 Luca Ambrogioni
 Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
 Radboud University
 l.ambrogioni@donders.ru.nl



                                                A BSTRACT

             In this work, we provide a deterministic alternative to the stochastic variational
             training of generative autoencoders. We refer to these new generative autoencoders
             as AutoEncoders within Flows (AEF), since the encoder and decoder are defined
             as affine layers of an overall invertible architecture. This results in a deterministic
             encoding of the data, as opposed to the stochastic encoding of VAEs. The paper
             introduces two related families of AEFs. The first family relies on a partition of
             the ambient space and is trained by exact maximum-likelihood. The second family
             exploits a deterministic expansion of the ambient space and is trained by maxi-
             mizing the log-probability in this extended space. This latter case leaves complete
             freedom in the choice of encoder, decoder and prior architectures, making it a
             drop-in replacement for the training of existing VAEs and VAE-style models. We
             show that these AEFs can have strikingly higher performance than architecturally
             identical VAEs in terms of log-likelihood and sample quality, especially for low
             dimensional latent spaces. Importantly, we show that AEF samples are substantially
             sharper than VAE samples.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014) have maintained
an enduring popularity in the machine learning community in spite of the impressive performance of
other generative models (Goodfellow et al., 2014; Karras et al., 2020; Van Oord et al., 2016; Van den
Oord et al., 2016; Salimans et al., 2017; Dinh et al., 2014; Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Dinh et al.,
2017; Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Nichol & Dhariwal, 2021). One key
feature of VAEs is their ability to project complex data into a semantically meaningful set of latent
variables. This feature is considered particularly useful in fields such as model-based reinforcement
learning, where temporally linked VAE architectures form the backbone of most state-of-the-art world-
models (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018b;a; Hafner et al., 2020; Gregor et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2020;
Hafner et al., 2021). Another attractive feature of VAEs is that they leave ample architectural freedom
when compared with other likelihood-based generative models, with their signature encoder-decoder
architectures being popular in many areas of ML beside generative modeling (Ronneberger et al.,
2015; Vaswani et al., 2017; Radford et al., 2021; Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022). However, VAE training
is complicated by the lack of a closed-form expression for the log-likelihood, with the variational gap
between the surrogate loss (i.e. the ELBO) and the true log-likelihood being responsible for unstable
training and, at least in non-hierarchical models, sub-optimal encoding and sample quality (Hoffman
& Johnson, 2016; Zhao et al., 2017; Alemi et al., 2018; Cremer et al., 2018; Mattei & Frellsen,
2018). Consequently, a large fraction of VAE research is devoted to tightening the gap between
    ∗
        Equal contribution.
    †
        Work done while at Radboud University


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the ELBO and the true likelihood of the model. Gap reduction can be achieved both by devising
alternative lower bounds (Burda et al., 2015; Bamler et al., 2017) or more flexible parameterized
posterior distributions (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015; Kingma et al., 2016). Normalizing flows (NF)
are deep generative models comprised of tractably invertible layers, whose log-likelihood can be
computed in closed-form using the change of variable formula (Kobyzev et al., 2020; Papamakarios
et al., 2021). However, this constraint appears to be at odds with autoencoder architectures, which
map all relevant information in a latent space of different (often smaller) dimensionality. This is
potentially problematic since naturalistic data such as images and speech waveforms are thought to
live, at least approximately, in a lower dimensional manifold of the ambient space (Bengio et al.,
2013; F. et al., 2016; Pope et al., 2021). It is therefore common to use hybrid VAE-flow models
that deploy NFs for modeling the VAE prior and/or the variational posterior (Rezende & Mohamed,
2015; Kingma et al., 2016). However, training these models is often a delicate business as changes in
the encoder and the prior cause a misalignment from the posterior, increasing the gap and causing
a shifting-target dynamic that introduces instabilities and decreases performance. For this reason,
the complex autoregressive or flow priors common in modern applications are often trained ex-post
after VAE training (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Razavi et al., 2019). In this paper we introduce
a new approach for training VAE-style architectures with deterministically encoded latents. The
key insight is that we can formulate an autoencoder within a conventional invertible architecture by
using invertible affine layers and by keeping track of the deviations between data and predictions.
Importantly, this can be done while leaving complete freedom in the design of the encoder, decoder
and prior, which makes our approach a drop-in replacement for the training of existing VAE and
VAE-style models. The resulting models can be trained by maximum-likelihood using the change of
variables formula. We denote these new generative autoencoders as autoencoders within flows (AEF),
since the autoencoder architecture is constructed inside a NF architecture.



2    P RELIMINARIES

In this section, we will outline the standard theory behind probabilistic generative modeling and
non-linear dimensionality reduction. Consider a dataset comprised of data-points x ∈ RN . We refer
to RN as the ambient space. The dataset is assumed to be sampled from a D-dimensional curved
manifold M embedded in the ambient space. We refer to M as the signal space. The dimensionality
of the signal space reflects the true dimensionality of the signal while the dimensionality of the
ambient space depends on the particularities of the measurement device (e.g. the nominal resolution
of the camera).
Variational autoencoders: VAEs are deep generative models in which the density of each data-
point depends on a D-dimensional stochastic latent variable z ∈ RD , which parameterizes the
signal space. The emission model is often assumed to be a diagonal Gaussian with parameters
determined by deep architectures: p(x | zj ; θ) = N (xj ; f (z; θ), fs (z; θ)) , where θ denotes the
model parameters. In this formula, the parameterized functions f (z; θ) and fs (z; θ) are the outputs
of a decoder architecture. The emission model is paired with a prior p0 (z; θ) over the latents.
While the marginal likelihood is intractable, it is possible to derive a lower bound (the ELBO) by
introducing a parameterized approximate posterior defined by the encoder architectures gm (x; ψ)
and gs (x; ψ), which respectively return the posterior mean and scale over the latent variables. An
additional normalizing flow transformation n−1  post (·; ψ) is often included in order to account for the
non-Gaussianity of the posterior (Kingma et al., 2016). Stochastic estimates of the gradient of the
ELBO can be computed by expressing samples from the posterior as a differentiable deterministic
function of the random samples (Kingma & Welling, 2014; Rezende et al., 2014). For our purposes,
it is important to notice that the Gaussian reparameterization formula:


                               z(x, ϵ; ψ) = gm (x; ψ) + gs (x; ψ) ⊙ ϵ ,                              (1)


defines an affine invertible layer, formally analogous to those used in RealNVPs and related NFs
(Dinh et al., 2017; Papamakarios et al., 2017). In the simplified case of Gaussian residual model with
variance σ 2 , the reparameterization of the ELBO leads to the following surrogate objective function


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for one data-point x:
                                                                                           
                                    1                         2
             LVAE (θ, σ 2 , ψ) =Eϵ                                                                     (2)
                                                                                        
                                    2σ 2 x − f z(x, ϵ; ψ); θ 2 − log p0 (z(x, ϵ; ψ); θ)
                                                                                       }
                                                               } |          {z
                                                                               Prior loss
                                    |           {z
                                            Reconstruction error
                                     N
                                 +     log 2πσ 2 −        H[q]           .
                                     2                    |{z}
                                                     Posterior entropy

While this loss has an interpretable appeal, it is important to keep in mind that it is just a tractable
surrogate for the log-likelihood. The gap between the ELBO and log-likelihood can be decomposed
into an inference gap and an amortization gap (Cremer et al., 2018). Large gaps lead to highly
sub-optimal training since the network is trained on a loose approximation of the true objective.
Normalizing flows and affine layers: The unavailability of a closed form log-likelihood introduces
a sub-optimality in VAE training that can only be remedied using complex posterior models or high
variance lower bounds. NFs are alternative methods that assume the latent manifold to have the
same dimensionality of the ambient space. Consider M = RN and ϕ(y; θ) being an invertible
differentiable mapping. Under these assumptions, the log-likelihood of the model can be expressed in
closed form using the change-of-variable formula log p(x) = log p0 (ϕ−1 (y)) + log det Dϕ−1 (y) ,
where Dϕ−1 (y) is the Jacobi matrix of the inverse mapping. If the base distribution p0 is standard
normal, the loss has the form
                                        1 −1         2
                           LNF (θ) =       ϕ (x; θ) + log det Dϕ−1 (x; θ) .                              (3)
                                        2
NF architectures are designed by composing K invertible layers ϕk . Affine layers divide the variables
in two blocks yk1 and yk2 , one of which remain unchanged and the other is scaled and translated based
on the first ϕk (yk2 ) = yk+1
                          2
                                = s(yk1 ) ⊙ yk2 + m(yk1 ), where s is an arbitrary positive-valued function
and m is an unconstrained function. When applied in the inverse direction, this layer becomes
  2
(yk+1  − m(yk+11
                    ))/s(yk1 ), which "predicts away" the mean and variance of one block given the other.
Using several of these layers with randomized partitions gradually removes statistical dependencies
until at the last layer the resulting y variable approximately matches the uncorrelated Gaussian target
p0 .

3     M ETHOD
3.1   AUTOENCODING WITH NORMALIZING FLOWS

In this section we show how to define a deterministic generative autoencoder within a NF architecture.
Given its similarity with autoencoders, we named this flow architecture as autoencoder within flows
(AEF). For now, we assume D ≪ N , namely that the manifold dimensionality of the signal is much
lower than the ambient dimensionality. We will remove this assumption in the next sections. Let
us begin by partitioning the input signal x ∈ RN in two subsets x1:D and xD+1:N , as commonly
done for coupling layers in NFs. In this paper, we refer to x1:D and xD+1:N as core and shell
variables respectively. As we shall see, the core variables are in 1-to-1 relation with the latents while
the shell variables are (approximately) "predicted away" by the latents. We define a mean (shell)
encoder gm (·; θ) : RN −D → RD and a scale (shell) encoder gs (·; θ) : RN −D → RD . These two
architectures are analogous to the mean and scale encoders of a VAE except for the fact that they only
take the shell variables as input. We also define an invertible core encoder n−1 (·; θ) : RD → RD that
takes care of encoding the core variables. Using these architectures and the core/shell partition, we
encode the data (both core and shell) into the latent variables via an invertible affine transformation:
                        z = gm (xD+1:N ; θ) + gs (xD+1:N ; θ) ⊙ n−1 (x1:D ; θ) .                        (4)
In order to recover the data from the latent, we define a decoder f          D+1:N
                                                                             (·; θ) : R → R D
                                                                                                    .N −D

This decoder only needs to reconstruct the shell variables since the core variables can be recovered
by inverting the core encoder. As far as the scale encoding is not zero, the encoding formula
defines a surjective transformation between the ambient space RN and the latent space RD . Such
a transformation is not invertible since information concerning the shell variables can be lost and,


                                                      3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


consequently, f D+1:N (z(x); θ) ̸= x. We can circumvent this problem by retaining the residuals of
the autoencoder as additional variables:
                                 δ D+1:N = xD+1:N − f D+1:N (z; θ) ,                                   (5)
These variables retain the information lost during encoding, thereby completing the surjective encod-
ing formula into an invertible transformation Φ−1 : RN → RN defined as Φ−1 (x1:D , xD+1:N ) →
z, δ D+1:N . Formally, the variables δ D+1:N are parts of the ’latents’ of the NF. However, conceptually
they are not true latent variables as they can only account for additive white noise. We can now
define a base distribution p0 (z; θ) to the latents. This distribution defines a generative model in the
latent space RD and it is analogous to the prior in VAEs. For this reason, we will often (improperly)
refer to p0 (z; θ) as the ’prior’. However, it is important to keep in mind that this distribution is not a
Bayesian prior since AEFs latents do not have a straightforward Bayesian interpretation. Moreover,
we define an error distribution r(δ; θ) to the residuals. It is important for this distribution to have
a learnable scale parameter that can be scaled down during training as the residuals are "predicted
away". In summary, the invertible architecture Φ−1 is trained to map the distribution of the data into
a factorized distribution of latent codes and residuals:
                               Φ−1 (x1:D , xD+1:N ; θ) ∼ p0 (z; θ)r(δ; θ)                              (6)
The exact negative log-likelihood loss can be obtained by using the change of variable formula of
normalizing flows (Eq. 3):
                       1                                2 N −D
  LAEF (θ, σ 2 ) =       2
                           xD+1:N − f D+1:N z(x; θ); θ 2 +     log 2πσ 2 − log p0 (z(x; θ); θ)
                     2σ
                     |                        {z            2          }
                                                   − log r(δ;θ)
                                                                                                       (7)
                                      −1
                     − log | det DΦ        (x; θ) | ,
where for the sake of simplicity we assumed (centered) Gaussian residual noise with (trainable)
variance σ 2 . It is now possible to note some striking similarities between the flow just described
and a VAE. Eq. 4 resembles the Gaussian reparametrization trick for variational autoencoders, with
the reparameterized posterior noise replaced by the core variables. Furthermore, equation 7 closely
resembles the ELBO in equation 2 but without noise injection, with the reconstruction error applied
only to the shell variables and the Jacobian term replacing the entropy of the posterior distribution. As
usual in flows, the AEF architecture can be used as a generative model simply by sampling the latent
code z from the ’prior’ p0 (z; θ) and inverting the AEF transformation Φ−1 (·). Since it is usually not
useful to add residual noise to the generated data, we can set δ D+1:N = 0 instead of sampling it from
the error distribution. This results in the following procedure:
                                                                       z − gm (xD+1:N ; θ)

                             D+1:N        D+1:N             1:D
        z ∼ p0 (z; θ) → x            =f          (z; θ) → x      =n                              .     (8)
                                                                          gs (xD+1:N ; θ)
This is visualized in Figure 3 (b) in Appendix A, and implemented in Algorithm 2.

3.2   PARTITION STRATEGIES AND AMBIENT SPACE EXPANSION

So far, we did not specify how to select core and shell variables. The most straightforward approach is
to to use an arbitrarily chosen partition of the original variables. For example, we could use a random
partition or, in an image, we could extract a central sub-image of "core pixels" and have the image with
cropped center as shell. An AEF with this kind of partition interpolates between a regular normalizing
flow (for D ≈ N ) and an autoencoder (for D ≪ N ). However, this approach limits the number of
latents to be smaller than N and reduces compatibility with the VAE literature. Furthermore, in the
case of noise corrupted data this partitioning strategy does not allow for denoising of the core variables
since they do not have corresponding deviations and error distributions. All these issues can be
circumvented if we appropriately expand the ambient space. In fact, the dimensionality of the ambient
space is usually largely arbitrary, depending on factors such as the sampling resolution of cameras and
digital microphones instead of the physical features of their respective measured signals. Consider a
parameterized injective function Ψ : RN → RN +D , defined as follows Ψ(x; γ) = (x, w = h(x; γ)) ,
where γ are the transformation parameters. This function expands the ambient dimensionality but,
since the transformation is injective and deterministic, it leaves the dimensionality of the signal


                                                           4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


manifold unchanged. Conceptually, this should be seen as a form of feature expansion and not an
architectural component of a flow. In this expanded space, we can define deviations for all the original
variables and, consequently, use a loss with VAE-style reconstruction error on all variables. This
can be done simply by using a regular AEF architecture with the original variables x as shell and
w = h(x) as core. This results in the following encoding layer:

                               z = gm (x; θ) + gs (x; θ) ⊙ n−1 (h(x; γ); θ) .                         (9)
Note that this differs from the well-known VAE reparameterized encoding formula (E. 1) just by the
fact that the input white noise is replaced by a deterministic function of the data. This is the only
architectural difference between VAEs and AEF in the extended space. It is not immediately obvious
that the feature expansion parameters γ can be trained by maximizing the log-likelihood. However,
this joint training can be fully justified as the minimization of (the limit of) KL divergences (see
Section 3.3), which results in the following objective function:
                                1                                2 N
         LAEF (θ, σ 2 , γ) =      2
                                    x − f z(x, h(x; γ); θ); θ 2 +         log 2πσ 2                  (10)
                               2σ                                      2
                               − log p0 (z(x, h(x; γ); θ); θ) − log | det DΦ−1 (x, h(x; γ); θ) | ,
which is just the log-likelihood in the expanded ambient space. We include the pseudocode for
computing the objective function as negative log likelihood in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Negative Log Likelihood AEF on expanded ambient space: g: Encoder; f : Decoder;
h: feature expansion map; n: core encoder; p0 : Base distribution (’prior’); r: error distribution; θ:
model parameters, γ: feature expansion parameters; x: input image
  procedure N EGATIVE L OG L IKELIHOOD(x)
     log | det J| ← 0
     w ← h(x; γ)
     z ← gm (x; θ) + gs (x; θ) ⊙ n−1 (w; θ)
     log | det J| ← log | det J| + log | det J(n−1 (w; θ))| + log gs (x; θ)
                                                             P
     δ ← x − f (z; θ)
     return −(log p0 (z; θ) + log r(δ; θ) + log | det J|)

During generative sampling, the additional variables w are redundant and can be discarded. This
results in a generative sampling formula that is identical to the one used in VAEs (see also Algorithm
3): x = f (z; θ), z ∼ p0 (z; θ). Consequently, the core flow n does no longer participate in the
generative sampling and it instead has an auxiliary role. This is a sign of its strong relation with the
posterior flow in a VAE, R which is already implicit in Eq. 9. The marginal likelihood in the original
ambient space p(x) = p(x, w)dw cannot be obtained in closed-form from the joint p(x, w). Note
that, at least from the point of view of manifold learning and dimensionality reduction, the original
likelihood p(x) itself does not have a privileged interpretation as the ambient dimensionality is usually
arbitrary and the ’true’ likelihood of the data is degenerate and lives on a lower dimensional manifold.
Nevertheless, p(x) is often useful for evaluation purposes (model comparison). Therefore, we provide
an efficient importance sampling scheme in Appendix C. All likelihood results reported in this paper
have been corrected using this method so as to be comparable with the VAE baselines.


Algorithm 2 Sampling AEF with core-shell                   Algorithm 3 Sampling AEF with expanded
partition: g: Encoder; f : Decoder; n: core en-            space: f : Decoder; p0 : base distribution
coder; p0 : base distribution (’prior’); θ: model          (’prior’); θ: model parameters
parameters                                                    procedure S AMPLE
  procedure S AMPLE                                              z ∼ p0 (z; θ)
     z ∼ p0 (z; θ)                                               x ← f (z; θ)
     xD+1:N ← f (z; θ)                                           return x
                           D+1:N
     x1:D ← n z−g     m (x
                   gs (xD+1:N ;θ)
                                 ;θ)

      x ← cat(x1:D , xD+1:N )
      return x

                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.3   T RAINING THE EXPANSION PARAMETERS γ

The feature expansion map h(x, γ) is, strictly speaking, not a component of the flow architecture.
Therefore, in spite of its intuitive appeal, it is not obvious that we can train γ by minimizing the joint
negative log-likelihood. However, this can be fully justified as minimization of the KL divergence
between the generative model and the empirical distribution of the data with expanded dimensionality.
The idea is to define a loss functional that can be used to make two parameterized distributions
approach each other, instead of just having a parameterized distribution approaching a fixed target
distribution. We will start considering a stochastic dimensionality expansion and then show that the
deterministic case can be obtained as a limit. We will denote the empirical sampling distribution of
the dataset as d(x). Now consider the joint distribution of the empirical data and the stochastically
expanded latent dimensions:
                                     qσ (x, w) = d(x)N (h(x, γ), Iσ)                                  (11)
where the expansion is performed using a Gaussian conditional density with fixed variance. The KL
divergence between the expanded empirical distribution q(x, w) and the joint distribution of the AEF
model p(x, w) is given by:
                       DKL (qσ (x, w), p(x, w)) = −Ex,ϵ∼q [log p(x, w)] + c ,                        (12)
where the constant c is the differential entropy of qσ (x, w), which is independent from both θ and γ.
This happens because the differential entropy of a Gaussian variable does not depend on its mean.
We can now compute the gradient with respect to γ:
                       ∇γ DKL (qσ (x, w), p(x, w)) = −Ex,ϵ [∇γ log p(x, w)] ,                        (13)
which, up to a constant, is just the gradient of the stochastically augmented joint log-likelihood. We
can now notice that, while the KL divergence is not well-defined at the limit σ → 0, the limiting
gradient is well-defined since the diverging entropy term does not depend on γ. This leads us with
the following limiting gradient:
                        lim ∇γ DKL (qσ (x, w), p(x, w))                                              (14)
                        σ→0
                                 = − lim Ex,ϵ [∇γ log p(x, h(x, γ) + σ ⊙ ϵ)]                         (15)
                                       σ→0
                                 = −Ex [∇γ log p(x, h(x, γ))] ,                                      (16)
where h(x, γ) + σ ⊙ ϵ, in the second line, is the the reparameterization formula for the conditional
Gaussian variable w. We can now see that, up to a proportionality constant, is the gradient of the
negative log-likelihood used to train the flow.

4     R ELATED W ORK
Improvements of VAE training: In recent years, there have been many works analyzing and
improving the training procedure of VAEs. Works such as (Hoffman & Johnson, 2016), (Zhao et al.,
2017) and (Alemi et al., 2018) diagnose some issues with ELBO training and propose a series of
methods to improve results. (Rezende & Viola, 2018) and (Dai & Wipf, 2019), propose an augmented
objective to tackle specific optimization issues. In the same vein, (Cremer et al., 2018) and (Mattei
& Frellsen, 2018) offer a theoretical analysis of the factors affecting the quality of approximate
inference in VAEs and introduce strategies to alleviate them. None of these works introduce an exact
maximum likelihood training. A popular way to improve VAEs is to use a more flexible prior or
posterior distribution. (Rezende & Mohamed, 2015) and (Kingma et al., 2016) use NFs as variational
posteriors, showing how the aggregate posterior matches the prior more closely, while (Tomczak
& Welling, 2018) use a variational mixture of posteriors as prior. (Morrow & Chiu, 2020) use a
two-stage training procedure, in which first they train a VAE with a NF prior, and then combine the
decoder with Glow (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) for improved sample quality. An alternative line
of research is the use of hierarchical priors with several stochastic layers (Sønderby et al., 2016;
Maaløe et al., 2019). More recent works use hierarchical VAEs with many layers, achieving state
of the art log-likelihood and generating images with impressive sample quality (Vahdat & Kautz,
2020; Child, 2021; Hazami et al., 2022). These works use a latent dimensionality that is greater,
often by orders of magnitude, than the dimensionality of the ambient space. This dimensionality
expansion greatly ameliorate the problem of posterior separations diagnosed in (Dai & Wipf, 2019) at


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the price of higher computational and memory costs and lower interpretability. Interestingly, a recent
post-training analysis showed that just a few percents of the hierarchical VAE’s latent dimensions are
needed to encode the data (Hazami et al., 2022).
Stochastic auxiliary variables and augmented normalizing flows: The fact that VAE encoding
can be seen as a form of affine coupling was first noticed in (Dinh et al., 2014) (Appendix C).
This allows one to conceptualize the one-sample reparameterization estimate of the ELBO as a
likelihood in a stochastically augmented space. However, this is just an equivalent re-formulation
and does not solve the inference sub-optimality problems of VAEs, which in this setting can be
explained by the fact that sharp posteriors correspond to singular points of non-invertibility. This
approach was recently generalized in (Huang et al., 2020), where several VAE-style affine layers are
stacked in an flow architecture that takes noise augmented input. The stacking procedure removes the
signal/noise separation and autoencoder-like loss of VAEs since the final prediction is not compared
with the original image but only with the previous layer. The resulting model is very similar to other
auxiliary-augmented flows (Cornish et al., 2020; Weilbach et al., 2020; Caterini et al., 2021a).
Two-steps training procedures: A recent trend in generative modeling is to disentangle the tasks of
learning a low-dimensional latent representation and maximum-likelihood density estimation. (Dai
& Wipf, 2019) proposes a two-stage procedure for training VAEs, and show its effectiveness both
theoretically and empirically. (Ghosh et al., 2020) propose to instead use an explicit regularization
scheme for the decoder, and employ an ex-post density estimation on the latent space to allow for
sampling and ensure that the latent space is distributed according to a simple distribution. Similarly,
(Xiao et al., 2019) and (Böhm & Seljak, 2020) use a deterministic autoencoder to learn the latent
representation of the data, and a normalizing flow to model the distribution of such latents, leading to
better density estimation while avoiding over-regularization of the latent variables. More recently,
(Loaiza-Ganem et al., 2022) discusses the problem of manifold overfitting, which arises when the
manifold is learned but not the distribution on it, and propose a two-step training procedure applicable
to all the likelihood-based models.
NFs on manifolds: Several authors propose variations of NFs that can model data on a manifold.
Works such as (Gemici et al., 2016), (Mathieu & Nickel, 2020) and (Rezende et al., 2020) assume
that the dimensionality reducing map is already known and available. (Kim et al., 2020; Horvat &
Pfister, 2021) propose methods based on adding noise to the data, which are capable of learning
unknown lower-dimensional manifolds. Injective flows strive for the same goal by using injective
deterministic transformations to map the data to a lower dimensional base density. (Brehmer &
Cranmer, 2020), (Kothari et al., 2021) and (Cramer et al., 2022) train injective flows with a two-steps
training procedure in which they alternate manifold and density training, while (Kumar et al., 2020)
introduces lower bounds on the injective change of variable. (Cunningham et al., 2020) combines
injective flows with an additive noise model to account for deviations from the learned manifold
using stochastic inversions trained on a variational bound. In (Caterini et al., 2021b) the authors
train injective flows by evaluating the in-manifold likelihood using a modification of the change
of variable formulas for rectangular Jacobi matrices, which is then supplemented by an additional
ad-hoc reconstruction loss. (Ross & Cresswell, 2021) uses conformal embeddings to train injective
flows with exact on-manifold log-likelihood plus an additional ad hoc reconstruction loss.
SurVAE flows: A work that is in spirit similar to ours is SurVAE (Nielsen et al., 2020), in the sense
that it aims at bridging the gap between Normalizing Flows and VAEs by combining their strengths.
SurVAEs extend flow models by incorporating stochastic and surjective transformations in both the
generative and the inference direction. The (generative direction) surjective transformations give rise
to stochastic estimates of the likelihood contribution and introduce lower bound likelihood estimates.
On the other hand, surjections in the inference direction allow exact probability computations for the
latent variables. However, these inference surjections themselves cannot be straightforwardly used to
perform generative dimensionality reduction since the stochastic forward transformation p(x|z) is
intractable and depends on the data probability itself via Bayes theorem (which is exactly the quantity
we want to estimate in generative modeling). In general, the contributions of our work and SurVAE
are almost orthogonal and could be combined to obtain the benefits of both techniques, for example
by incorporating surjections in our decoder architecture so as to enforce symmetries in the data.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5    E XPERIMENTS

We now show empirically that, at least in complex naturalistic datasets such as CelebA-HQ and
ImageNet Karras et al. (2018); Deng et al. (2009), the exact maximum likelihood training leads to
drastically improved results compared to architecturally equivalent VAEs. Our aim is to show the
difference in performance between exact log-likelihood and ELBO objective functions when the
architecture is kept constant. Therefore, in our VAE baselines we do not use the many regularization,
annealing and KL scaling terms that are somewhat common in VAE applications (Vahdat & Kautz,
2020; Child, 2021). However, we make sure to compare architecturally identical models with strong
prior and variational posteriors, which in themselves ameliorate many of the pathologies of the
ELBO (Kingma et al., 2016; Tomczak & Welling, 2018). As main baseline, we use the original
VAE algorithm as introduced in (Kingma & Welling, 2014) with an Inverse Autoregressive Flow
(IAF) posterior and a Masked Autoregressive Flow (MAF) prior. Apart from the feature expansion
layer, this baseline is architecturally identical to our AEF (linear) model, which uses learnable linear
features as core variables. We also test two AEF models that do not expand the ambient space, one
with the center pixels and the other with the corner pixels as core variables, referred to as AEF (center)
and AEF (corner) respectively. Additional experiments on denoising are reported in Appendix B,
while more details about the experiments and results can be found in Appendix D and E. The code
for all the experiments is available at: https://github.com/gisilvs/AEF.
Generative modeling and manifold learning: To compare the generative performance of AEFs
with VAEs we test on CelebA-HQ resized to 64 × 64 and 32 × 32, and ImageNet resized to 32 × 32.
We focus on models with significantly less latent variables than observable dimensions since this is
the regime that is the most problematic for traditional VAE training. We use a complex Encoder-
Decoder architecture with residual blocks, similar to the one used in (Child, 2021), and compare
the performances of the AEF (with linear core variables) and its architecturally identical VAE for
different latent dimensions. Table 1 shows that AEFs significantly outperform their architecturally
equivalent VAEs both in terms of bits per dimension and FID score, generating significantly sharper
and more detailed samples (Fig. 1, 2). To compute bits per dimension, we use importance sampling, as
described in Appendix D.6. Additionally, we look at smaller scale datasets: MNIST, FashionMNIST
and KMNIST (Deng, 2012; Xiao et al., 2017; Clanuwat et al., 2018). Here we use small conventional
encoder and decoder architectures (see Appendix D.1). Results on MNIST are shown in Table 1 for a
latent dimensionality of 2 and 32. In Appendix E we present these results for all latent dimensions
and datasets, as well as the results for AEF (center) and AEF (corner). Performance for all three
versions of AEF is comparable, with the linear AEF performing slightly better. Overall, we observe
an increase in performance for AEFs compared with VAEs. On the other hand, VAE outperforms
AEF for a high number of latent dimensions. In Appendix F we investigate the importance of the
posterior and prior flows on generative performance for both AEFs and VAEs. Here we observe
that incorporating a prior flow is very important to sample quality for both models. Additionally,
we observed that, in this setting, even the AEF without flows performs better than a VAE with both
posterior and prior flow in terms of BPD and FID.

                         MNIST          CelebA (64 × 64)          CelebA (32 × 32)         ImageNet

 Models              2       32       64       128        256    64     128      256      128     256
            BPD      2.40    1.80     6.98     6.86       6.79   6.90   6.64     6.63     6.89    6.74
 VAE
            FID      57.5    16.2     106      92.6       90.9   87.6   67.0     63.5     179     160
            BPD      2.37    1.82     6.35     6.07       5.78   6.20   5.88     5.57     6.30    6.21
 AEF
            FID      55.8    17.7     76.5     60.8       55.8   51.9   38.4     30.9     131     123

Table 1: Bits per dimension (BPD) and Frechet Inception Distance (FID) for AEF and VAE models
trained on various datasets. The second row denotes the latent dimensionality used. Lower is better
for both metrics. For MNIST we report the mean over five runs, for the other datasets we report the
mean over two runs. For both VAE and AEF, BPD values are estimated using importance sampling.
We refer to Appendix E for more results, and Appendix D.6 for details on the importance sampling
estimators.



                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 CelebA-HQ (64x64)           ImageNet (32x32)                64              128               256


Figure 1: Reconstructions from an AEF (top             Figure 2: Samples from an AEF (top row) and
row) and VAE (bottom row) with equivalent ar-          VAE (bottom row) with equivalent architectures
chitectures trained on rescaled CelebA-HQ and          trained on rescaled CelebA-HQ (64 × 64) with
rescaled ImageNet with 256 latent dimensions.          64, 128, and 256 latent dimensions respectively.
                                                       Images were sampled with a temperature of 0.85.


6    D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In this work we showed that autoencoders, if properly constructed out of invertible layers, can be
trained by maximum-likelihood either in the original ambient space or in an appropriately expanded
space. This latter approach results in an objective function that can be directly used in the training of
any pre-existing VAE and VAE-like model that uses Gaussian residual noise. In our experiments,
we showed that in many datasets AEFs perform strikingly better than VAEs. Importantly, the AEF
images where not affected by the blurriness typical of low-dimensional VAEs, which resulted in
very remarkable difference in the quality of samples and reconstructions. This is an interesting and
perhaps surprising result as the AEF and VAE models were architecturally identical. Given the
arguments presented in Alemi et al. (2018), we conjecture that this difference is due to the failure
of the VAEs to converge to a sufficiently sharp posterior, which has been proven to result in poor
separation between the encoding of the training samples. We further conjecture that this failure is
due to the fact that the optimum is very close to a singular point of non-invertibility of the VAE
architecture, which results in numerical instabilities due to the diverging KL term. This problem does
not affect AEFs since the encoding is always deterministic. In our experiments, the main exception
to this trend was MNIST with 32 latent dimensions, where the VAE performed consistently better.
We conjecture that this is due to the relatively large ratio between the latent dimensionality and the
true signal dimensionality, which results in less concentrated (and less unstable) variational posterior
distributions. In this regime, the extra statistical variability provided by the posterior samples of
the VAE can loosen the topological constraints of the architecture, potentially leading to higher
performance Cornish et al. (2020); Caterini et al. (2021a). When compared to VAEs, the main
limitation of AEFs is that they cannot straightforwardly use discrete emission models (decoders) since
their flow architecture is assumed to work on continuous data. Another limitation is that, since we are
not using stochastic auxiliary variables, AEFs have the same topological constraints of regular NFs
(Cornish et al., 2020; Caterini et al., 2021a). However, auxiliary variables can be straightforwardly
added to AEFs using standard methods Caterini et al. (2021a). Finally, from the point of view of
the NF literature, our work opens the door to hybrid autoencoder-flow models that can learn how to
reduce the latent dimensionality by "predicting away" some dimensions, possibly at several different
stages of processing. Adding manifold learning capabilities to NFs has great potential since it can
avoid some of the pathologies of invertible models when used on lower dimensional data, while at
the same time increasing training efficiency.

7    R EPRODUCIBILITY

We provide access to all the code used in our experiments here: https://github.com/gisilvs/AEF. The
readme contains instructions on how to reproduce the experiments presented in the paper from the
command line, as well as a Jupyter notebook example on training an AEF from scratch using the


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


provided code. To further increase the clarity of our proposed method, we have added diagrams
that visually explain the sampling and inference procedure for our model in Appendix A, as well as
corresponding pseudocode (algorithms 1, 2, 3). The reader can find additional explanations of the
methods in Sections 3.3 and C. Additional details on the performed experiments such as description
of architectural details and hyperparameter used in this work can be found in Section D. Ablation
experiments are found in Section F in the Supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
OnePlanet Research Center aknowledges the support of the Province of Gelderland.

R EFERENCES
Alexander Alemi, Ben Poole, Ian Fischer, Joshua Dillon, Rif A Saurous, and Kevin Murphy. Fixing a
  broken ELBO. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Robert Bamler, Cheng Zhang, Manfred Opper, and Stephan Mandt. Perturbative black box variational
  inference. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new
  perspectives. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 35(8):1798–1828,
  2013.
Lukas Biewald. Experiment tracking with weights and biases, 2020. URL https://www.wandb.
  com/. Software available from wandb.com.
Vanessa Böhm and Uroš Seljak. Probabilistic auto-encoder. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.05479, 2020.
Johann Brehmer and Kyle Cranmer. Flows for simultaneous manifold learning and density estimation.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Yuri Burda, Roger Grosse, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Importance weighted autoencoders. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1509.00519, 2015.
Anthony Caterini, Rob Cornish, Dino Sejdinovic, and Arnaud Doucet. Variational inference with
  continuously-indexed normalizing flows. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2021a.
Anthony L Caterini, Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem, Geoff Pleiss, and John P Cunningham. Rectangular
  flows for manifold learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021b.
Rewon Child. Very deep vaes generalize autoregressive models and can outperform them on images.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Tarin Clanuwat, Mikel Bober-Irizar, Asanobu Kitamoto, Alex Lamb, Kazuaki Yamamoto, and David
  Ha. Deep learning for classical japanese literature. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01718, 2018.
Rob Cornish, Anthony Caterini, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Relaxing bijectivity
  constraints with continuously indexed normalising flows. International conference on machine
  learning, 2020.
Eike Cramer, Felix Rauh, Alexander Mitsos, Raúl Tempone, and Manuel Dahmen. Nonlinear
  isometric manifold learning for injective normalizing flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03934,
  2022.
Chris Cremer, Xuechen Li, and David Duvenaud. Inference suboptimality in variational autoencoders.
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Edmond Cunningham, Renos Zabounidis, Abhinav Agrawal, Ina Fiterau, and Daniel Sheldon.
  Normalizing flows across dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.13070, 2020.
Bin Dai and David Wipf. Diagnosing and enhancing vae models. International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2019.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale hier-
   archical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   pp. 248–255, 2009. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Li Deng. The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research. IEEE Signal
  Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Bengio. Nice: Non-linear independent components
  estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using real nvp. Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. nflows: normalizing flows in
  PyTorch, November 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4296287.
Charles F., Sanjoy M., and Hariharan N. Testing the manifold hypothesis. Journal of the American
  Mathematical Society, 29(4):983–1049, 2016.
Mevlana C Gemici, Danilo Rezende, and Shakir Mohamed. Normalizing flows on riemannian
 manifolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02304, 2016.
Mathieu Germain, Karol Gregor, Iain Murray, and Hugo Larochelle. Made: Masked autoencoder for
 distribution estimation. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.
Partha Ghosh, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Antonio Vergari, Michael Black, and Bernhard Schölkopf. From
  variational to deterministic autoencoders. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 2014.
Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Frederic Besse, Yan Wu, Hamza Merzic, and Aaron van den
  Oord. Shaping belief states with generative environment models for rl. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2019.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2018a.
David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10122, 2018b.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with discrete
  world models. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Louay Hazami, Rayhane Mama, and Ragavan Thurairatnam. Efficient-vdvae: Less is more. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.13751, 2022.
Matthew D Hoffman and Matthew J Johnson. Elbo surgery: yet another way to carve up the variational
 evidence lower bound. In Workshop in Advances in Approximate Bayesian Inference, NIPS, 2016.
Christian Horvat and Jean-Pascal Pfister. Denoising normalizing flow. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2021.
Chin-Wei Huang, Laurent D., and Aaron C. Augmented normalizing flows: Bridging the gap between
  generative flows and latent variable models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.07101, 2020.
Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Progressive growing of gans for
  improved quality, stability, and variation. International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing
  and improving the image quality of stylegan. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8110–8119, 2020.
Hyeongju Kim, Hyeonseung Lee, Woo Hyun Kang, Joun Yeop Lee, and Nam Soo Kim. Softflow:
  Probabilistic framework for normalizing flow on manifolds. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding variational bayes. International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2014.
Durk P Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal. Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 2018.
Durk P Kingma, Tim Salimans, Rafal Jozefowicz, Xi Chen, Ilya Sutskever, and Max Welling.
  Improved variational inference with inverse autoregressive flow. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 2016.
Ivan Kobyzev, Simon JD Prince, and Marcus A Brubaker. Normalizing flows: An introduction and
  review of current methods. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 43
  (11):3964–3979, 2020.
Konik Kothari, AmirEhsan Khorashadizadeh, Maarten de Hoop, and Ivan Dokmanić. Trumpets:
  Injective flows for inference and inverse problems. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Abhishek Kumar, Ben Poole, and Kevin Murphy. Regularized autoencoders via relaxed injective
  probability flow. International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.
Gabriel Loaiza-Ganem, Brendan Leigh Ross, Jesse C Cresswell, and Anthony L Caterini. Diagnosing
  and fixing manifold overfitting in deep generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07172, 2022.
Lars Maaløe, Marco Fraccaro, Valentin Liévin, and Ole Winther. Biva: A very deep hierarchy of
  latent variables for generative modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.
Emile Mathieu and Maximilian Nickel. Riemannian continuous normalizing flows. Advances in
 Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Pierre-Alexandre Mattei and Jes Frellsen. Leveraging the exact likelihood of deep latent variable
  models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Rogan Morrow and Wei-Chen Chiu. Variational autoencoders with normalizing flow decoders. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.05617, 2020.
Alexander Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Didrik Nielsen, Priyank Jaini, Emiel Hoogeboom, Ole Winther, and Max Welling. Survae flows:
  Surjections to bridge the gap between vaes and flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 33:12685–12696, 2020.
George Papamakarios, Theo Pavlakou, and Iain Murray. Masked autoregressive flow for density
  estimation. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017.
George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji
  Lakshminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. Journal of
 Machine Learning Research, 22(57):1–64, 2021.
Phillip Pope, Chen Zhu, Ahmed Abdelkader, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. The intrinsic
  dimension of images and its impact on learning. International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen,
  and Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Ali Razavi, Aaron Van den Oord, and Oriol Vinyals. Generating diverse high-fidelity images with
  vq-vae-2. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2019.
Danilo Rezende and Shakir Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. International
  conference on machine learning, 2015.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende and Fabio Viola. Taming vaes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00597, 2018.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Daan Wierstra. Stochastic backpropagation and
  approximate inference in deep generative models. International conference on machine learning,
  2014.
Danilo Jimenez Rezende, George Papamakarios, Sébastien Racaniere, Michael Albergo, Gurtej
  Kanwar, Phiala Shanahan, and Kyle Cranmer. Normalizing flows on tori and spheres. International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In International Conference on Medical image computing and computer-
  assisted intervention, pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015.
Brendan Ross and Jesse Cresswell. Tractable density estimation on learned manifolds with conformal
  embedding flows. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Tim Salimans, Andrej Karpathy, Xi Chen, and Diederik P Kingma. Pixelcnn++: Improving the
  pixelcnn with discretized logistic mixture likelihood and other modifications. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep unsupervised
  learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2015.
Casper Kaae Sønderby, Tapani Raiko, Lars Maaløe, Søren Kaae Sønderby, and Ole Winther. Ladder
  variational autoencoders. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2016.
Jakub Tomczak and Max Welling. Vae with a vampprior. International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, 2018.
Arash Vahdat and Jan Kautz. Nvae: A deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Aaron Van den Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, Lasse Espeholt, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, et al. Conditional
  image generation with pixelcnn decoders. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  2016.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 2017.
Aaron Van Oord, Nal Kalchbrenner, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Pixel recurrent neural networks.
  International conference on machine learning, 2016.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 2017.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Christian Weilbach, Boyan Beronov, Frank Wood, and William Harvey. Structured conditional
  continuous normalizing flows for efficient amortized inference in graphical models. International
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2020.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Zhisheng Xiao, Qing Yan, and Yali Amit. Generative latent flow. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.10485,
  2019.
Shengjia Zhao, Jiaming Song, and Stefano Ermon. Towards deeper understanding of variational
  autoencoding models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1702.08658, 2017.
Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Maximilian Igl, Sebastian Schulze, Yarin Gal, Katja Hofmann, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning.
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S UPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS

A    A DDITIONAL DIAGRAMS
In Figure 3, we show diagrams for inferece and sampling procedures, for AEFs with partitioning and
expanded ambient space.


             (a)                      (b)                        (c)                    (d)

Figure 3: Diagrams showcasing the inference and sampling process for (a, b) AEFs with partioning;
(c, d) AEFs with expanded ambient space.



B    D ENOISING E XPERIMENTS
Denoising is one of the main applications of the classical autoencoder literature. The basic idea
is that the signal can be compressed in a low dimensional manifold while the (white) noise, being
incomprehensible, is filtered out. The denoising problem shows the capacity of our training scheme
to separate the signal and the noise spaces, thereby performing an adaptive non-linear filtering.
We test performance on CelebA-HQ (32 × 32), and the MNIST, FashionMNIST and KMNIST
datasets with different noise levels. We compare against architecturally equivalent VAEs and least
squares denoising autoencoders (AE). All models were trained exclusively on noisy data. To compare
performance we look at the mean squared error between the Inception feature activations (the same
ones as used for the FID score) for an original, noiseless sample and the reconstruction based on
its noisy version. Results for CelebA-HQ and MNIST are shown in Table 2 and Fig. 4 for various
noise regimes, while results for FashionMNIST and KMNIST and the other noise regimes can be
found in Appendix E.2. For CelebA-HQ we see that the gap in performance between AEF and VAE
for denoising is similar to the one in generative modeling. On the other hand, for the less complex
MNIST datasets we observe that the VAE often performs better than both the AEF and the denoising
AE, which suggests that the posterior uncertainty of the stochastic latent variables of the VAE may
play a beneficial role in the denoising performance.

C    I MPORTANCE SAMPLING FOR LINEAR AEF
After training, if we wish to compute
                                  R the probability p(x) for model comparison purposes, we would
need to solve the integral p(x) = p(x, w)dw, which cannot be obtained in closed form. However,
we can use an importance sampling scheme:
                                                                 1 X p(x, wk )
                           Z              Z
                                                  p(x, w)
                   p(x) = p(x, w)dw = q(w)                dw ≈                              (17)
                                                    q(w)        K       q(wk )
                                                                       k


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 CelebA-HQ (128)                      MNIST (2)                        MNIST (32)

             0.05       0.1         0.2       0.5       0.75         1.0     0.5         0.75     1
      AE     0.080      0.078       0.078     0.135     0.142        0.144   0.086       0.115    0.133
      VAE    0.082      0.081       0.085     0.085     0.094        0.109   0.045       0.058    0.075
      AEF    0.058      0.063       0.075     0.082     0.091        0.102   0.053       0.072    0.094

Table 2: Mean squared error between inception feature activations of original inputs and reconstruc-
tions of noisy inputs. The number between parentheses denotes the latent dimensionality of the
models. The second row gives the standard deviation of the noise distribution. For CelebA-HQ and
MNIST we report the mean over two and five runs respectively.


              (a) AEF                               (b) VAE                              (c) AE


Figure 4: Examples of reconstruction performance of AEF, VAE, and deterministic autoencoder (AE)
trained on CelebA samples with a noise level (σ) of 0.1, and a latent dimensionality of 128. Top:
image with added noise; Middle: reconstructed image; Bottom: original image.


To do so, we first compute w = h(x; γ), then take K samples from a normal distribution centered
around w: w1,...,K ∼ q(w) = N (w, ϵ), where ϵ is the approximate posterior scale and needs to be
tuned on the validation set for each model. We perform the rest of the computations using w1,...,K
instead of w, and finally compute the probability in Eq. 17. To reduce the variance of the estimator,
we additionally use importance weighted sampling:
                                                               "                   #
                                                                   1 X p(x, wk )
                              log p(x) ≈ log Ew1,...,K ∼q(w)                                              (18)
                                                                   K    q(wk )
                                                                      k



D     E XPERIMENTS ’ DETAILS

D.1    E NCODER AND D ECODER

For the MNIST datasets, all the encoders and decoders consist of a two-layers convolutional neural
network. The encoder uses 3 × 3 kernels, 64 for the first layer and 128 for the second. Each layer is
followed by ReLU activation. Finally, two linear layers map the feature maps to mean and standard
deviation of the latent space respectively. Similarly, the decoder first uses a linear layer to increase the
dimensionality of the latent samples, and then two transposed convolutional layers with respectively
128 and 64 kernels of size 4. The decoder outputs two values: the mean and the standard deviation,
as a set of trainable parameters constrained with softplus activation.
For the larger CelebA and ImageNet datasets we use an encoder and decoder with many more layers
and residual blocks, an architecture similar to (Child, 2021). In particular, we use the same residual
bottleneck block, but the encoder does not output activations at intermediate layers, and the decoder
processes only the input coming from the previous layer, without stochastic sampling and prior
computation. In other words, we reuse the residual bottleneck blocks from (Child, 2021) to build a
"traditional" encoder-decoder architecture, and the outputs of the encoder and decoder are the same
as for the manifold learning and denoising experiments. In all the experiments, we use four residual
bottleneck blocks for each feature map size.


                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.2   M ASKED AUTOREGRESSIVE F LOW

For all of our NFs, we use and adapt implementations from (Durkan et al., 2020). Our MAF models
stack K MADE autoregressive layers (Germain et al., 2015), each with 2 residual blocks with N
hidden units. We add ActNorm (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018) between each autoregressive layer.
IAF is simply the inverse of MAF. When MAF or IAF are used within an autoencoder architecture,
whether as prior, posterior or encoder flow, we use K = 4 and N = 256.

D.3   P REPROCESSING L AYER

For all models, we apply a preprocessing bijective transformation like the one used in (Papamakarios
et al., 2017):
                                    x = logit (λ + (1 − 2λ)z)                                   (19)
where z is the input image and λ is a parameter. We use λ = 1e−6 for the MNIST-like datasets and
λ = 0.05 for CelebA-HQ and ImageNet. This transformation is then followed by an ActNorm layer.

D.4   DATASETS AND DATA PRE - PROCESSING

In all our experiments, we use a dequantized version of the data, in which we first add uniform noise
u ∼ U(0, 1) to the image and then divide by 256. Division by 256 requires an adjustment in the log
likelihood, which we take into account when computing the bits per dimension.
For the denoising experiments we add gaussian white noise N (0, σ) to the samples, with different
levels of σ depending on the dataset: 0.25, 0.5, 0.75 and 1.0 for MNIST datasets, and 0.05, 0.1 and
0.2 for CelebA-HQ. By varying the standard deviation of the noise distribution we can increase the
intensity of the noise. After adding the noise to the images we clip them so that the pixel values stay
in their original range.
For CelebA-HQ we apply random left-right flipping whenever an image is loaded into a batch. For
all the models we use 10% of the training dataset as validation set, apart from CelebA-HQ for which
we use the predefined train-val-test split.

D.5   T RAINING PROCEDURE

On the MNIST datasets we train all models for 100K iterations, and we evaluate the test metrics
on the iteration that achieved the best validation loss. For CelebA-HQ (32 × 32 and 64 × 64), we
train instead for 1M iterations and do early stopping if the validation loss does not improve for more
than 20k iterations. ImageNet models are trained for 2M iterations with early stopping set to 100K
iterations with no improvement. For generative modeling on CelebA-HQ, ImageNet, and all the
denoising models we use gradient clipping if the magnitude of the gradients is bigger than 200. As
optimizer we choose ADAM (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate 1e − 3 for the MNIST-like
datasets, and 1e − 4 for denoising experiments, CelebA-HQ and ImageNet. We use a batch size 128
for all the MNIST experiments, a batch size of 64 for CelebA-HQ resized to 32 × 32 and a batch size
of 16 for CelebA-HQ resized to 64 × 64 and ImageNet.
We use Weights & Biases to track all our experiments and store models’ checkpoints. (Biewald, 2020)

D.6   I MPORTANCE SAMPLING

To get an estimate of the marginal likelihood for both VAE and AEF (linear) we use importance
sampling with an average of 20 times 128 samples.

D.7   C OMPUTE RESOURCES

We used AzureML and Google Colab Pro to run all our experiments. All the manifold learning and
denoising experiments are run on one GPU NVIDIA M60, while we use one GPU NVIDIA K80 for
the experiments on CelebA-HQ and ImageNet.


                                                  17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.8   M ODELS ’ PARAMETERS

We report the number of parameters used in each model for the different datasets: Table 3 for the
models trained on MNIST-like datasets, Table 4 for CelebA-HQ resized to 32 × 32, and Table .

                                            Nr. of latent dimensions
                  Models          2        4         8         16      32
                  VAE             2.37M    2.42M      2.52M   2.71M    3.12M
                  AEF             2.37M    2.42M      2.52M   2.71M    3.12M
                  AEF (linear)    2.37M    2.42M      2.53M   2.73M    3.15M

Table 3: Approximate number of model parameters for all models trained on MNIST-like datasets.

                                            Nr. of latent dimensions

                            Models         64         128     256
                            VAE            2.80M      4.07M   8.32M
                            AEF (linear)   2.99M      4.46M   9.11M



Table 4: Approximate number of model parameters for all models trained on CelebA-HQ and
ImageNet rescaled to 32 × 32.

                                            Nr. of latent dimensions

                            Models         128        256     512
                            VAE            4.34M      9.40M   28.0M
                            AEF (linear)   5.91M      12.5M   34.3M



Table 5: Approximate number of model parameters for all models trained on CelebA-HQ rescaled to
64 × 64.


                                                 18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E           A DDITIONAL RESULTS
E.1             G ENERATIVE MODELING AND MANIFOLD LEARNING

In this section we provide additional results. Table 6 shows the results of all runs on CelebA-HQ and
ImageNet. We show results comparing the linear and partitioned versions of AEF with VAEs on the
MNIST datasets in Figure 5 and Figure 6. Figure 8 shows samples of VAEs and AEFs trained on
MNIST, FashionMNIST and KMNIST with a latent dimensionality of 32, and Figure 9 shows the
same for CelebA-HQ resized to 64 × 64 for various latent dimensionalities.

                                                                    CelebA (64 × 64)                                CelebA (32 × 32)                          ImageNet

                       Models                                   64               128        256                 64                  128                256    128             256
                                                                6.98             6.87       6.79                6.98                6.70               6.63   6.89            6.76
                                                      BPD
                                                                6.99             6.86       6.79                6.90                6.64               6.65   6.92            6.74
                       VAE
                                                                106              96.3       90.9                91.9                68.4               63.5   179             164
                                                      FID
                                                                102              92.6       92.1                87.6                67.0               66.2   182             160
                                                                6.35             6.07       5.78                6.20                5.86               5.58   6.30            6.24
                                                      BPD
                                                                6.35             6.07       5.79                6.21                5.93               5.57   6.31            6.21
                       AEF
                                                                76.5             60.8       55.8                51.9                38.4               27.9   131             123
                                                      FID
                                                                76.2             62.6       54.9                53.3                40.2               30.9   132             124

Table 6: Bits per dimension (BPD) and Frechet Inception Distance (FID) for both runs of AEF and
VAE models trained on CelebA and ImageNet. The second row denotes the latent dimensionality
used. Lower is better for both metrics.

                                 MNIST                                                           FashionMNIST                                                                KMNIST
                                                                                                                                                 4.0
      2.5               AEF (center)       AEF (linear)                                      AEF (center)       AEF (linear)                                         AEF (center)       AEF (linear)
                                                                           4.7
                        AEF (corner)       VAE                                               AEF (corner)       VAE                                                  AEF (corner)       VAE
      2.4
                                                                           4.6                                                                   3.8

      2.3
                                                                           4.5

                                                                                                                                                 3.6
      2.2
                                                                           4.4
BPD


                                                                     BPD


                                                                                                                                           BPD


      2.1
                                                                           4.3
                                                                                                                                                 3.4
      2.0
                                                                           4.2

      1.9                                                                  4.1                                                                   3.2


      1.8                                                                  4.0
            2      4                   8                  16   32                2      4                   8                  16     32                 2     4                    8                  16   32
                           Latent dimensions                                                    Latent dimensions                                                       Latent dimensions


Figure 5: Bits per dimension achieved by AEFs and equivalent VAE MNIST, FashionMNIST and
KMNIST. We show the mean and 95% confidence interval over 5 runs.

                                 MNIST                                                            FashionMNIST                                                               KMNIST
      60                AEF (center)       AEF (linear)                                      AEF (center)       AEF (linear)                     160                 AEF (center)       AEF (linear)
                        AEF (corner)       VAE                             100               AEF (corner)       VAE                                                  AEF (corner)       VAE

                                                                            90                                                                   140
      50

                                                                            80
                                                                                                                                                 120
      40
FID


                                                                     FID


                                                                                                                                           FID


                                                                            70
                                                                                                                                                 100
                                                                            60
      30
                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                            50

      20                                                                    40                                                                    60


                                                                            30
            2      4                   8                  16   32                2      4                   8                  16     32                  2    4                    8                  16   32
                           Latent dimensions                                                    Latent dimensions                                                       Latent dimensions


Figure 6: FID score achieved by achieved by AEFs and equivalent VAE on multiple datasets. We
show the mean and 95% confidence interval over 5 runs.


                                                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Visualization of a learned two-dimensional manifold by AEF trained on MNIST with a
two-dimensional latent space.

        VAE                  AEF (linear)           AEF (center)            AEF (corner)


Figure 8: Samples generated by VAEs and AEFs trained on MNIST, FashionMNIST and KMNIST
with 32 latent dimensions. Samples were generated with a temperature of 0.85.

                       VAE                                         AEF


64


128


256


Figure 9: Samples generated by VAEs and AEFs trained on CelebA-HQ resized to 64 × 64 with 64,
128 and 256 latent dimensions. Samples were generated with a temperature of 0.85.


                                               20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2            D ENOISING

This section presents additional results and figures comparing the denoising performance of AEFs
to baseline models, specifically to a VAE with equivalent architecture and a least squares denoising
autoencoder (AE) with equivalent encoder and decoder. Figure 10 presents the mean squared error
between inception feature activations (IFE) for increasing levels of noise MNIST, FashionMNIST
and KMNIST datasets.
                              MNIST                                                         FashionMNIST                                                      KMNIST
                                                                                                                                          0.20
                      AE       AEF (linear)          VAE                              AE       AEF (linear)          VAE                                AE      AEF (linear)          VAE
                                                                       0.165
      0.150



                                                                                                                                          0.18
                                                                       0.150
      0.125


                                                                                                                                                                                                  (D=2)
IFE


                                                                 IFE


                                                                                                                                    IFE
                                                                                                                                          0.16
                                                                       0.135

      0.100

                                                                                                                                          0.14
                                                                       0.120


      0.075
               0.25   0.5                     0.75         1.0                 0.25   0.5                     0.75           1.0                 0.25   0.5                    0.75         1.0
                            Noise level                                                      Noise level                                                      Noise level

                             MNIST                                                          FashionMNIST                                                      KMNIST
                                                                       0.175
                      AE      AEF (linear)           VAE                              AE       AEF (linear)          VAE                  0.20          AE      AEF (linear)          VAE


      0.12                                                             0.150
                                                                                                                                          0.16


                                                                                                                                                                                                  (D=32)
IFE


                                                                 IFE


                                                                                                                                    IFE
                                                                       0.125
      0.08
                                                                                                                                          0.12


                                                                       0.100

      0.04                                                                                                                                0.08

              0.25    0.5                     0.75         1.0                 0.25   0.5                     0.75           1.0                 0.25   0.5                    0.75         1.0
                            Noise level                                                      Noise level                                                      Noise level


Figure 10: Mean squared error between inception feature activations of the original inputs, and the
reconstructions based on a noisy input for increasing levels of noise. Averaged over five runs. Bars
indicate 95% confidence intervals. The number of latent dimensions for was set to 2 for the upper
row, and 32 for the lower row.


F             A BLATIONS
In this section we investigate the importance of the prior and posterior flow on the performance
of both VAEs and AEFs. We train a VAE and AEF with and without prior and posterior flow on
CelebA-HQ (32 × 32), and report the results in BPD and FID in Table 7. Qualitatively and by
FID score we observe that for both VAE and AEF the quality of samples generated without a prior
flow present in the model are of significantly worse quality than when there is a prior flow present.
Additionally, having only a posterior flow decreases samples quality in both the VAE and the AEF.
It is interesting to note that an AEF without core encoder and prior flow still performs better than a
VAE with both posterior flow and prior flow in terms of BPD and FID score. Examples of samples
for each ablation are presented in Figure 11 and Figure 12.

                                                                                                                      BPD          FID
                                                                 VAE (no flows)                                       6.68         77.2
                                                                 VAE (only posterior)                                 6.56         81.5
                                                                 VAE (only prior)                                     6.71         74.1
                                                                 VAE (both flows)                                     6.67         68.1
                                                                 AEF (no flows)                                       5.90         64.4
                                                                 AEF (only posterior)                                 5.88         108
                                                                 AEF (only prior)                                     6.05         37.6
                                                                 AEF (both flows)                                     5.90         35.6

Table 7: Ablation results of VAEs and AEFs with and without a posterior flow/core encoder and prior
flow.


                                                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         VAE                                                AEF


(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)


Figure 11: Samples and reconstructions of VAEs and AEFs trained on CelebA-HQ resized to 32 × 32
with: 1) no posterior or prior flow; 2) only a posterior flow; 3) only a prior flow; 4) both posterior
and prior flows. All models had a latent dimensionality of 128. Samples were generated with a
temperature of 0.85.


                         VAE                                                AEF


(1)


(2)


(3)


(4)



Figure 12: Samples and reconstructions of VAEs and AEFs trained on MNIST with: 1) no posterior
or prior flow; 2) only a posterior flow; 3) only a prior flow; 4) both posterior and prior flows. All
models had a latent dimensionality of 32. Samples were generated with a temperature of 0.85.


                                                 22
