Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


T OWARDS S KILLED P OPULATION C URRICULUM FOR
M ULTI -AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Recent advances in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) allow agents to
         coordinate their behaviors in complex environments. However, common MARL
         algorithms still suffer from scalability and sparse reward issues. One promising
         approach to resolve them is automatic curriculum learning (ACL), where a student
         (curriculum learner) train on tasks of increasing difficulty controlled by a teacher
         (curriculum generator). Unfortunately, in spite of its success, ACL’s applicability is
         restricted due to: (1) lack of a general student framework to deal with the varying
         number of agents across tasks and the sparse reward problem, and (2) the non-
         stationarity in the teacher’s task due to the ever-changing student strategies. As a
         remedy for ACL, we introduce a novel automatic curriculum learning framework,
         Skilled Population Curriculum (SPC), adapting curriculum learning to multi-agent
         coordination. To be specific, we endow the student with population-invariant com-
         munication and a hierarchical skill set. Thus, the student can learn cooperation and
         behavior skills from distinct tasks with a varying number of agents. In addition,
         we model the teacher as a contextual bandit conditioned by student policies. As
         a result, a team of agents can change its size while retaining previously acquired
         skills. We also analyze the inherent non-stationarity of this multi-agent automatic
         curriculum teaching problem, and provide a corresponding regret bound. Empirical
         results show that our method improves scalability, sample efficiency, and general-
         ization in multiple MARL environments. The source code and the video can be
         found at https://sites.google.com/view/marl-spc/.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) has long been a go-to tool in complex robotic and
strategic domains (RoboCup, 2019; OpenAI, 2019). However, learning effective policies with
sparse reward from scratch for large-scale multi-agent systems remains challenging. One of the
challenges is that the joint observation-action space grows exponentially with varying numbers of
agents. Meanwhile, the sparse reward signal requires a large number of training trajectories. Hence,
applying existing MARL algorithms directly to complex environments with a large number of agents
is not effective. In fact, they may produce agents that do not collaborate with each other even when it
is of significant benefit (Zhang et al., 2021; Yang & Wang, 2020).
There are several lines of work related to the large-scale MARL problem with sparse reward,
including: reward shaping (Hu et al., 2020), curriculum learning (Chen et al., 2021), and learning from
demonstrations (Huang et al., 2021). Among these approaches, the curriculum learning paradigm, in
which the difficulty of experienced tasks and the population of training agents progressively grow,
shows particular promise. In automatic curriculum learning (ACL), a teacher (curriculum generator)
learns to adjust the complexity and sequencing of tasks faced by a student (curriculum learner).
Several works have even proposed multi-agent ACL algorithms, based on approximate or heuristic
approaches to teaching, such as DyMA-CL (Wang et al., 2020c), EPC (Long et al., 2020), and VACL
(Chen et al., 2021). However, DyMA-CL and EPC rely on a framework of an off-policy student with
replay buffer, and ignore the forgetting problem that arises when the agent population size grows.
ACL relies on the strong assumption that the value of the learned policy does not change when agents
switch to a different task. Moreover, the teacher in these approaches is still facing an unmitigated
non-stationarity problem due to the ever-changing student strategies. In addition, if we somewhat
expand the ACL paradigm and presume that the teacher may have another purpose for the sequence


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of tasks performed by the student, another class of larger-scale MARL solutions should be mentioned.
Namely, hierarchical MARL, which learns temporal abstraction with more dense rewards, including:
skill discovery (Yang et al., 2019), option as response (Vezhnevets et al., 2019), role-based MARL
(Wang et al., 2020b), and two levels of abstraction (Pang et al., 2019). Alas, hierarchical MARL
mostly focuses on one specific task with a fixed number of agents and does not consider the transfer
ability of learned complementary skills. In this paper, we informally give our answer to a question:
Can an elaborate combination of ACL and hierarchical principles learn complex cooperation with
sparse reward in MARL?
Specifically, we present a novel automatic curriculum learning algorithm, Skilled Population Curricu-
lum (SPC), which learns cooperative behaviors from scratch. The core idea of SPC is to encourage
the student to learn skills from tasks with different numbers of agents. Motivation from the real world
is team sports, where players often train their skills by gradually increasing the difficulty of tasks and
the number of coordinating players. In particular, we implement SPC with three key components
with the teacher-student framework. First, to solve the final complex cooperative tasks, we model the
teacher as a contextual bandit, where we utilize an RNN-based (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997)
imitation model to represent student policies and use this to generate the bandit’s context. Second,
to handle the varying number of agents across these tasks, motivated by the transformer (Vaswani
et al., 2017), which can process sentences of varying lengths, we implement population-invariant
communication by treating each agent’s message as a word. Thus, a self-attention communication
channel is used to support an arbitrary number of agents sharing their messages. Third, to learn
transferable skills in the sparse reward setting, we utilize the skill framework in the student. Agents
communicate on the high level about a set of shared low-level policies. Empirical results show that
our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in several tasks in the multi-particle environment
(MPE) (Lowe et al., 2017) and the challenging 5vs5 competition in Google Research Football (GRF)
(Kurach et al., 2019).

2    P RELIMINARIES

Dec-POMDP. A cooperative MARL problem can be formulated as a decentralized partially observ-
able Markov decision process (Dec-POMDP) (Bernstein et al., 2002), which is described as a tuple
⟨n, S, A, P, R, O, Ω, γ⟩, where n represents the number of agents. S represents the space of global
states. A = {Ai }i=1,··· ,n denotes the space of actions of all agents. O = {Oi }i=1,··· ,n denotes
the space of observations of all agents. P : S × A → S denotes the state transition probability
function. All agents share the same reward as a function of the states and actions of the agents
R : S × A → R. Each agent i receives a private observation oi ∈ Oi according to the observation
function Ω(s, i) : S → Oi . γ ∈ [0, 1] denotes the discount factor.
Multi-armed Bandit. Multi-armed bandits (MABs) are a simple but very powerful framework that
repeatedly makes decisions under uncertainty. In an MAB, a learner performs a sequence of actions.
After every action, the learner immediately observes the reward corresponding to its action. Given a
set of K actions and a time horizon T , the objective is to maximize its total reward over T rounds.
The regret is used to measure the gap between the cumulative reward of an MAB algorithm and the
best-arm benchmark. An representative work is the Exp3 algorithm (Auer et al., 2002),p      which is
proposed to increase the probability of pulling good arms and achieves a regret of O( KT log(K))
under a time-varying reward distribution. Another related work is the contextual bandit problem
(Hazan & Megiddo, 2007), where the learner makes decisions based on some prior information as the
context.

3    S KILLED P OPULATION C URRICULUM

In this section, we first provide a formal definition of the curriculum-enhanced Dec-POMDP frame-
work, which formulates the MARL with curriculum problem under the Dec-POMDP framework.
We then present our multi-agent automatic curriculum learning algorithm named Skilled Population
Curriculum (SPC) as shown in Fig. 1. In the following subsections, we first formulate the curriculum
learning framework in 3.1, then propose a contextual multi-armed bandit algorithm as the teacher
to deal with the non-stationarity in 3.2, and last introduce the student with a skill and population-
invariant communication framework to tackle the varying number of agents and the sparse reward
problem in 3.3.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Teacher                                    Student                             Population-invariant
                                                  𝝅𝒉        skill     𝝅𝒍
         Contexts                                                                                     𝒂𝒉,𝒋              𝒂𝒋
                                                                                 𝒐𝒋           𝝅𝒉,𝒋             𝝅𝒍𝒐𝒘
                  …                          hidden                      𝒐
                                             state    RNN                               𝒎𝒋           ෥𝒋
                                                                                                     𝒎       view of agent j
                                                                         𝒂
                                        𝝓𝒊                                       𝒎𝟏                            ෥𝟏
                                                                                                               𝒎
 Prob.                                         𝒐, 𝒓                     𝒂
                                                                                             self-att
                                                                                 𝒎𝟐                    ෥𝟐
                                                                                                       𝒎
                                Tasks          Env                                    …      channel …
                  …                                                              𝒎𝒏𝝓𝒊                          ෥ 𝒏𝝓
                                                                                                               𝒎
          𝝓𝟏 𝝓𝟐       𝝓𝒌−𝟏 𝝓𝒌
                                    𝒓𝒕𝒆𝒂𝒄𝒉𝒆𝒓    𝑛𝜙𝑖 , 𝑺𝜙𝑖 , 𝑨𝜙𝑖 , 𝑃𝜙𝑖 , 𝑟 𝜙𝑖                                        𝒊


Figure 1: The overall framework of SPC. It consists of three parts: configurable environments, a
teacher, and a student. Left. The teacher is modeled as a contextual multi-armed bandit. At each
teacher timestep, the teacher chooses a training task from the distribution of bandit actions. Mid. The
student is endowed with population-invariant communication and a skill framework, and trained with
MARL algorithms on the training task. The student returns to the teacher not only the hidden state of
RNN imitation model as contexts but also the average discounted cumulative rewards on the testing
task. Right. The student learns hierarchical policies. The population-invariant communication is on
the high level, and implemented with a self-attention communication channel to handle the messages
from varying number of agents. The agents in the student share the same low-level policy.


3.1      P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

We consider environments from multi-agent automatic curriculum learning problems are equipped
with parameterized task spaces and thus can be modeled as curriculum-enhanced Dec-POMDPs.
Definition 3.1 (Curriculum-enhanced Dec-POMDP). A curriculum-enhanced Dec-POMDP is defined
by a tuple ⟨Φ, M⟩, where Φ and M represent a task
                                                  space and a Dec-POMDP, respectively. Given the
task ϕ, the Dec-POMDP M(ϕ) is presented as nϕ , S ϕ , Aϕ , P ϕ , rϕ , Oϕ , Ωϕ , γ ϕ . The superscript
ϕ denotes that the Dec-POMDP elements are determined by the task ϕ. Note that task ϕ can be
a few parameters of the environment or task IDs in a finite task space. In a curriculum-enhanced
Dec-POMDP, the objective is to improve the student’s performance on the target tasks through the
sequence of training tasks given by the teacher..

Let τ denote a trajectory whose unconditional distribution Prπ,ϕ        (τ ) under a policy π and a task ϕ
                                                               P∞ µ
with initial state distribution µ(s0 ) is Prπ,ϕ
                                            µ   (τ ) = µ (s0 )  t=0 π  (a           ϕ
                                                                          t | st ) P (st+1 | st , at ). We use
p(ϕ) to represent the distribution of target tasks and q(ϕ) to represent the distribution of training tasks
at each task sampling step. We consider the joint agents’ policies πθ (a|s) and qψ (ϕ) parameterized
by θ and ψ, respectively. The overall objective to maximize in a curriculum-enhanced Dec-POMDP
is:
                                                                          p(ϕ)
                  J(θ, ψ) = Eϕ∼p(ϕ),τ ∼Prπµ Rϕ (τ ) = Eϕ∼qψ (ϕ)

                                                                                  V (ϕ, πθ )               (1)
                                                                         qψ (ϕ)
where Rϕ (τ ) = t γ t rϕ (st , at ; s0 ) and V (ϕ, πθ ) represent the value function of πθ in Dec-POMDP
                   P
M(ϕ). However, when optimizing qψ (ϕ), we cannot get the partial derivative ∇ψ J(θ, ψ) =
∇ψ τ qψ1(ϕ) Rϕ (τ ) Prπ,ϕ        1
     P
                           µ (τ ) since the reward function and the transition probability function
w.r.t number of agents are non-parametric, non-differentiable, and discontinuous in most MARL
scenarios.
Thus, we use the non-differentiable method, i.e., multi-armed bandit algorithms, to optimize qψ (ϕ),
and use an RL algorithm (the student) in alternating periods to optimize πθ (a|s). However, there are
three key challenges in solving this problem: (1) There is a lack of a general student framework to
deal with the varying number of agents across tasks and the sparse reward problem. (2) The teacher
is facing a non-stationarity problem due to the ever-changing student’s strategies. (3) The student
will forget the old tasks and need to re-learning them. Some tasks can be the prerequisites of other
tasks, while some can be inter-independent and parallel.
   1
       p(ϕ) is not in the partial derivative since it is a fixed distribution.


                                                                3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2     T EACHER MODELED AS A N ON -S TATIONARY C ONTEXTUAL BANDIT

As mentioned in the previous subsection, the teacher is facing a non-stationarity problem due to the
ever-changing student’s strategies, since the student learns across different tasks in process. That is,
in different stages of student learning, the teacher will observe different student’s performances when
giving the same task to the student, thus leading to a time-varying reward distribution of the teacher.
In addition, the student might forget the learned policy during the learning process. To avoid this
problem, the teacher should offer some trained tasks to the student. It can be seen as the exploitation
and exploration problem of the teacher. The teacher is encouraged to give the training tasks that
benefit the student’s performance on the target tasks; however, there is still a need for sufficient
exploration on various training tasks that may not directly facilitate the student’s learning.
Fortunately, we notice that the non-stationarity stems from the student, which can be mitigated with
a contextual bandit which embeds the student policy into the context. As shown in Fig. 1 Left, the
teacher takes the student’s policy representation as the context and chooses a task from the distribution
of training tasks. Specifically, we extend the Exp3 algorithm (Auer et al., 2002) with context by
two-step online clustering (see Alg.1(Zhang et al., 1996)). The context x is the student’s policy
representation, the teacher’s action is a certain task ϕ, and the teacher’s reward is the return of the
student in the target tasks. The teacher’s algorithm is listed below. In steps 1-4, the teacher samples a
task for the student’s training. In steps 6-7, the teacher would update the parameters based on the
evaluation reward of the student. So, we need to learn a good representation for the student’s policy
as the context.

Algorithm 1 Teacher Sampling and Training
Input: Context x, the number of Clusters Nc , Nc instances of Exp3 with task distribution
w(ϕk , c) for k = 1, . . . , K and for c = 1, . . . , Nc , learning rate α, a buffer maintaining the his-
torical contexts
Output: M(ϕ) = nϕ , S ϕ , Aϕ , P ϕ , rϕ , Oϕ , Ωϕ , γ ϕ , the teacher bandit parameters
Sampling
1. Get the the context x, and save it to the buffer
2. Run the online cluster algorithm and get the index of the cluster center c(x)
3. Let the active Exp3 instance be the instance with index c(x)
                                       (1−α)w(ϕk ,c(x))       α
4. Set the probability p(ϕk , c(x)) = P   K
                                             w(ϕ ,c(x))
                                                          +K    for each task ϕk
                                         j=1    k
5. Sample a new task according to the distribution of pϕk ,c
Training
6. Get the return (discounted cumulative rewards) from student testing r
7. Update the active Exp3 instance by setting w(ϕk , c(x)) = w(ϕk , c(x))eαr/K

3.2.1    C ONTEXT R EPRESENTATION
A straightforward representation is to directly use the student parameters θ as the context. However,
the number of parameters is too large to be used as the input of neural network if we change the
student’s architecture. Thus, we turn to an alternative method.
A principle to learn a good representation of a policy is predictive representation, that is, the
representation should be accurate to predict policy actions given states. According to the principle, we
utilize an imitation function through supervised learning. Supervised learning does not require direct
access to reward signals, making it an attractive approach for reward-agnostic representation learning.
Intuitively, the imitation function attempts to mimic low-level policy based on historical behaviors.
In practice, we use an RNN-based imitation function fim : S × A → [0, 1]. Since recurrent neural
networks are theoretically Turing complete (Hyötyniemi, 1996), its internal states can be used as the
representation of the student’s policy. Regarding the training of this imitation function, we use the
negative cross entropy objective E[log fim (s, a)].

3.2.2    R EGRET A NALYSIS
In this subsection, we  show the regret bound of the proposed teacher algorithm E[R(T )] =
O T 2/3 (LK log T )1/3 , where T is the number of total rounds, L is the Lipschitz constant, and K
is the number of arms (the number of the teacher’s actions). The regret analysis is used to justify the


                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


usage of the bandit algorithm in the non-stationary setting. Since the teacher’s reward is the return of
the student in the target tasks, the regret bound shows the optimality of the proposed method.
First, we introduce the Lipschitz assumption about the generalization ability of the task space.
Assumption 3.2 (Lipschitz continuity w.r.t the context). Without loss of generality, the contexts are
mapped into the [0, 1] interval, so that the expected rewards for the teacher are Lipschitz with respect
to the context.
                         |r(ϕ | x) − r (ϕ | x′ )| ≤ L · |x − x′ |
                                                                                                     (2)
                        for any arm ϕ ∈ Φ and any pair of contexts x, x′ ∈ X
where L is the Lipschitz constant, and X is the context space.

This assumption suggests that, for any policy that is trained on a set of tasks, the rate of performance
change is not faster than the rate of policy change. It is a realistic assumption since we cannot expect
the student to achieve a dramatic improvement on a given task when the student is represented by a
new context via a few training steps.
Then, we borrow a contextual bandit algorithm for a small number of contexts (Auer et al., 2002)
(see Appendix Alg. 2) and the lemma 3.3, as a stepping stone for the proof of Theorem 3.4.
                                             p
Lemma 3.3. Alg. 2 has regret E[R(T )] = O( T K|X | log K).

Lemma 3.3 introduces a square root dependence on |X | if running a separate copy of Exp3 for each
context (Auer et al., 2002). It motivates us to handle large context space by discretization.
Theorem 3.4. Consider the Lipschitz contextual     bandit problem with contexts in [0, 1]. The Alg. 1
yields regret E[R(T )] = O T 2/3 (LK ln T )1/3 .

Proof. See Appendix B for the proof.
In practice, the contextual space is high-dimensional instead of in [0, 1], and a uniform mesh is used
to discretize the context space in the proof. Since we cannot have such a uniform mesh, without loss
of generality, we utilize the Balanced Iterative Reducing and Clustering using Hierarchies (BIRCH)
online clustering algorithm (Zhang et al., 1996) to generate and discretize the context space. BIRCH
summarizes large datasets into a smaller tree with clustered leaf nodes. The clustering is efficient
and easy to update for newly added data. Thus, it is suitable for clustering the RNN-based policy
representation. At the end of the training, the cluster can be seen as an approximation of the uniform
mesh.

3.3   S TUDENT WITH P OPULATION -I NVARIANT S KILLS

Here, to tackle the varying number of agents and the sparse reward problem, we propose a population-
invariant skill framework where agents can communicate via a self-attention channel. In this
framework, agents can learn the skills that can be transferred between different tasks. The student
module is MARL algorithm-agnostic. It is orthogonal to any state-of-the-art MARL algorithm.
Although there are few researches (Iqbal et al., 2021; Hu et al., 2021) trying to address the varying
number of agents, they heavily rely on the prior knowledge of the environments.
Population-Invariant Teamwork Communication. Instead of learning independent policies for
agents in the student, we introduce communication to enable the population-invariant property and
learn tactics among agents. Motivated by the fact that the transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) in natural
language processing can handle varying lengths of sentences, we use the self-attention mechanism in
our communication. As shown in Fig. 1 Right, each agent j receives an observation oj . In each round
of communication, each agent j sends a message vector mj = f (oj ) to a self-attention channel,
where f is an observation encoder function.
The channel aggregates all messages and sends the new message vector m̃j through the self-attention
mechanism. Concretely, given the input of the channel M = [m1 , m2 , · · · , mn ] ∈ Rn×dm and
the trainable weight of the channel WQ , WK , WV ∈ Rdm ×dm , we can obtain three different
representations Q = MWQ , K = MWK , V = MWV . Then, the output messages are
                                                     QKT

             M̃ = Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax √             V = [m̃1 , m̃2 , · · · , m̃n ]     (3)
                                                       dm

                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  Simple Spread              Push Ball


               Agents             Landmark   Ball

                              (a)                                        (b)

    Figure 2: The environments. (a): Multi-particle Environment. (b): Google Reaserach Football
where dm is the dimension of the messages. Since the dimensions of the trainable weight are irrelevant
to the number of agents, the student can take advantage of the population-invariant property to learn
tactics.
Transferable Hierarchical Skills. As shown in the dotted box in Fig. 1 Right, after receiving the
new messages m̃j from the channel, each agent takes the high-level action (skill) ah,j = πh,j (oj , m̃j )
to execute the low-level policy aj = πlow (oj , ah,j ). In this work, we generalize the high-level action
(skill) ah,j to a continuous embedding space, so that the skill can be either a latent continuous vector
as in DIAYN (Eysenbach et al., 2018), or a categorical distribution for sampling discrete options
(Bacon et al., 2017).
Implementation. We implement the high- and low-level policies in the student with Proximal Policy
Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017). Following the common practice proposed in (Fu et al.,
2022), the high-level policy for each agent is learned independently, whereas the low-level policies
share parameters, since the most basic action pattern should be the same within different agents. The
low-level agent is rewarded by the environment. The high-level policy takes actions given a fixed
interval during training. Within this interval, a cumulative low-level reward is used as a high-level
reward. When the categorical distribution is used to enable a discrete skill, we would sample an
“option” from the categorical distribution and feed the corresponding one-hot embedding to the
low-level policy.

4    F URTHER R ELATED W ORK
Automatic Curriculum Learning in MARL. Curriculum learning is a training strategy inspired
by the human learning process, mimicking how humans learn new concepts in an orderly manner,
usually based on the difficulty level of the problems (Portelas et al., 2020b). The selection of tasks is
formulated as a Curriculum Markov Decision Process (CMDP) (Narvekar & Stone, 2018). Automatic
Curriculum Learning mechanisms aim to learn a task selection function based on information about
past interactions, such as ADR (Akkaya et al., 2019; Mehta et al., 2020), ALP-GMM (Portelas et al.,
2020a), SPCL (Jiang et al., 2015), GoalGAN (Florensa et al., 2018), PLR (Jiang et al., 2021b;a),
SPDL (Klink et al., 2020), CURROT (Klink et al., 2022), and graph-curriculum (Svetlik et al.,
2017). Inspired by the mechanism of biodiversity in nature, a series of MARL curriculum learning
frameworks have recently been proposed with remarkable empirical success. These include open-
ended evolution (Banzhaf et al., 2016; Lehman et al., 2008; Standish, 2003), population-based training
(Jaderberg et al., 2019; Liu et al., 2019), meta-learning (Gupta et al., 2021; Portelas et al., 2020c) and
training with emergent curriculum (Baker et al., 2019; Leibo et al., 2019; Portelas et al., 2020b). In
general, these frameworks can be unified under the idea of an automatic curriculum that automatically
generates an endless procession of better performing agents by exerting selection pressure among
many self-optimizing agents.
Hierarchical MARL and Communication. Hierarchical reinforcement learning (HRL) has been
extensively studied to address the sparse reward problem and to facilitate transfer learning. Single-
agent HRL focuses on learning the temporal decomposition of tasks, either by learning subgoals
(Nachum et al., 2018b;a; Sukhbaatar et al., 2018; Nair & Finn, 2019; Wang et al., 2021) or by
discovering reusable skills (Daniel et al., 2012; Gregor et al., 2016; Shankar & Gupta, 2020; Sharma
et al., 2020). Recent works about hierarchical MARL have been discussed in the Introduction. In
multi-agent settings, communication has demonstrated success in multi-agent cooperation (Foerster
et al., 2016; Das et al., 2019; Sukhbaatar et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2018; Jiang & Lu, 2018; Kim et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2020a). However, existing approaches that extend HRL to multi-agent systems or


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


utilize communication are limited to a fixed number of agents and are hard to transfer with different
number of agents.
Google Research Football (Kurach et al., 2019). Recent works attempt to tackle multi-agent
scenarios in GRF by using a containerized learning framework (Wu et al., 2021), learning from
demonstration (Huang et al., 2021), individuality (Jiang & Lu, 2021), and diversity (Li et al., 2021).
However, they mainly focus on single-agent control, or train relatively easy academy tasks in GRF, or
use offline expert data to train agents.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We consider several tasks in two environments, Simple-Spread and Push-Ball in the Multi-agent
Particle-world Environment (MPE) (Lowe et al., 2017), and the challenging 5vs5 task of GRF (Kurach
et al., 2019), to further demonstrate the performance of our approach.
We aim to answer the following three research questions. Q1: Is curriculum learning needed in the
complex large-scale MARL problem? (Sec. 5.2) Q2: Can our SPC outperform previous curriculum-
based MARL methods? If so, which components in SPC contributes the most to performance gains?
(Sec. 5.3) Q3: Can SPC learn a good curriculum for the student? (Sec. 5.4)

5.1   E NVIRONMENTS , BASELINES AND M ETRIC
Environments. In the GRF 5vs5 scenario, we need to control 4 agents (except the goalkeeper) to
compete with the opponent built-in AI. Each agent would observe a compact encoding, which consists
of a 115-dimensional vector summarizing many aspects of the game, such as player coordinates, ball
possession and direction, active player, and game mode. The action set available to an individual
agent consists of 19 discrete actions such as idle, movement, passing, shooting, dribbling, or sliding.
The GRF provides two types of reward: scoring and checkpoints, to encourage the agent to move the
ball forward and have a successful shot.
In MPE, we investigate Simple-Spread and Push-Ball (see Fig. 2a). In Simple-Spread, there are n
agents that need to cover all n landmarks. Agents are penalized for collisions and only receive a
positive reward when all the landmarks are covered. In Push-Ball, there are n agents, n balls, and n
landmarks. The agents need to push the balls to cover every landmark. A success reward is given
after all the landmarks have been covered.
Baselines. We evaluate the following approaches as baseline in Table 1:
We compare MARL algorithms to justify                    Table 1: Baseline algorithms.
curriculum learning in the complex large-
scale MARL problem. Also, we modify                Categories                 Methods
VACL by removing the centralized critic               MARL            QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018)
for a fair comparison of the MPE. Due                  (Q1)           IPPO (de Witt et al., 2020)
to the difficulty of the GRF, we include
                                               Curriculum-based IPPO with uniform task sampling
a shooting reward to encourage the student
                                                     (Q2)          VACL (Chen et al., 2021)
to shoot.
                                                 Ablation Study SPC with uniform task sampling
Metric. Even if we use the reward to opti-             (Q3)           SPC without HRL and COM
mize various algorithms, the mean episode
reward in such environments cannot show the performance of the agents. Therefore, for GRF scenar-
ios, we plot the win rate and the average goal difference, which is the number of goals scored by the
MARL agents minus the number of goals scored by the other team.
The experiments are carried out on 30 nodes, one of which has a 128-core CPU and 4 A100 GPUs.
Each experiment trial is repeated over 5 seeds and runs for 1-2 days.

5.2   T HE N ECESSITY OF C URRICULUM L EARNING
First, we describe experiments using MPE. In contrast to the fully observable setting and the
centralized critic in VACL, we consider individual PPO in partially observable environments with
default rewards. We randomly pick a starting state, and the episode ends after a fixed number of
maximum steps. To be specific, the task space consists of n agents, where n ∈ {2, 4, 8, 16}. We set
the maximum allowed steps to 25. All evaluations are performed on the target task, where n = 16.
IPPO is trained and evaluated directly on the target task. In Fig. 3, we can see that IPPO performs


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         (a) Cover Rate on Simple Spread                               (b) Cover Rate on Push Ball                                                                      (a) Simple Spread                          (b) Push Ball
                                                                                            IPPO                                                                             16                                        16
                     0.40
                                                                                            VACL                                                                             14                                        14


                                                                                                                                                     Mean Number of Agents
                                                                                0.30
Cover Rate in Eval   0.35                                                                   SPC
                                                                                                                                                                             12                                        12
                     0.30
                                                                                                                                                                             10                                        10
                     0.25                                                       0.25
                                                                                                                                                                              8                                          8
                     0.20
                                                                                                                                                                              6                                          6
                                                                      IPPO
                     0.15                                                       0.20                                                                                          4                                          4
                                                                      VACL                                                                                                                                    VACL                                     VACL
                     0.10                                             SPC                                                                                                                                     SPC                                      SPC
                                                                                                                                                                              2                                          2
                                0.0                0.5        1.0         1.5                   2           4                                                                  0.0         0.5       1.0         1.5          0      2         4           6
                                                 Training Timesteps      1e6                  Training Timesteps     1e5                                                                 Training Timesteps     1e6               Training Timesteps     1e5



Figure 3: The evaluation performance of vari-                                                                                            Figure 4: The changes in the number of agents
ous methods on MPE.                                                                                                                      on MPE.

                                                     SPC                                                                                                                             SPC
                                                     SPC w. uniform                                                                                  4                               SPC w. uniform
                                          0.8
                                                     SPC w/o. HRL                                                                                                                    SPC w/o. HRL
                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                     SPC w/o. COM                                                                                                                    SPC w/o. COM


                                                                                                                               Goal Diff. in Eval
                       Win Rate in Eval


                                          0.6        IPPO w. uniform                                                                                 2                               IPPO w. uniform
                                                     IPPO w/o. teacher                                                                                                               IPPO w/o. teacher
                                                     QMix w/o. teacher                                                                               1
                                          0.4
                                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                                                                                                    −1
                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                    −2

                                          0.0                                                                                                       −3
                                                0M         20 M          40 M         60 M           80 M          100 M                                                     0M            20 M          40 M         60 M        80 M        100 M
                                                                         Training Timesteps                                                                                                              Training Timesteps


                                                                      (a) Win Rate                                                                                                             (b) Goal Difference
      Figure 5: The evaluation performance of various methods on 5vs5 football competition.
nearly VACL. SPC achieves a higher coverage rate than the baseline methods, but the improvement
is not significant. Furthermore, we experimentally investigate the probability variation of different
population sizes in Fig. 4. We observe that the curriculum afforded by SPC is approaching the
target task. The results illustrate that in a simple environment where the student can directly learn to
complete the task, there is no need to apply curriculum learning.
Then we show the performance comparison with the baselines in GRF. We also run CDS (Li et al.,
2021) and CMARL (Wu et al., 2021), however, we did not include their performances, since the goal
difference reported in CMARL (Wu et al., 2021) is relatively low compared to our method. In Fig. 5a
, we can see that without the curriculum learning scheme, QMix and IPPO cannot perform well in
the 5vs5 scenario. However, IPPO is slightly better than QMix in the scope of MARL algorithms
in this scenario. In Fig. 5b, we omit the lines of QMix since the mean score is low, affecting the
presentation of the figure. The reason could be that QMix is an off-policy MARL algorithm, which
would rely heavily on the replay buffer. However, in such sparse reward scenarios, the replay buffer
has much less efficient samples for QMix to learn. For example, the replay buffer would contain tons
of zero-score samples, leading to a non-promising performance. Meanwhile, IPPO with a shared actor
and critic, an on-policy algorithm, would utilize the samples more efficiently. Therefore, curriculum
learning is a promising solution to the complex large-scale MARL problem.
During our experiments, we found that IPPO or shared parameter PPO can easily achieve good
performance in most academic scenarios in GRF. However, 5vs5 is an obstacle for agents to handle
more complex scenarios. Due to the limitation of computational resources, we tested SPC in the
11vs11 scenario. The result can be seen in the Appendix C.

5.3                                         P ERFORMANCE AND A BLATION S TUDY
In the experiments on MPE, In both environments, SPC performs better than VACL. Instead of
training with continuous relaxation of the categorical distribution of population size in VACL, our
bandit teacher achieves a higher success rate at test time, since the population size is a discrete
variable in nature. Also, in Fig. 4, we observe that the curriculum provided by SPC is effective in
exploring the task space as agents become increasingly competent.
In the experiments on GRF, we do not include VACL in our baselines in the GRF, since the imple-
mentation in the source code of VACL is heavily based on prior knowledge of specific scenarios,
such as the threshold to divide the learning process. We can see that SPC has higher win rate
and goal difference than IPPO with uniform task sampling in the 5vs5 football competition. The
experiments on MPE and GRF show that when the teacher is rewarded by the student’s performance,


                                                                                                                           8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 1.0                                                                    1.0
                                                                                                                                     0
                           5_vs_5
                                                                                                                                     1
                           3_vs_3
                 0.8                                                                                                                 2
                           academy_pass_and_shoot_with_keeper                           0.5                                          3
                           academy_3_vs_1


                                                                          Dimension 2
    Task Prob.



                 0.6       academy_empty_goal_close

                                                                                        0.0
                 0.4


                 0.2                                                                    -0.5



                 0.0
                         20 M   40 M    60 M 80 M 100 M 120 M 140 M                                 -0.5          0.0              0.5
                                       Training Timesteps                                                  Dimension 1

          (a) The task distribution of SPC during training.                                    (b) The visualization of contexts

                          Figure 6: Visualization of Learned Curriculum.
the bandit-based teacher can exploit the student learning stage and give the suitable training tasks to
the student.
For ablation study, we replace our contextual multi-armed bandit teacher with uniform task sampling
and remove the hierarchical part in the student framework. As shown in Figs. 5a, 5b, we can clearly
see that SPC can achieve a higher win rate and a greater score difference than SPC with uniform
and SPC w/o. HRL. Also, SPC with uniform task sampling outperforms IPPO with uniform task
sampling. The difference between these two methods is only the introduction of HRL. It shows
the contribution of HRL in the 5vs5 football competition. When removing HRL and contextual
multi-armed bandit, the performance degradation w.r.t. SPC are similar. It shows that HRL and
the contextual multi-armed bandit seem to contribute equally. This can again justify the need for
a curriculum learning scheme. However, we can see that SPC w. uniform has a larger variance in
performance than SPC w/o. HRL. It means that uniform sampling might introduce more undesired
tasks for student training.

5.4                    V ISUALIZATION OF L EARNED C URRICULUM
We visualize the distribution of task sampling of SPC during training based on a selected trial as shown
in Fig. 6a. An interesting observation is that the task probability seems nearly uniform. We interpret
this into an anti-forgetting mechanism. We can see that at the beginning of training, the task probability
seems to be near-uniform, since the teacher should explore the task space and try to keep track of
the student’s learning status. During training, the probabilities vary over time steps. For example,
at about 80-100 million timesteps, we can see a sudden drop in academy empty goal close
and academy 3 vs 1 with keeper, since the student almost handles the skills learned in such
scenarios. However, when training is continued, we can still observe that agents are trained on these
tasks more frequently. We also visualize the distribution of contexts in Fig. 6b using t-SNE (Van der
Maaten & Hinton, 2008). The contexts are collected and stored in a buffer. We divide the contexts
into four classes according to the index. We can clearly see different parts in terms of different
contexts about the final student policy representation.

6                 D ISCUSSION

Conclusion. We introduce a novel ACL algorithm, Skilled Population Curriculum (SPC). SPC
addresses the scalability and sparse reward issue in current multi-agent system and learns complex
behaviors from scratch. Specifically, to handle the varying number of agents, we incorporate a
population-invariant multi-agent communication framework and exploit a hierarchical scheme for
each agent to learn skills to deal with sparse rewards. Moreover, to mitigate the non-stationarity, we
model the teacher as a contextual bandit, where the context is represented by the student’s policy
representation. Empirical results show that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
several tasks in the multi-particle environment and the challenging 5vs5 competition in GRF.
Limitations. We acknowledge some limitations of our algorithm. First, since the objective of SPC is
to solve difficulty tasks, SPC is over-designed when applied to some simple tasks. Second, the set of
subtasks is still closely related to the environment. Lastly, it remains unclear how much the number
of agents can affect the dynamics of the environment since we treat it as a black-box optimization.


                                                                      9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Ilge Akkaya, Marcin Andrychowicz, Maciek Chociej, Mateusz Litwin, Bob McGrew, Arthur Petron,
   Alex Paino, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Raphael Ribas, et al. Solving rubik’s cube with a
   robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113, 2019.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, Yoav Freund, and Robert E Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed
  bandit problem. SIAM Journal on Computing, 32(1):48–77, 2002.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Bowen Baker, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Todor Markov, Yi Wu, Glenn Powell, Bob McGrew, and Igor
  Mordatch. Emergent tool use from multi-agent autocurricula. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07528,
  2019.
Wolfgang Banzhaf, Bert Baumgaertner, Guillaume Beslon, René Doursat, James A Foster, Barry Mc-
 Mullin, Vinicius Veloso De Melo, Thomas Miconi, Lee Spector, Susan Stepney, et al. Defining and
 simulating open-ended novelty: Requirements, guidelines, and challenges. Theory in Biosciences,
 135(3):131–161, 2016.
Daniel S Bernstein, Robert Givan, Neil Immerman, and Shlomo Zilberstein. The complexity of
  decentralized control of Markov Decision Processes. Mathematics of Operations Research, 27(4):
  819–840, 2002.
Jiayu Chen, Yuanxin Zhang, Yuanfan Xu, Huimin Ma, Huazhong Yang, Jiaming Song, Yu Wang,
   and Yi Wu. Variational automatic curriculum learning for sparse-reward cooperative multi-agent
   problems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.
Christian Daniel, Gerhard Neumann, and Jan Peters. Hierarchical relative entropy policy search. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 273–281, 2012.
Abhishek Das, Théophile Gervet, Joshua Romoff, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, Mike Rabbat, and Joelle
  Pineau. Tarmac: Targeted multi-agent communication. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1538–1546. PMLR, 2019.
Christian Schroeder de Witt, Tarun Gupta, Denys Makoviichuk, Viktor Makoviychuk, Philip HS
  Torr, Mingfei Sun, and Shimon Whiteson. Is independent learning all you need in the StarCraft
  multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.09533, 2020.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for
  reinforcement learning agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1515–1528.
  PMLR, 2018.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando De Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning
  to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Wei Fu, Chao Yu, Zelai Xu, Jiaqi Yang, and Yi Wu. Revisiting some common practices in cooperative
 multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07505, 2022.
Karol Gregor, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Daan Wierstra. Variational intrinsic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.07507, 2016.
Abhinav Gupta, Marc Lanctot, and Angeliki Lazaridou. Dynamic population-based meta-learning
  for multi-agent communication with natural language. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 34:16899–16912, 2021.
Elad Hazan and Nimrod Megiddo. Online learning with prior knowledge. In International Conference
  on Computational Learning Theory, pp. 499–513. Springer, 2007.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Siyi Hu, Fengda Zhu, Xiaojun Chang, and Xiaodan Liang. Updet: Universal multi-agent rein-
  forcement learning via policy decoupling with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08001,
  2021.
Yujing Hu, Weixun Wang, Hangtian Jia, Yixiang Wang, Yingfeng Chen, Jianye Hao, Feng Wu, and
  Changjie Fan. Learning to utilize shaping rewards: A new approach of reward shaping. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2011.02669, 2020.
Shiyu Huang, Wenze Chen, Longfei Zhang, Ziyang Li, Fengming Zhu, Deheng Ye, Ting Chen, and
  Jun Zhu. Tikick: Toward playing multi-agent football full games from single-agent demonstrations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04507, 2021.
Heikki Hyötyniemi. Turing machines are recurrent neural networks. In STeP ’96/Publications of the
  Finnish Artificial Intelligence Society, 1996.
Shariq Iqbal, Christian A Schroeder De Witt, Bei Peng, Wendelin Böhmer, Shimon Whiteson, and Fei
  Sha. Randomized entity-wise factorization for multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4596–4606. PMLR, 2021.
Max Jaderberg, Wojciech M Czarnecki, Iain Dunning, Luke Marris, Guy Lever, Antonio Garcia
 Castaneda, Charles Beattie, Neil C Rabinowitz, Ari S Morcos, Avraham Ruderman, et al. Human-
 level performance in 3d multiplayer games with population-based reinforcement learning. Science,
 364(6443):859–865, 2019.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. Learning attentional communication for multi-agent cooperation.
   Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Jiechuan Jiang and Zongqing Lu. The emergence of individuality. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pp. 4992–5001. PMLR, 2021.
Lu Jiang, Deyu Meng, Qian Zhao, Shiguang Shan, and Alexander G Hauptmann. Self-paced
  curriculum learning. In Twenty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2015.
Minqi Jiang, Michael Dennis, Jack Parker-Holder, Jakob Foerster, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim
 Rocktäschel. Replay-guided adversarial environment design. Advances in Neural Information
 Processing Systems, 34:1884–1897, 2021a.
Minqi Jiang, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. Prioritized level replay. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4940–4950. PMLR, 2021b.
Daewoo Kim, Sangwoo Moon, David Hostallero, Wan Ju Kang, Taeyoung Lee, Kyunghwan Son,
  and Yung Yi. Learning to schedule communication in multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1902.01554, 2019.
Pascal Klink, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan R Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. Self-paced deep reinforcement
  learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9216–9227, 2020.
Pascal Klink, Haoyi Yang, Carlo D’Eramo, Jan Peters, and Joni Pajarinen. Curriculum reinforcement
  learning via constrained optimal transport. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  11341–11358. PMLR, 2022.
Karol Kurach, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stańczyk, Michal Zajkac, Olivier Bachem, Lasse Espeholt,
  Carlos Riquelme, Damien Vincent, Marcin Michalski, Olivier Bousquet, et al. Google research
  football: A novel reinforcement learning environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11180, 2019.
Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, et al. Exploiting open-endedness to solve problems through the
  search for novelty. In ALIFE, pp. 329–336. Citeseer, 2008.
Joel Z Leibo, Edward Hughes, Marc Lanctot, and Thore Graepel. Autocurricula and the emergence
  of innovation from social interaction: A manifesto for multi-agent intelligence research. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1903.00742, 2019.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chenghao Li, Chengjie Wu, Tonghan Wang, Jun Yang, Qianchuan Zhao, and Chongjie Zhang. Cele-
  brating diversity in shared multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02195,
  2021.
Siqi Liu, Guy Lever, Josh Merel, Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Nicolas Heess, and Thore Graepel.
  Emergent coordination through competition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.07151, 2019.
Qian Long, Zihan Zhou, Abhibav Gupta, Fei Fang, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Evolutionary popula-
  tion curriculum for scaling multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10423,
  2020.
Ryan Lowe, Yi Wu, Aviv Tamar, Jean Harb, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-agent actor-
  critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2017.
Bhairav Mehta, Manfred Diaz, Florian Golemo, Christopher J Pal, and Liam Paull. Active domain
  randomization. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 1162–1176. PMLR, 2020.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation learning
  for hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01257, 2018a.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018b.
Suraj Nair and Chelsea Finn. Hierarchical foresight: Self-supervised learning of long-horizon tasks
  via visual subgoal generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.05829, 2019.
Sanmit Narvekar and Peter Stone. Learning curriculum policies for reinforcement learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.00285, 2018.
OpenAI. OpenAI Five. https://openai.com/blog/openai-five/, 2019. Accessed
  March 4, 2019.
Zhen-Jia Pang, Ruo-Ze Liu, Zhou-Yu Meng, Yi Zhang, Yang Yu, and Tong Lu. On reinforcement
  learning for full-length game of starcraft. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2019.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
  curriculum learning of deep RL in continuously parameterized environments. In Conference on
  Robot Learning, pp. 835–853, 2020a.
Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Lilian Weng, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Automatic
  curriculum learning for deep RL: A short survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04664, 2020b.
Rémy Portelas, Clément Romac, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Meta automatic curricu-
   lum learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.08463, 2020c.
Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and Shi-
  mon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4295–4304, 2018.
RoboCup. Robocup Federation Official Website. https://www.robocup.org/, 2019. Ac-
  cessed April 10, 2019.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Tanmay Shankar and Abhinav Gupta. Learning robot skills with temporal variational inference. In
  Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning. JMLR. org, 2020.
Archit Sharma, Shixiang Gu, Sergey Levine, Vikash Kumar, and Karol Hausman. Dynamics-aware
  unsupervised discovery of skills. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Amanpreet Singh, Tushar Jain, and Sainbayar Sukhbaatar. Learning when to communicate at scale in
 multiagent cooperative and competitive tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09755, 2018.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Russell K Standish. Open-ended artificial evolution. International Journal of Computational
  Intelligence and Applications, 3(02):167–175, 2003.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Rob Fergus, et al. Learning multiagent communication with backpropagation.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Emily Denton, Arthur Szlam, and Rob Fergus. Learning goal embeddings via
  self-play for hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.09083, 2018.
Maxwell Svetlik, Matteo Leonetti, Jivko Sinapov, Rishi Shah, Nick Walker, and Peter Stone. Auto-
 matic curriculum graph generation for reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the AAAI
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 31, 2017.
Laurens Van der Maaten and Geoffrey Hinton. Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
  learning research, 9(11), 2008.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 30, 2017.
Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Yuhuai Wu, Remi Leblond, and Joel Z Leibo. Options as responses:
  Grounding behavioural hierarchies in multi-agent rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01470, 2019.
Rundong Wang, Xu He, Runsheng Yu, Wei Qiu, Bo An, and Zinovi Rabinovich. Learning efficient
  multi-agent communication: An information bottleneck approach. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, pp. 9908–9918. PMLR, 2020a.
Rundong Wang, Runsheng Yu, Bo An, and Zinovi Rabinovich. I2hrl: Interactive influence-based
  hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Conference
  on International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 3131–3138, 2021.
Tonghan Wang, Tarun Gupta, Anuj Mahajan, Bei Peng, Shimon Whiteson, and Chongjie Zhang.
  Rode: Learning roles to decompose multi-agent tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.01523, 2020b.
Weixun Wang, Tianpei Yang, Yong Liu, Jianye Hao, Xiaotian Hao, Yujing Hu, Yingfeng Chen,
 Changjie Fan, and Yang Gao. From few to more: Large-scale dynamic multiagent curriculum
 learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 7293–
 7300, 2020c.
Siyang Wu, Tonghan Wang, Chenghao Li, and Chongjie Zhang. Containerized distributed value-based
  multi-agent reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08169, 2021.
Jiachen Yang, Igor Borovikov, and Hongyuan Zha. Hierarchical cooperative multi-agent reinforce-
   ment learning with skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03558, 2019.
Yaodong Yang and Jun Wang. An overview of multi-agent reinforcement learning from game
  theoretical perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00583, 2020.
Kaiqing Zhang, Zhuoran Yang, and Tamer Başar. Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A selective
  overview of theories and algorithms. Handbook of Reinforcement Learning and Control, pp.
  321–384, 2021.
Tian Zhang, Raghu Ramakrishnan, and Miron Livny. Birch: An efficient data clustering method for
  very large databases. ACM Aigmod Record, 25(2):103–114, 1996.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    A LGORITHM

Algorithm 2 A contextual bandit algorithm for a small number of contexts
 1: Initialization: For each context x, create an instance Exp3x of algorithm Exp3
 2: for round do
 3:     Invoke algorithm Exp3x with x = xt
 4:     Play the action chosen by Exp3x
 5:     Return reward rt to Exp3x
 6: end for



B    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.4

Theorem 3.4. Consider the Lipschitz contextual  bandit problem with contexts in [0, 1]. The Alg. 1
yields regret E[R(T )] = O T 2/3 (LK ln T )1/3 .

Proof. Let Sm be the ϵ-uniform mesh on [0, 1], that is, the set of all points in [0, 1] that are integer
multiples of ϵ. We take ϵ = 1/(d − 1) where the integer d is the number of points in Sm , which will
be adjusted later in the analysis.
We apply Alg. 2 to the context space Sm . Let fSm (x) be a mapping from context x to the closest
point in Sm :

                                                             ′
                               fSm (x) = min argmin |x − x |
                                                     x′ ∈Sm

In each round t, we replace the context xt with fSm (xt ) and call Exp3S . The regret bound
will have two components: the regret bound for Exp3S and (a suitable notion of) the discretiza-
tion error. Formally, let us define the “discretized best response” πS∗ m : X → Φ: πS∗ m (x) =
π ∗ (fSm (x)) for each context x ∈ X .
                                                               PT
We define the total reward of an algorithm Alg is Reward(Alg) = t=1 rt . Then the regret of Exp3S
and the discretization error are defined as:
                            RS (T ) = Reward (πS∗ ) − Reward (Exp3S )
                            DE(S) = Reward (π ∗ ) − Reward (πS∗ ) .
                                                                                     √
It follows that regret is the sum R(T ) = RS (T ) + DE(S). We have E [RS (T )] = O( T K log K)
from Lemma 3.3, so it remains to upper bound the discretization error and adjust the discretization
step ϵ.
For each round t and the respective context x = xt , r (πS∗ (x) | fS (x)) ≥ r (π ∗ (x) | fS (x)) ≥
r (π ∗ (x) | x) − ϵL. The first inequality is determined by the optimality of πS∗ and the second is
determined by Lipschitzness. Summing this up over all rounds t, we obtain E [Reward (πS∗ )] ≥
Reward [π ∗ ] − ϵLT .
Thus, the regret is that
                                         r                 !
                                             1
                E[R(T )] ≤ ϵLT + O             T K log T       = O T 2/3 (LK log T )1/3             (4)
                                             ϵ

For the last inequality, we choose ϵ = ( KTlog T 1/3
                                            L2 )     .


C    11 VS 11 F ULL G AME ON GRF

We further conduct experiments on the 11vs11 scenario of GRF. As shown in Fig. 7, SPC achieves
about 50% win rate after training with 200 million timesteps.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                                                                   SPC
                                                                                          0.6

                                                                                          0.5


                                                                       Win Rate in Eval
                                                                                          0.4

                                                                                          0.3

                                                                                          0.2

                                                                                          0.1

                                                                                          0.0
                                                                                                0M    25 M   50 M    75 M 100 M 125 M                          150 M   175 M    200 M
                                                                                                                      Training Timesteps



                                                       Figure 7: The performance of SPC on the 11v11 scenario.


D                        Q UALITATIVELY ANALYSIS ABOUT LOW- LEVEL SKILLS

We show some statistics, for example, shooting, passing and running, in GRF in terms of different
fixed low-level policies (defined by a set of fixed high-level actions). We evaluate the statistics by
only fixing one agent’s high-level action, maintaining other agents with trained SPC and testing 5
times. We show the results in Table 2.


                                                                shooting per game                                      passing per game                                            running per game
                                              skill 1               7.9 times                                              0.5 times                                                2254 time steps
                                              skill 2               2.3 times                                             26.4 times                                                2149 time steps
                                              skill 3               1.6 times                                              3.9 times                                                2875 time steps

                                                                 Table 2: Statistics analysis about low-level skills.



E                       C ORNER -5 ON GRF

To further illustrate the effectiveness of the SPC teacher module, we conduct experiments on the
corner-5 scenario on GRF, where the target task is to control five of the eleven players to obtain a
goal in the GRF academy corner scenario. The experiments are designed to determine whether
or not the contextual bandit in SPC outperforms alternative curriculum learning methods to schedule
the number of agents in training. We compare SPC teacher against non-curriculum training (None),
uniform task sampling (Uniform), ALP-GMM, and VACL. The training task space consists of n
agents, where n ∈ {1, 3, 5}. All teachers have the same base architecture without transformer
architecture and hierarchical framework. We also investigate the effect of RNN-based contexts (see
Contextual Bandit and Bandit). Fig. 8 shows the benefit of SPC contextual bandit over other ACL
methods after training with one million timesteps.



                       0.30                                                                                                                             0.25
                                  ALP-GMM                                                                                                                          ALP-GMM
                                  None                                                                                                                  0.20       None
                       0.25       Uniform                                                                                                                          Uniform
                                  Contextual Bandit                                                                                                     0.15       Contextual Bandit
                                  Bandit                                                                                                                           Bandit
                       0.20       VACL                                                                                                                             VACL
                                                                                                                                                        0.10
                                                                                                                                  Goal Diff. in Eval
    Win Rate in Eval


                       0.15                                                                                                                             0.05

                                                                                                                                                        0.00
                       0.10
                                                                                                                                                       −0.05

                       0.05                                                                                                                            −0.10

                                                                                                                                                       −0.15
                       0.00
                          0.0 M           0.2 M        0.4 M            0.6 M                        0.8 M      1M                                         0.0 M           0.2 M         0.4 M            0.6 M   0.8 M   1M
                                                         Training Timesteps                                                                                                                Training Timesteps


                                                      (a) Win Rate                                                                                                                 (b) Goal Difference
Figure 8: The evaluation performance of various teacher algorithms on the GRF corner-5 scenario.


                                                                                                                           15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           Table 3: SPC hyper-parameters used in GRF.

                             Name                              Value
                             Discount rate                     0.99
                             GAE parameter                      1.0
                             KL coefficient                     0.2
                             Rollout fragment length           1000
                             Training batch size              100000
                             SGD minibatch size               10000
                             # of SGD iterations                60
                             Learning rate                     1e-4
                             Entropy coefficient                0.0
                             Clip parameter                     0.3
                             Value function clip parameter     10.0


                           Table 4: SPC hyper-parameters used in MPE.

                              Name                             Value
                              Discount rate                     0.99
                              GAE parameter                      1.0
                              KL coefficient                     0.5
                              # of SGD iterations                10
                              Learning rate                     1e-4
                              Entropy coefficient                0.0
                              Clip parameter                     0.3
                              Value function clip parameter     10.0



F     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

Here we describe the SPC framework. We use the open-sourced Ray RLlib implementation of Proxi-
mal Policy Optimization (PPO), which scales out using multiple workers for experience collection.
This allows us to use a large amount of rollouts from parallel workers during training to ameliorate
high variance and aid exploration. We do multiple rollouts in parallel with distributed workers and
use parameter sharing for each agent. The trainer broadcasts new weights to the workers after their
synchronous sampling. We now turn our attention to environment-specific settings.


F.1   G OOGLE R ESEARCH F OOTBALL

We set five tasks for training the 5vs5 scenario. They are academy empty goal close,
academy pass and shoot with keeper, 3 vs 3, academy 3 vs 1 with keeper,
5 vs 5. In all scenarios, we do not control our team’s goalkeeper.
In the academy empty goal close, one agent need to move forward and shoot with an empty
goal. In academy pass and shoot with keeper and 3 vs 3, two agents are controlled to
play against a goalkeeper and 3 players respectively. In academy 3 vs 1 with keeper, three
agents are controlled to play against a center-back and a goalkeeper. In 5 vs 5, 4 agents are
controlled to play against 5 players. Without loss of generality, we initialize all player with fixed
positions and roles as center midfielders.
We use both MLP and self-attention mechanism for the high-level policy, and use MLP for the
low-level policy. For high-level policy, the input is first projected to an embedding using 2 hidden
layers with 256 units each and ReLU activation, which is then fed into multi-head self-attention
(8 heads, 64 units each). The output is then projected to the actions and values using another fully
connected layer with 256 units. For low-level policy, we use MLP with 2 hidden layers with 256
units each, i.e., the default configuration of policy network in RLlib.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F.2   MPE

In this environment, agents must cooperate through physical actions to reach a set of landmarks.
Agents observe the relative positions of other agents and landmarks, and are collectively rewarded
based on the proximity of any agent to each landmark. In other words, the agents have to ‘cover’
all of the landmarks. Further, the agents occupy significant physical space and are penalized when
colliding with each other. The agents need to infer the landmark to cover and move there while
avoiding other agents.
The hyper-parameters of SPC in MPE are shown in Table 4. In MPE, hyper-parameters such as
rollout fragment length, training batch size and SGD minibatch size are adjusted according to horizon
of the scenarios so that policy are updated after episodes are done. We use the same network as
in GRF, but with 128 units for all MLP hidden layers. Other omitted hyper-parameters follow the
default configuration in RLlib PPO implementation.


                                                 17
