Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S AR N ET: S ARCASM VS T RUE -H ATE D ETECTION N ET-
WORK

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         At times hate speech detection classifiers miss the context of a sentence and flag
         a sarcastic tweet incorrectly. To tackle this problem by emphasising on the con-
         text of a tweet we propose SarNet. SarNet is a two-fold deep learning based model
         which follows a quasi-ternary labelling strategy and contextually classifies a tweet
         as hate, sarcastic or neither. The first module of SarNet is an ANN-BiLSTM based
         Pyramid Network used to calculate the hate and sarcastic probabilities of a sen-
         tence. The second module of the SarNet is the Nash Equalizer which stems from
         the concept of game theory and prisoner’s dilemma. It treats hate and sarcasm
         as two prisoners. A payoff matrix is constructed to calculate the true hate of the
         tweet. True hate considers the hate part of a tweet excluding the sarcastic part of
         the tweet. Thus, this gives a true estimate of the hate content in a tweet thereby
         decreasing the number of sarcastic tweets being falsely flagged as hate. Our pro-
         posed model is trained on state-of-the-art hate speech and sarcasm datasets in the
         English language. The precision, recall and F1 score of our proposed model is
         0.93, 0.84 and 0.88 respectively. Comparison with state-of-the-art architectures
         demonstrated better performance of SarNet by a significant margin.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Social media has the potential to influence the opinion of the masses. People from all around the
world interact and share their perspectives. This has facilitated the rapid exchange of ideas. Un-
fortunately, these social media platforms are being used to disseminate hate speech. Hate speech
is described as aggressive or threatening speech that shows prejudice based on ethnicity, religion,
sexual orientation or other factors. This raises the need to deploy robust and efficient classifiers to
regulate online content.
Citizens on social media regularly use sarcasm to convey their emotions in conversation. Sarcasm
is an effective means of expressing thoughts indirectly that is not easy to notice. It is described as
an incidental technique of expressing a viewpoint in which the written word does not reflect the
intended meaning. Most of the hate speech detection algorithms (1; 2) face difficulty in distinguish-
ing sarcastic statements. This is because sarcasm reverses the polarity of a seemingly positive or
negative phrase. This attribute of sarcasm leads hate detection classifiers to falsely flag sentences
as hate. Thus, it is crucial to reduce the false positives by considering the sarcastic context of a
sentence while predicting hate.
The labelled datasets suffer from annotators’ bias and/or the unavailability of datasets annotated as
both hate and sarcasm (5). The above limitations of datasets make it very difficult for deep learning
models to predict the actual hate content of a tweet with high precision. Our proposed SarNet model
overcomes these problems by employing a semi-supervised learning approach to predict the degree
of hate in a sentence that we define as true-hate.
Researchers have presented multiple approaches for tackling hate speech in the past decade. Kapil
and Ekbal (14) proposed a deep neural network-based multi-task learning approach for hate speech
detection. Corazza et al. (4) proposed a neural network classifier for multilingual online hate speech
detection in three languages and investigated the impact of each feature on the respective outcomes.
While it is critical to identify hate on social media promptly, it is equally important to avoid false
positives. Arango et al. (5) point to methodological flaws as well as significant dataset biases while
tackling hate speech. (5) stated that many state-of-the-art performance claims had become vastly


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


overstated and suggested a more realistic view of the state-of-the-art methodologies. Meriem et al.
(6) presented a fuzzy sarcasm detection method that uses social knowledge and multiplies it by a
degree of relevance. Kumar et al. (7) presented a multi-head attention-based BiLSTM network for
detecting sarcastic remarks in a corpus. The aforementioned works do not consider the sarcastic and
hate context in the same tweet while prediction.
Most of the methods (8; 9; 10) fail to consider the sarcastic context of the sentence while detecting
hate speech, which leads to misclassification of a sarcastic sentence as hate. Thus, we propose the
SarNet model to tackle the misclassification problem in hate speech detection by considering the
sarcastic context of the sentence.
This paper presents SarNet, a two-fold learning method wherein we employ the concept of multiple
games based on game theory (Prisoners’ Dilemma) and Nash equilibrium. SarNet detects true-hate
by considering the sarcastic context of the sentence and gives a pooled output. Hate and sarcasm
are a perspective-dependent sentiment. Our proposed SarNet model as shown in Figure 10 analyzes
the contextual information of a sentence. The major contributions of this work are summarized as
follows:

       • Introduce a novel model, SarNet, by integrating the ANN, LSTM network for calculating
         probabilities to Nash Equalizer which plays games to identify the label of the sentence,
         using a quasi-ternary labeling technique .
       • Perform comparative analysis of SarNet to establish its supremacy.
       • Investigate the impact of different hyper-parameters’ values on the efficacy of SarNet, and
         the effectiveness of the Nash Equalizer.

The paper is structured as follows: Section II is a review of existing works. Section III describes Sar-
Net at an intuitive level and presents the experimental and hyperparameter settings and results, com-
pares them with the current state-of-the-art and discusses the model. Section IV draws a conclusion
to our research work and Section V presents the limitations of our work, giving future directions.


2     R ELATED W ORK

This section summarizes existing research in hate speech detection and sarcasm detection in social
media. The current strategy is split into four; namely, machine learning based approaches, deep
learning based approaches, sarcasm detection and hate detection. We discuss all the sub-categories
in the following subsections.

2.1   M ACHINE L EARNING BASED A PPROACHES

Dave and Desai (11), attempt to identify various supervised classification techniques like SVM,
Naı̈ve Bayes using basic Bag-of-words features with TF-IDF as the feature’s frequency measure.
The researchers studied the outcomes of these classification approaches using textual data accessible
in multiple languages on review sites, social networking sites, and microblogging sites, as well as
the data set construction and feature selection processes. A pilot experiment is carried out by the
researchers to detect sarcastic statements in ”Hindi.”
Koushik et al. (12) propose a machine learning technique for automatically detecting hate tweets
utilising a bag of words and the TFIDF approach on an existing Twitter data set. The researchers
utilised a logistic regression classifier for binary categorisation of the tweets. The researchers ob-
tained 94.11 per cent accuracy using a bag of words feature, and 94.62 per cent accuracy using the
TFIDF feature.

2.2   D EEP L EARNING BASED A PPROACHES

Patro et al. (13) present a deep learning framework for detecting sarcasm targets in pre-defined
sarcastic messages by conducting empirical research of socio-linguistic variables and identify those
that are statistically significant in predicting sarcastic targets. Finally, they provide a deep learning
LSTM based architecture enhanced with sociolinguistic features on a dataset released by Joshi et al.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kapil and Ekbal (14) propose a deep multi-task learning framework to harness beneficial information
from numerous related categorization tasks to improve the performance of the individual task. The
multi-task model is based on a shared-private architecture in which shared and private layers are
assigned to capture shared and task-specific characteristics. Experiments on five benchmark binary
datasets suggest multi-task model performs better than the single-tasking framework and indicate
that separate data sets classified in different sub-classes do indeed aid each other in categorization.
An automated system is proposed by Roy et al. (15) using the Deep Convolutional Neural Network
(DCNN) which utilises the tweet text in English language with GloVe embedding vector to capture
the tweets’ semantics with the help of convolution operation. Besides this the researchers also ex-
perimented on state of the art machine learning classifiers. The researchers claim that they achieved
the precision, recall and F1-score values as 0.97, 0.88, and 0.92 respectively on the DCNN network.
Plaza-del-Arco et al. (16) address the task of identifying Spanish hate speech on social media.
They specifically compare Deep Learning methods to recently pre-trained language models based
on Transfer Learning as well as classic machine learning models. The researchers claim that their
findings produced with the TL models surpass the other ML models. They evaluate the performance
of two multilingual pre-trained models (mBERT and XLM) that are currently accessible with a
monolingual model (BETO) that has been particularly trained on Spanish. The results demonstrate
that the monolingual pre-trained LM (BETO) outperformed mBERT and XLM.

2.3   S ARCASM D ETECTION

Researchers are continuously working on detecting sarcasm in sentences.(11), developed a method
to identify sarcasm using various supervised classification techniques like SVM, Näıve Bayes using
simple BoW features and TF-IDF as the feature’s measure of frequency. The researchers examined
these classification techniques’ results on textual data available in various languages on various
websites along with the analysis of dataset generation and feature extraction process.
Researchers have used deep learning-based classifiers for the detection of sarcasm. Patro et al. (13)
provide a deep learning framework for recognising sarcasm targets in predefined sarcastic messages
by conducting an empirical study on socio-linguistic characteristics that are statistically important
in predicting sarcastic targets. Husain et al. (17) present a methodology based on the hypothesis
that tweets with negative sentiment and sarcastic content are more likely to contain offensive con-
tent; thus, fine-tuning the classification model using a large corpus of offensive language which aids
the model’s learning process for detecting sentiment and sarcastic content, and investigate transfer
learning in the contexts of foul language, sarcasm detection, and sentiment analysis. Using the math-
ematical formalisms of quantum theory and fuzzy logic, Zhang et al. (18) suggest a complex-valued
fuzzy network. Verma et al. (19) focus on new research on sarcasm detection, including several
strategies and problems based on deep hybrid learning. Nayel et al. (20) propose an SVM-based
classifier for sarcasm detection in Arabic language. The researchers perform a model comparison
with other state-of-the-art techniques.

2.4   H ATE D ETECTION

The NLP community has constantly been working on the problem of hate speech classification.
Pitsilis et al. (21) describe a hate speech detection strategy that integrates several user-related char-
acteristics, such as the users’ tendency for racism or sexism, with an ensemble of RNN classifiers.
Pachalides et al. (22) proposed MANDOLA. This big-data processing system uses big-data method-
ologies to monitor, detect, display, and report the expansion and penetration of online hate-related
discourse. Teh et al. (1) looked into how profanity was used on Twitter by people of different groups
to mark how successful it was in detecting hate speech. To rationalize the differences in profanity
usage across the three nations, statistical hypothesis tests are conducted, and a Bayes theorem-based
probability estimation process is developed to quantify the efficacy of blasphemy-based detection
systems for hate speech. Senarath et al. (23) claim that semantic information can aid machine learn-
ing algorithms in augmenting the word senses that are represented in context to social media posts
and present a new empirical study of various semantic variables such as word embedding represen-
tation for distributional semantics, corpus-based semantics and declarative knowledge patterns for
hate speech categorization tasks on social media posts. Mozafari et al. (24) presented a transfer
learning strategy based on BERT by evaluating the potential of BERT to capture hateful context


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


inside social media content using various fine-tuning approaches. Caselli et al. (25) proposed Hate-
BERT, a re-trained BERT model trained on a publicly available Reddit comments data set for hate
language detection in English.

3     M ETHODOLOGY
SarNet is proposed for true-hate detection which includes data pre-processing, and an explanation
of our proposed two-fold deep learning based method.

3.1   DATA P RE -P ROCESSING

Useless information is filtered by pre-processing the datasets. In the pre-processing, SarNet per-
forms the following steps: The tweets were converted into lower case and the words were split for
removal of stop words using the NLTK library. Using regex white spaces, URLs, hashtags, twitter
handles, emoticons, dots, punctuation marks and non-ASCII characters etc. were removed. The
words were then stemmed using SnowBall Stemmer.

3.2   P ROPOSED S AR N ET M ODEL


                             Figure 1: Detailed Architecture of SarNet

Figure 1 shows the SarNet model. SarNet is a two fold deep learning model. It is used for quasi
ternary labeling of tweets as hate, sarcasm or neither. The SarNet model is built using two parallel
Pyramid Networks. They are trained on a hate speech dataset and a sarcasm dataset respectively.
These parallel pipelines converge into the Nash Equalizer.
The Pyramid Network of the model is built using an input layer followed by an embedding layer
which passes the data to ANN layers which consist of regular dropouts. This helps in faster feature
extraction. These layers are integrated with stacked LSTM layers followed by a sigmoid activation
which helps in predicting the probability of a given tweet. These probabilities are then fed into the
Nash Equalizer for the final labelling. The model is discussed at an intuitive level in the following
subsections.
The pre-processed tweet is passed to the input layer based on the token generated by indexing the
dictionary values. As a result, the input layer transforms the incoming text into a vector.
The embedding layer semantically correlates the relevant terms with equivalent vector representa-
tions. We use pre-trained (GloVe) (26) embedding for word representation.


                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2.1    P YRAMID N ETWORK
The Pyramid Network exploits successive ANN layers to extract features from the pre-processed
input tweet vectors. We do not use CNN layers as the words in a tweet do not have spatial correla-
tion. There are multiple successive layers of ANN and dropout for downsizing the initial number of
features extracted by the ANN layer. The dropout between successive layers is by a factor of either
0.2 or 0.4 (refer Section 3.5 Hyperparameter Settings) . Finally six most relevant features (calcu-
lated empirically to produce best results) per tweet are passed onto the LSTM layers for identifying
sequential correlation between them. The ANN layers help in faster and accurate feature extraction
which helps in reducing the training time significantly when compared to other feature extractors
like RNN. Equation 1 represents the nth feature sequence , zn , which is a summation of the dot
product between the matrix of weights wT and input tweet row vector x and the bias b. f (.) is ReLU
(non linear activation function). d gives the factor of dropout which is either 0.2 or 0.4.
                                zn = d ∗ f (wT .x + b) ; d = {0.2, 0.4}                               (1)

BiLSTM employs a memory cell that is made up of an input gate, a forget gate, an output gate,
and a node that is linked to itself. The memory cell in a certain layer utilises the previous layer’s
hidden state at the current time and the current layer’s hidden state from the prior time. The forget
gate determines which information in the cell state should be discarded, while the input gate and
tanh layer determine which information is stored in the cell state. The best features extracted from
the ANN layers are passed onto multiple successive BiLSTM cells to map the selected features
sequentially. BiLSTMs enable additional training by traversing the input data in the forward and
the backward directions thus reinforcing the contextual information extracted. The extracted infor-
mation is passed through a sigmoid activation layer for calculating the probabilities of prediction
which are then passed onto the Nash Equalizer. BiLSTM alone is not self sufficient to gather the
context of hate and sarcasm of a given tweet. To overcome this ambiguity a payoff matrix using
Nash Equilibrium is constructed which along with probabilistic terms quantify the tweet as hate or
sarcasm.

3.2.2    NASH E QUALIZER
As discussed above, it is crucial to consider the context of the sentence, that is its intent and estimate
a degree of hate or sarcasm of that sentence before classifying it. Many a times it is difficult to
determine whether a sentence is hate or not as its meaning cannot be understood at its face value.
This is especially true when sarcasm is used, as the true intent of the sentence is hidden behind
words. At its face value the sentence might seem to spur hate but in reality the intention behind
might be the opposite. Thus to get an estimate of the hatefulness of a sentence taking into account
the sarcastic part of the sentence we propose a parameter true-hate.This proposed parameter gives
a measure of the hate content of a given tweet excluding the sarcastic part. It will greatly help in
assessing the degree of hate content in a tweet and also in reducing false flagging of not hate tweets.
Thus we propose our Nash Equalizer which predicts the degree of hate of a tweet.
The pyramid network being trained on the hate speech dataset learns the hate content features of a
sentence and the pyramid network being trained on the sarcasm dataset learns the sarcasm content
features of a sentence. Thus, prior to testing, we acquire two pyramid networks that have learned
two distinct semantics of a sentence, namely hate and sarcasm. Following the initial training of both
pyramid networks, the test split ( refer Section 3.3 Datasets of the paper for detailed explanation
of the test split) of the hate speech dataset is simultaneously passed through both pipelines. Let’s
assume a tweet t labelled as hate from the hate speech dataset’s test split. It is simultaneously passed
through both pipelines of the pyramid network. The hate pyramid network will calculate the hate
probability of tweet t. The sarcasm pyramid network returns the sarcasm probability of the given
tweet t. As a result, for the tweet t, we will get the probabilities of hate and sarcasm.
Since both the probabilities are obtained from two different pipelines, they are independent from
each other. Bayes Theorem of conditional probability is now used to calculate four probabilities
which are as follows:

        • Probability of a tweet being sarcastic given hate, (PS|H ).
        • Probability of a tweet being not sarcastic given hate, (PS ′ |H ).


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              Sarcasm      Not Sarcasm
                                 Hate         PS|H         PS ′ |H
                                 Not Hate     PS|H ′       PS ′ |H ′

                                         Table 1: Payoff Matrix


       • Probability of a tweet being sarcastic given not hate, (PS|H ′ ).
       • Probability of a tweet being not sarcastic given not hate, (PS ′ |H ′ ).

The following equation is used to obtain four cases of probabilistic relationships.

                                                    P (H ∩ S)
                                          PS|H =                                                      (2)
                                                      P (H)

Finally the Nash Equalizer constructs a Prisoners’ dilemma considering sarcasm and hate as the two
prisoners as shown in Table 1. The pooled output of the table constructed using the dilemma is used
to calculate the label for the final tweet as follows:

       • Case I: The maximum probability of a tweet comes out to be not sarcastic given not hate.
         This case is clearly indicative of the fact that the given tweet is neither hate nor sarcastic.
         Thus this case of tweet is labelled as neither hate nor sarcastic.
       • Case II: The maximum probability of a tweet comes out to be not sarcastic given hate. This
         case is clearly indicative of the fact that the tweet is hate and not sarcastic. Thus this case
         of tweet is labelled as hate.
       • Case III: The maximum probability of a tweet comes out to be sarcastic given not hate.
         This case is clearly indicative of the fact that the tweet is not hate but is only sarcastic.
         Thus this case of tweet is labelled as sarcastic.
       • Case IV: The maximum probability of a tweet comes out to be sarcastic given hate. This
         case is clearly indicative of the fact that the tweet is hate as well as sarcastic. For this case
         we consider true hate factor instead of hate.

As mentioned above for cases I, II and III we do not consider the true hate of any tweet. But if the
tweet belongs to category IV, that means that the given tweet contains hate content as well as sarcasm
content. We then proceed to evaluate the true hate parameter of the tweet. This is the case wherein
most classifiers fail to flag the nature of the tweet correctly. Thus to tackle this we propose the true
hate parameter. The true hate factor considers effective hate by excluding the sarcastic component
of the given tweet. These include cases where the sentence looks like hate but is sarcastic. For
calculating the true hate factor we start with simple hypothesis and move towards complex relations.
A simple relationship calculates true hate by subtracting the probability of sarcasm from hate and if
the probability of hate is greater than sarcasm then the given tweet is flagged as hate and vice-versa.
The hypothesis used to calculate true hate is given as follows:

                                                             [P (S)]n
                                    P (HT rue ) = P (H) −                                             (3)
                                                                m
Here n, m ϵ N This hypothesis is used to evaluate the probability of the true hate (HT rue ) parameter
of a tweet in case where the tweet is sarcastic given hate. As seen in the equation for such a case we
revert back to the original hate and sarcasm probabilities of the tweet and from those we obtain the
true hate of such a tweet. If we obtain the probability of true hate to be greater than 0.5, we classify
the tweet as hate otherwise we classify the tweet as sarcastic.

3.3   DATASETS

We evaluate our proposed SarNet model on 2 benchmark datasets.
Hate Speech Dataset:


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Davidson et al. (27) utilised Twitter API and collected 84.4M tweets from 33.458K users. The
CrowdFlower crowdsourcing platform annotated the randomly sampled 25k tweets. Since the
dataset was unbalanced we had to deploy an oversampling technique to balance the classes. We
then binarised the classes as hate and not hate.
Basile et al. (29) outlined the structure of the SemEval-’19 Task 5 identifies hate speech against
hate speech against immigrants and women in Spanish and English. The data set is composed of
6,600 spanish and 13,000 english tweets. We utilised the english corpus for our hate speech training
purposes.
For the task of training one pipeline of the pyramid network on hate speech we binarised both the
datasets (27) and (29) and merged them into one dataset. This was done to increase the size of the
dataset. The total number of hate tweets were 37,521 and the total number of not hate tweets were
45,045. This new combined hate speech dataset was then split into train, validation and test. The
train, validation and test split ratio is 70, 20 and 10 percent respectively. Fig 2(a) is a bar graph
which shows the number of hate and not hate tweets.
We tested our true hate detection task on another hate speech dataset (30) The dataset was created
using Twitter data. The text is divided into three categories: hate speech, offensive language, and
neither. For our task we binarised the class labels as hate and not hate by merging the hate speech
and offensive language class labels into one class label; i.e. hate. The dataset consisted of 2,242
hate tweets and 29,720 not hate tweets. Due to such imbalance of the dataset we applied SMOTE to
upsample the hate tweets to 29,720 hate tweets. Figure 2(c) is a bar graph which shows the number
of hate and not hate tweets after SMOTE has been applied.
Sarcasm Dataset:
Arora et al. (28) proposed a binary labelled sarcasm detection dataset in english. The sarcastic
statements were extracted from 2 news websites: the Onion, which publishes satirical renditions
of critical events, and all of the headlines from the News in Brief and News in Photos categories.
HuffPost provided the non-sarcastic news headlines. The advantage of using this dataset was its high
quality labels with little noise, formal usage of english language and absence of spelling mistakes.
For the task of training one pipeline of the pyramid network on sarcasm detection we used (28)
dataset. It consisted of 13,624 sarcastic tweets and 14,985 not sarcasm tweets. The train, validation
split for this dataset is 80 and 20 percent respectively. Fig 2(b) is a bar graph which shows the
number of sarcasm and not sarcasm tweets.

3.4      E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS

SarNet is implemented using Python 3. All the experiments were performed on Google Collabora-
tory1 . The GPU is Tesla K80 with a memory of 12 GB. Tensorflow2 , API was used.

3.5      H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS

The hate dataset is split into training, validation and testing 70, 20 and 10 per cent respectively
while the sarcastic dataset is split into train and valid of 80 and 20 respectively. The hate pipeline
of the Pyramid Net trains and fine-tunes on the train and validation splits of the hate dataset and the
sarcastic pipeline of the Pyramid Net trains and fine-tunes on the train and validation split of the
Sarcastic dataset. Both the pipelines are used to calculate the probabilities on the test split of the
hate dataset. Furthermore the total number of ANN layers in the Pyramid Net are 7 with neurons
decreasing from 100, 80, 60, 40, 20, 10 to 6. Dropout layers are present with a factor of 0.2 from
ANN layers of 100 to 10 and a factor of 0.4 from 10 to 6. The output vector of the ANN layer of
6 neurons is transposed into a 2- dimensional matrix using a repeatvector layer. The 7 BiLSTM
layers contains 100 cells each. ANN layers use ReLU activation function. Adam optimizer and the
bininary cross-entropy loss function are used. Total trainable parameters of the Pyramid Network
are 1,697,177.

   1
       https://colab.research.google.com
   2
       https://www.tensorflow.org


                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.6   C OMPARATIVE A NALYSIS

In this section we give a detailed comparative analysis of our proposed SarNet model with 14 base-
line models and 5 state-of-the-art models.As a result, we recreate the comparison techniques from
scratch using the instructions provided in those publications. Our proposed model SarNet achieved
the best results. It achieved a precision, recall and an F1 score of 0.93, 0.84, 0.88 respectively.
Comparison with Baseline Models:
SarNet was compared with 14 baseline models. In this comparative analysis various combination of
feature extraction techniques followed by classifiers were tested for the hate speech detection task on
new combined hate speech dataset. The formation of the new combined dataset is described above
in subsection 3.3. The following techniques were used for feature extraction:

       • TF-IDF- The relevance of a term is represented by (Term Frequency-Inverse Document
         Frequency). It is the result of calculating the dot product of TF and IDF.
       • GloVe- GloVe (26) is an abbreviation for Global Vectors for Word Representation. It is
         an unsupervised learning approach that seeks to construct word embeddings from a given
         corpus by aggregating global word co-occurrence matrices. The primary idea behind the
         GloVe word embedding is to use statistics to determine the link between words.
       • Small BERT- BERT (32) base consists of 12 layers, 768 hidden size and 12 attention heads.
       • BERT- BERT large (33) consists of 24 layers, 1024 hidden size and 16 attention heads.
       • ALBERT- ALBERT (35) is a ”Lite” version of BERT with much less parameters. ALBERT
         (like BERT) uses a deep neural network using the Transformer architecture to calculate
         dense vector representations for natural language.
       • ELECTRA- ELECTRA (34) is a BERT-like model that has been pre-trained as a discrimi-
         nator in a generative adversarial network setup (GAN). ELECTRA (like BERT) uses a deep
         neural network using the Transformer architecture to calculate dense vector representations
         for natural language.

The baseline classifiers used for the hate speech detection task are SVM, XGB, MLP, CNN and Bi-
LSTM. The combination of feature extraction techniques and classifiers deployed can be seen in the
bar graphs given in the appendix section. The best performance in terms of precision was obtained
by BERT+CNN combination in hate speech detection where BERT was used for feature extraction
and CNN was used for classification. It achieved a precision of 0.78. In terms of recall Small
BERT+CNN achieved a best recall of 0.81. The best F1 score was achieved for ELECTRA+MLP
and BERT+CNN. The F1 score achieved was 0.76.
Comparison with State-of-the-art Models:
5 state-of-the-art models were trained on the new combined dataset for hate speech detection. They
are as follows:

       • Siino et al. (8) presented a deep learning model based on a 1-D CNN. Their model achieved
         a precision, recall and an F1 score of 0.81, 0.49 and 0.79 respectively when trained and
         tested on the new combined hate speech dataset.
       • Pereira-Kohatsu et al. (37) proposed HaterNet wherein they deployed multiple deep learn-
         ing based models. We trained their best performing model which used Tf-Idf for feature
         extraction followed by a combination of MLP + neural networks for classification. When
         trained and tested on our new combined hate speech dataset their model achieved a preci-
         sion, recall and F1 score of 0.66, 0.49 and 0.64 respectively.
       • Roy et al. (15) proposed a deep CNN based model using GLoVe embeddings. Their model
         achieved a precision, recall and F1 of 0.61, 0.42 and 0.48 respectively.
       • Ding et al. (38) proposed a stacked BiGRU model based on a capsule network architecture.
         They used fastText to transform tweets into vector representations. Their model achieved
         a precision, recall and F1 score of 0.67, 0.64 and 0.62 respectively when trained and tested
         on the new combined hate speech dataset.


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Khan et al. (36) proposed HCovBi-Caps a convolutional, BiGRU, and capsule network-
         based deep learning model using GloVe embeddings. Their model when trained and tested
         on our new combined hate speech dataset achieved a precision, recall and F1 score of 0.84,
         0.75 and 0.76 respectively.

4   C ONCLUSION
In this research we proposed SarNet, a two fold deep learning model to predict the true hate of a
given tweet. Our main goal was to extract the degree of hate and sarcasm from a tweet to get a
more realistic comprehension of any given tweet. For this task we proposed the pyramid network to
extract the probabilities of hate and sarcasm. Two parallel pipelines of the pyramid network were
trained on sarcasm and hate speech datasets to get their probability. Using Bayes’ Theorem we
made four cases of probabilities of hate and sarcasm for any given tweet. Then our proposed Nash
Equalizer used the concept of game theory (Prisoner’s Dilemma) to construct a payoff matrix to
give one of the four cases of degree of hate and sarcasm. From here we calculated the true hate
parameter for a particular case (P (H|S)) obtained from the Nash Equalizer. The rest of the three
cases were directly classified. In the end tweets were classified as hate, sarcastic or neither. We used
one Kaggle sarcasm dataset for learning the sarcasm features of the tweets. We trained and tested our
hate speech task on the new combined dataset which was formed by merging the T.Davidson dataset
and the SemEval-2019 Task 5 english hate speech dataset. Our model achieved a precision, recall
and F1 score of 0.93, 0.84 and 0.88 respectively. We trained and implemented 14 baseline classifiers
and 5 state-of-the-art architectures on the new combined dataset for comparison with our model.
Our model outperformed all other classifiers. We studied the impact of various hyperparameters on
the efficacy of our proposed SarNet model.

5   L IMITATIONS
The main drawback is the non availability of robust datasets. Datasets suffer from multiple problems
such as class imbalance, annotator bias, difference in the definition of hate speech and varying forms
and intentions of expressions. The availability of robust datasets would increase the validity of our
model’s prediction. We have researched only on english. Research work can further be extended to
other languages, as well as considering other parameters, alongside sarcasm like sexism etc.

R EFERENCES
[1] Teh, Phoey Lee, and Chi-Bin Cheng. ”Profanity and hate speech detection.” International Jour-
   nal of Information and Management Sciences 31, no. 3 (2020): 227-246.
[2] Abulaish, Muhammad, and Ashraf Kamal. ”Self-deprecating sarcasm detection: an amalga-
   mation of rule-based and machine learning approach.” In 2018 IEEE/WIC/ACM International
   Conference on Web Intelligence (WI), pp. 574-579. IEEE, 2018.
[3] Kapil, Prashant, and Asif Ekbal. ”A deep neural network based multi-task learning approach to
   hate speech detection.” Knowledge-Based Systems 210 (2020): 106458.
[4] Corazza, Michele, Stefano Menini, Elena Cabrio, Sara Tonelli, and Serena Villata. ”A multi-
   lingual evaluation for online hate speech detection.” ACM Transactions on Internet Technology
   (TOIT) 20, no. 2 (2020): 1-22.
[5] Arango, Aymé, Jorge Pérez, and Barbara Poblete. ”Hate speech detection is not as easy as you
   may think: A closer look at model validation.” In Proceedings of the 42nd international acm sigir
   conference on research and development in information retrieval, pp. 45-54. 2019.
[6] Meriem, Amina Ben, Lobna Hlaoua, and Lotfi Ben Romdhane. ”A fuzzy approach for sarcasm
   detection in social networks.” Procedia Computer Science 192 (2021): 602-611.
[7] Kumar, Avinash, Vishnu Teja Narapareddy, Veerubhotla Aditya Srikanth, Aruna Malapati, and
   Lalita Bhanu Murthy Neti. ”Sarcasm detection using multi-head attention based bidirectional
   LSTM.” Ieee Access 8 (2020): 6388-6397.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


[8] Siino, Marco, Elisa Di Nuovo, Ilenia Tinnirello, and Marco La Cascia. ”Detection of hate speech
   spreaders using convolutional neural networks.” In CLEF (Working Notes), pp. 2126-2136. 2021.
[9] Alatawi, Hind S., Areej M. Alhothali, and Kawthar M. Moria. ”Detecting white supremacist
   hate speech using domain specific word embedding with deep learning and BERT.” IEEE Access
   9 (2021): 106363-106374.
[10] Vishwamitra, Nishant, Ruijia Roger Hu, Feng Luo, Long Cheng, Matthew Costello, and Yin
   Yang. ”On analyzing covid-19-related hate speech using bert attention.” In 2020 19th IEEE In-
   ternational Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 669-676. IEEE,
   2020.
[11] Dave, Anandkumar D., and Nikita P. Desai. ”A comprehensive study of classification tech-
   niques for sarcasm detection on textual data.” In 2016 International Conference on Electrical,
   Electronics, and Optimization Techniques (ICEEOT), pp. 1985-1991. IEEE, 2016.
[12] Koushik, Garima, K. Rajeswari, and Suresh Kannan Muthusamy. ”Automated hate speech
   detection on Twitter.” In 2019 5th International Conference On Computing, Communication,
   Control And Automation (ICCUBEA), pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2019.
[13] Patro, Jasabanta, Srijan Bansal, and Animesh Mukherjee. ”A deep-learning framework to de-
   tect sarcasm targets.” In proceedings of the 2019 conference on empirical methods in natural
   language processing and the 9th international joint conference on natural language processing
   (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 6336-6342. 2019.
[14] Kapil, Prashant, and Asif Ekbal. ”A deep neural network based multi-task learning approach
   to hate speech detection.” Knowledge-Based Systems 210 (2020): 106458.
[15] Roy, Pradeep Kumar, Asis Kumar Tripathy, Tapan Kumar Das, and Xiao-Zhi Gao. ”A frame-
   work for hate speech detection using deep convolutional neural network.” IEEE Access 8 (2020):
   204951-204962.
[16] Plaza-del-Arco, Flor Miriam, M. Dolores Molina-González, L. Alfonso Urena-López, and M.
   Teresa Martı́n-Valdivia. ”Comparing pre-trained language models for Spanish hate speech detec-
   tion.” Expert Systems with Applications 166 (2021): 114120.
[17] Husain, Fatemah, and Ozlem Uzuner. ”Leveraging offensive language for sarcasm and sen-
   timent detection in Arabic.” In Proceedings of the Sixth Arabic Natural Language Processing
   Workshop, pp. 364-369. 2021.
[18] Zhang, Yazhou, Yaochen Liu, Qiuchi Li, Prayag Tiwari, Benyou Wang, Yuhua Li, Hari Mo-
   han Pandey, Peng Zhang, and Dawei Song. ”CFN: a complex-valued fuzzy network for sarcasm
   detection in conversations.” IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems 29, no. 12 (2021): 3696-3710.
[19] Verma, Palak, Neha Shukla, and A. P. Shukla. ”Techniques of sarcasm detection: A review.”
   In 2021 International Conference on Advance Computing and Innovative Technologies in Engi-
   neering (ICACITE), pp. 968-972. IEEE, 2021.
[20] Nayel, Hamada, Eslam Amer, Aya Allam, and Hanya Abdallah. ”Machine learning-based
   model for sentiment and sarcasm detection.” In Proceedings of the Sixth Arabic Natural Lan-
   guage Processing Workshop, pp. 386-389. 2021.
[21] Pitsilis, Georgios K., Heri Ramampiaro, and Helge Langseth. ”Effective hate-speech detection
   in Twitter data using recurrent neural networks.” Applied Intelligence 48, no. 12 (2018): 4730-
   4742.
[22] Paschalides, Demetris, Dimosthenis Stephanidis, Andreas Andreou, Kalia Orphanou, George
   Pallis, Marios D. Dikaiakos, and Evangelos Markatos. ”Mandola: A big-data processing and
   visualization platform for monitoring and detecting online hate speech.” ACM Transactions on
   Internet Technology (TOIT) 20, no. 2 (2020): 1-21.
[23] Senarath, Yasas, and Hemant Purohit. ”Evaluating semantic feature representations to effi-
   ciently detect hate intent on social media.” In 2020 IEEE 14th International Conference on Se-
   mantic Computing (ICSC), pp. 199-202. IEEE, 2020.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


[24] Mozafari, Marzieh, Reza Farahbakhsh, and Noel Crespi. ”A BERT-based transfer learning ap-
   proach for hate speech detection in online social media.” In International Conference on Complex
   Networks and Their Applications, pp. 928-940. Springer, Cham, 2019.
[25] Caselli, Tommaso, Valerio Basile, Jelena Mitrović, and Michael Granitzer. ”Hatebert: Retrain-
   ing bert for abusive language detection in english.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12472 (2020).
[26] Pennington, Jeffrey, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. ”Glove: Global vectors for
   word representation.” In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural
   language processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532-1543. 2014.
[27] Davidson, Thomas, Dana Warmsley, Michael Macy, and Ingmar Weber. ”Automated hate
   speech detection and the problem of offensive language.” In Proceedings of the international
   AAAI conference on web and social media, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 512-515. 2017.
[28] Misra, Rishabh, and Prahal Arora. ”Sarcasm detection using hybrid neural network.” arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1908.07414 (2019).
[29] Basile, Valerio, Cristina Bosco, Elisabetta Fersini, Debora Nozza, Viviana Patti, Francisco
   Manuel Rangel Pardo, Paolo Rosso, and Manuela Sanguinetti. ”Semeval-2019 task 5: Multilin-
   gual detection of hate speech against immigrants and women in twitter.” In Proceedings of the
   13th international workshop on semantic evaluation, pp. 54-63. 2019.
[30] https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mrmorj/hate-speech-and-offensive-language-dataset
[31] Pennington, Jeffrey, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. ”Glove: Global vectors for
   word representation.” In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural
   language processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532-1543. 2014.
[32] Khadhraoui, Mayara, Hatem Bellaaj, Mehdi Ben Ammar, Habib Hamam, and Mohamed
   Jmaiel. ”Survey of BERT-Base Models for Scientific Text Classification: COVID-19 Case Study.”
   Applied Sciences 12, no. 6 (2022): 2891.
[33] Vaswani, Ashish, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
   Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. ”Attention is all you need.” Advances in neural information
   processing systems 30 (2017).
[34] Clark, Kevin, Minh-Thang Luong, Quoc V. Le, and Christopher D. Manning. ”Electra: Pre-
   training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.10555
   (2020).
[35] Lan, Zhenzhong, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu
   Soricut. ”Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations.” arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1909.11942 (2019).
[36] Khan, Shakir, Ashraf Kamal, Mohd Fazil, Mohammed Ali Alshara, Vineet Kumar Sejwal,
   Reemiah Muneer Alotaibi, Abdul Rauf Baig, and Salihah Alqahtani. ”HCovBi-caps: hate speech
   detection using convolutional and Bi-directional gated recurrent unit with Capsule network.”
   IEEE Access 10 (2022): 7881-7894.
[37] Pereira-Kohatsu, Juan Carlos, Lara Quijano-Sánchez, Federico Liberatore, and Miguel
   Camacho-Collados. ”Detecting and monitoring hate speech in Twitter.” Sensors 19, no. 21 (2019):
   4654.
[38] Ding, Yunxia, Xiaobing Zhou, and Xuejie Zhang. ”Ynudyx at semeval-2019 task 5: A stacked
   bigru model based on capsule network in detection of hate.” In Proceedings of the 13th interna-
   tional workshop on semantic evaluation, pp. 535-539. 2019.


6   A PPENDIX


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Figure 2: F1 Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on T.Davidson + SemEval Dataset


      Figure 3: Recall Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on T.Davidson + SemEval Dataset


    Figure 4: Precision Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on T.Davidson + SemEval Dataset


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Figure 5: F1 Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on T.Davidson + SemEval Dataset


      Figure 6: Recall Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on T.Davidson + SemEval Dataset


    Figure 7: Precision Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on T.Davidson + SemEval Dataset


                                              13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               Figure 8: F1 Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on Kaggle Dataset


             Figure 9: Recall Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on Kaggle Dataset


           Figure 10: Precision Score of SarNet vs state-of-the-art on Kaggle Dataset


                                              14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                (a)                          (b)                           (c)

    Figure 11: Dataset for (a) Hate Tweets (b) Sarcastic Tweets (c) Kaggle Hate after SMOTE


                                              15
