Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E FFICIENT DATA S UBSET S ELECTION TO G ENERALIZE
T RAINING ACROSS M ODELS : T RANSDUCTIVE AND I N -
DUCTIVE N ETWORKS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Subset selection, in recent times, has emerged as a successful approach toward
         efficient training of models by significantly reducing the amount of data and
         computational resources required. However, existing methods employ discrete
         combinatorial and model-specific approaches which lack generalizability— for
         each new model, the algorithm has to be executed from the beginning. Therefore,
         for data subset selection for an unseen architecture, one cannot use the subset
         chosen for a different model. In this work, we propose S UB S EL N ET, a non-
         adaptive subset selection framework, which tackles these problems with two main
         components. First, we introduce an attention-based neural gadget that leverages
         the graph structure of architectures and acts as a surrogate to trained deep neural
         networks for quick model prediction. Then, we use these predictions to build
         subset samplers. This leads us to develop two variants of S UB S EL N ET. The first
         variant is transductive (called as Transductive-S UB S EL N ET) which computes the
         subset separately for each model by solving a small optimization problem. Such
         an optimization is still super fast, thanks to the replacement of explicit model
         training by the model approximator. The second variant is inductive (called as
         Inductive-S UB S EL N ET) which computes the subset using a trained subset selector,
         without any optimization. Most state-of-the-art data subset selection approaches
         are adaptive, in that the subset selection adapts as the training progresses, and as
         a result, they require access to the entire data at training time. Our approach, in
         contrast, is non-adaptive and does the subset selection only once in the beginning,
         thereby achieving resource and memory efficiency along with compute-efficiency at
         training time. Our experiments show that both the variants of our model outperform
         several methods on the quality of the subset chosen and further demonstrate that our
         method can be used for choosing the best architecture from a set of architectures.

1 I NTRODUCTION
In the last decade, deep neural networks have enhanced the performance of the state-of-the-art ML
models dramatically. However, these neural networks often demand massive data to train, which
renders them heavily contingent on availability of high performance computing machinery, e.g.,
GPUs, CPUs, RAMs, storage disks, etc. However, such resources entail heavy energy consumption,
excessive CO2 emission and maintenance cost.
Driven by this challenge, a recent body of work focus on suitably selecting a subset of instances, so
that the model can be quickly trained using lightweight computing infrastructure (Boutsidis et al.,
2013; Kirchhoff & Bilmes, 2014; Wei et al., 2014a; Bairi et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2015; Wei et al., 2015;
Lucic et al., 2017; Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020b; Kaushal et al., 2019; Killamsetty et al., 2021a;b;c).
However, these existing data subset selection algorithm are discrete combinatorial algorithms, which
share three key limitations. (1) Scaling up the combinatorial algorithms is often difficult, which
imposes significant barrier against achieving efficiency gains as compared to training with entire data.
(2) Many of these approaches are adaptive in nature, i.e, the subset changes as the model training
progresses. As a result, they require access to the entire training dataset and while they provide
compute-efficiency, they do not address memory and resource efficiency challenges of deep model
training. (3) The subset selected by the algorithm is tailored to train only a given specific model and
it cannot be used to train another model. Therefore, the algorithm cannot be shared across different
models. We discuss the related work in detail in Appendix A.

                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


1.1   P RESENT WORK

Responding to the above limitations, we develop S UB S EL N ET, a trainable subset selection framework,
which— once trained on a set of model architectures and a dataset— can quickly select a small
training subset such that it can be used to train a new (test) model, without a significant drop in
accuracy. Our setup is non-adaptive in that it learns to select the subset before the training starts for a
new architecture, instead of adaptively selecting the subset during the training process. We initiate
our investigation by writing down an instance of combinatorial optimization problem that outputs a
subset specifically for one given model architecture. Then, we gradually develop S UB S EL N ET, by
building upon this setup. S UB S EL N ET comprises of the following novel components.
Neural model approximator. The key blocker in scaling up a model-specific combinatorial subset
selector across different architectures is the involvement of the model parameters as optimization
variables along with the candidate data subset. To circumvent this blocker, we design a neural
model approximator which aims to approximate the predictions of a trained model for any given
architecture. Thus, such a model approximator can provide per instance accuracy provided by a new
(test) model without explicitly training it. This model approximator works in two steps. First, it
translates a given model architecture into a set of embedding vectors using graph neural networks
(GNNs). Similar to the proposal of Yan et al. (2020) it views a given model architecture as a directed
graph between different operations and, then outputs the node embeddings by learning a variational
graph autoencoder (VAE) in an unsupervised manner. Due to such nature of the training, these
node embeddings represent only the underlying architecture— they do not capture any signal from
the predictions of the trained model. Hence, in the next step, we build a neural model encoder
which uses these node embeddings and the given instance to approximate the prediction made by the
trained model. The model encoder is a transformer based neural network which combines the node
embedding using self-attention induced weights to obtain an intermediate graph representation. This
intermediate representation finally combines with the instance vector x to provide the prediction of
the trained architecture.
Subset sampler. Having computed the prediction of a trained architecture, we aim to choose a subset
of instances that would minimize the predicted loss and at the same time, offers a good representation
of the data. Our subset sampler takes the approximate model output and an instance as input and
computes a selection score. Then it builds a logit vector using all these selection scores, feeds it into
a multinomial distribution and samples a subset from it. This naturally leads to two variants of the
model.
Transductive-S UB S EL N ET: The first variant is transductive in nature. Here, for each new architecture,
we utilize the predictions from the model approximator to build a continuous surrogate of the original
combinatorial problem and solve it to obtain the underlying selection scores. Thus, we still need
to solve a fresh optimization problem for every new architecture. However, the direct predictions
from the model approximator allow us to skip explicit model training. This makes this strategy
extremely fast both in terms of memory and time. We call this transductive subset selector as
Transductive-S UB S EL N ET.
Inductive-S UB S EL N ET: In contrast to Transductive-S UB S EL N ET, the second variant does not
require to solve any optimization problem. Consequently, it is extremely fast. Instead, it models the
scores using a neural network which is trained across different architectures to minimize the entropy
regularized sum of the prediction loss. We call this variant as Inductive-S UB S EL N ET.
We compare our method against six state-of-the-art methods on three real world datasets, which show
that Transductive-S UB S EL N ET (Inductive-S UB S EL N ET) provides the best (second best) trade off
between accuracy and inference time as well as accuracy and memory usage, among all the methods.
This is because (1) our subset selection method does not require any training at any stage of subset
selection for a new model; and, (2) our approach is non-adaptive and does the subset selection before
the training starts. In contrast, most state-of-the-art data subset selection approaches are adaptive, in
that the subset selection adapts as the training progresses, and as a result, they require access to the
entire data at training time. Finally, we design a hybrid version of the model, where given a budget,
we first select a larger set of instances using Inductive-S UB S EL N ET, and then extract the required
number of instances using Transductive-S UB S EL N ET. We observe that such a hybrid approach
allow us to make a smooth transition between the trade off curves from Inductive-S UB S EL N ET to
Transductive-S UB S EL N ET.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     D EVELOPMENT OF PROPOSED MODEL : S UB S EL N ET
In this section, we setup the notations and write down the combinatorial subset selection problem for
efficient training. This leads us to develop a continuous optimization problem which would allow us
to generalize the combinatorial setup across different models.

2.1   N OTATIONS
We are given a set of training instances {(xi , yi )}i∈D where we use D to index the data. Here,
xi ∈ Rdx are features and yi ∈ Y as the labels. In our experiments, we consider Y as a set of
categorical labels. However, our framework can also be used for continuous labels. We use m to
denote a neural architecture and represent its parameterization as mθ . We also use M to denote
the set of neural architectures. Given an architecture m ∈ M, Gm = (Vm , Em ) provides the
graph representation of m, where the nodes u ∈ Vm represent the operations and the e = (um , vm )
indicates an edge, where the output given by the operation represented by the node um is fed to one
of the operands of the operation given by the node vm . Finally, we use H(·) to denote the entropy of
a probability distribution and ℓ(mθ (x), y) as the cross entropy loss hereafter.

2.2   C OMBINATORIAL SUBSET SELECTION FOR EFFICIENT LEARNING
We are given a dataset {(xi , yi )}i∈D and a model architecture m ∈ M with its neural parameteri-
zation mθ . The goal of a subset selection algorithm is to select a small subset of instances S with
|S| = n << |D| such that, training mθ on the subset S gives nearly same accuracy as training on the
entire dataset D. Existing works (Killamsetty et al., 2021b; Sivasubramanian et al., 2021; Killamsetty
et al., 2021a) adopt different strategies to achieve this goal, but all of them aim to simultaneously
optimize for the model parameters θ as well as the candidate subset S. At the outset, we may consider
the following optimization problem.
                                      X
                          minimize        ℓ(mθ (xi ), yi ) − λ D IVERSITY(S),                      (1)
                        θ,S⊂D:|S|=b
                                      i∈S
where b is the budget, D IVERSITY(S) measures the representativeness of S with respect to the whole
dataset D and λ is a regularizing coefficient. One can use submodular functions (Fujishige, 2005;
Iyer, 2015) like Facility Location, graph cut, or Log-Determinants to model D IVERSITY(S). Here,
λ trades off between training loss and diversity. Such an optimization problem indeed provides an
optimal subset S that results in high accuracy.
Bottlenecks of the combinatorial optimization. The optimization problem (1) imposes the following
challenges. (1) It demands explicit training of mθ which can be expensive in terms of both memory
and time. (2) The training of mθ every time for a new architecture m prevents the subset S from
being generalizable— one needs to solve the optimization (1) again to find S for an unseen model
architecture. We address these challenges by designing a neural surrogate of the objective (1), which
would lead to generalization of subset selection across efficient training of different models.

2.3   C OMPONENTS OF S UB S EL N ET MODEL
Next, we sketch our proposed model S UB S EL N ET that leads to substituting the optimization (1) with
its neural surrogate. It consists of two key components: (i) neural approximator of the trained model
and (ii) the subset sampler. Figure 4 in Appendix B illustrates our model.
Approximator of the trained model mθ∗ . First, we design a neural network Fϕ which would
approximate the predictions of the trained model mθ∗ for different architectures m ∈ M. Given the
dataset {(xi , yi )i∈D } and a model architecture m ∈ M, we first feed the underlying DAG Gm into a
graph neural network GNNα with parameter α, which outputs the representations of the nodes of the
Gm , i.e., Hm = {hu }u∈Vm . Next, we feed Hm and the instance xi into an encoder gβ
                          Fϕ (Gm , xi ) ≈ mθ∗ (xi ) for m ∈ M.                                     (2)
                          Here, Fϕ (Gm , xi ) = gβ (GNNα (Gm ), xi ).                              (3)
                       ∗
Here, ϕ = {α, β}, and θ is the set of learned parameters of the model mθ on the dataset D.
Subset sampler. We design a subset sampler using a probabilistic model Prπ (•). Given a budget
|S| ≤ b, it sequentially draws instances S = {s1 , ..., sb } from a softmax distribution of the logit
vector π ∈ R|D| where π(xi , yi ) indicates a score for the element (xi , yi ). Having chosen the


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


first t instances St = {s1 , ..st } from D, it draws the (t + 1)-th element (x, y) from the remaining
instances in D with a probability proportional to exp(π(x, y)) and then repeat it for b times. Thus,
the probability of selecting the ordered set of elements S = {s1 , ..., sb } is given by
                                          b
                                          Y          exp(π(xst+1 , yst+1 ))
                             Pr π (S) =         P                                                    (4)
                                          t=0       τ ∈D\St exp(π(xsτ , ysτ ))
We would like to highlight that we use S as an ordered set of elements, selected in a sequential
manner. However, such an order does not affect the trained model which is inherently invariant of
permutations of the training data, it only affects the choice of S.
Training objective. Using the Eqs. (2) and (4), we replace the combinatorial optimization problem
in Eq. (1) with a continuous optimization problem, across different model architectures m ∈ M. To
that goal, we define
                                       P
                     Λ(S; m; π, Fϕ ) = i∈S ℓ(Fϕ (Gm , xi ), yi ) − λH(Pr π (•))                (5)
                      X                                X
           minimize           E      Λ(S; m; π, Fϕ ) +     γKL(Fϕ (Gm , xi ), mθ∗ (xi ))       (6)
              π,ϕ          S∈Prπ (•)
                     m∈M                                     i∈S
Here, we use entropy on the subset sampler H(Prπ (•)) to model the diversity of samples in the
selected subset. We call our neural pipeline, which consists of the model approximator Fϕ and the
subset selector π, as S UB S EL N ET. In the above, γ penalizes the difference between the output of
model approximator and the prediction made by the trained model, which allows us to generalize the
training of different models m ∈ M through the model Fϕ (Gm , xi ).

2.4   T RANSDUCTIVE -S UB S EL N ET AND I NDUCTIVE -S UB S EL N ET MODELS
The optimization (6) suggests that once Fϕ is trained, we can use it to compute the output of the
trained model mθ∗ for an unseen architecture m′ and use it to compute π. This already removes a
significant overhead of model training and facilitates fast computation of π. This leads us to develop
two types of models based on how we can compute π, as follows.
Transductive-S UB S EL N ET. The first variant of the model is transductive in terms of computation of
π. Here, once we train the model approximator Fϕ , then we compute π by solving the optimization
problem explicitly with respect to π, every time when we wish to select data subset for a new archi-
tecture. Given a trained model Fϕ and a new model architecture m′ ∈ M, we solve the optimization
problem: minπ ES∈Pr π (•) [Λ(S; m; π, Fϕ )] to find the subset sampler Prπ during inference time for
a new architecture m′ . Such an optimization still consumes time during inference. However, it is
still significantly faster than the combinatorial methods (Killamsetty et al., 2021b;a; Mirzasoleiman
et al., 2020a; Sivasubramanian et al., 2021) thanks to sidestepping the explicit model training using a
model approximator.
Inductive-S UB S EL N ET. In contrast to the transductive model, the inductive model does not require
explicit optimization of π in the face of a new architecture. To that aim, we approximate π using a
neural network πψ . This takes two signals as inputs - the dataset D and the outputs of the model
approximator for different instances {Fϕ (Gm , xi ) | i ∈ D}, and finally outputs a score for each
instance πψ (xi , yi ). Under Inductive-S UB S EL N ET, the optimization (6) becomes:
                                     "                                                        #
                       X                                    X
         minimize              E       Λ(S; m; πψ , Fϕ ) +      γKL(Fϕ (Gm , xi ), mθ∗ (xi ))     (7)
            ψ,ϕ           S∈Prπψ (•)
                    m∈M                                       i∈S
Such an inductive model can select an optimal distribution of the subset that should be used to
efficiently train any model mθ , without explicitly training θ or searching for the underlying subset.
3     N EURAL PARAMETERIZATION OF S UB S EL N ET
In this section, we describe the neural parametrization of S UB S EL N ET. S UB S EL N ET consists of two
key components, Fϕ and πψ . Specifically, Transductive-S UB S EL N ET has only one neural component
which is Fϕ , whereas, Inductive-S UB S EL N ET has both Fϕ and πψ .
3.1   N EURAL PARAMETERIZATION OF Fϕ
The approximator Fϕ consists of two components: (i) a graph neural network GNNα which maps Gm ,
the DAG of an architecture, to the node representations Hm = {hu }u∈Vm and (ii) a model encoder


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


gβ which takes Hm and the instance xi as input and approximates mθ∗ (xi ), i.e., the prediction made
by the trained model. Therefore, Fϕ (Gm , x) = gβ (GNNα (Gm ), xi ). Here, ϕ = {α, β}.
Computation of architecture embedding using GNNα . Given a model m ∈ M, we compute the
representations Hm = {hu |u ∈ Vm } by using a graph neural network GNNα parameterized with α,
following the proposal of Yan et al. (2020). We first compute the feature vector fu for each node
u ∈ Vm using the one-hot encoding of the associated operation (e.g., max, sum, etc.) and then feed
it into a neural network to compute an initial node representation, as given below.
                                       hu [0] = I NIT N ODEα (fu )                                      (8)
Then, we use a message passing network, which collects signals from the neighborhood of different
nodes and recursively compute the node representations (Yan et al., 2020; Xu et al., 2018b; Gilmer
et al., 2017). Given a maximum number of recursive layers K and the node u, we compute the node
embeddings Hm = {hu |u ∈ Vm } by gathering information from the k < K hops using K recursive
layers as follows.
                     h(u,v) [k − 1] = E DGE E MBEDα (hu [k − 1], hv [k − 1])

                     h′u [k − 1] = S YMM AGGRα ( h(u,v) [k − 1] | v ∈ Nbr(u) )
                     hu [k] = U PDATEα (hu [k − 1], h′u [k − 1]).                                       (9)
Here, Nbr(u) is the set of neighbors of u. We use S YMM AGGR as a simple sum aggregator and both
U PDATE and E DGE E MBED are injective mappings, as used in (Xu et al., 2018b). Note that trainable
parameters from E DGE E MBED, S YMM AGGR and U PDATE are decoupled. They are represented as
the set of parameters α. Finally, we obtain our node representations as:
                                      hu = [hu [0], .., hu [K − 1]].                                   (10)
Model encoder gβ . Having computed the architecture representation {hu | u ∈ Vm }, we next design
the model encoder which leverages these embeddings to predict the output of the trained model
mθ∗ (xi ). To this aim, we developed a model encoder gβ parameterized by β that takes Hm and xi as
input and attempts to predict mθ∗ (xi ), i.e., gβ (Hm , xi ) ≈ mθ∗ (xi ). It consists of three steps. In the
first step, we generate a permutation invariant order on the nodes. Next, we feed the representations
{hu } in this order into a self-attention based transformer layer. Finally, we combine the output of the
transformer and the instance xi using a feedforward network to approximate the model output.
Node ordering using BFS order. We first sort the nodes using breadth-first-search (BFS) order ρ.
Similar to You et al. (2018), this sorting method produces a permutation-invariant sequence of nodes
and captures subtleties like skip connections in the network structure Gm
Attention layer. Given the BFS order ρ, we pass the representations Hm = {hu | u ∈ Vm } in the
sequence ρ through a self-attention based transformer network. Here, the Query, Key and Value
functions are realized by matrices Wquery , Wkey , Wvalue ∈ Rdim(h)×k where k is a tunable width.
Thus, for each node u ∈ Vm , we have:
                          ⊤                            ⊤                             ⊤
            Query(hu ) = Wquery hu ,       Key(hu ) = Wkey hu ,        Value(hu ) = Wvalue hu          (11)
Using these quantities, we compute an attention weighted vector ζu given by:
              X                                                                  √
 Attu = WcT        au,v Value(hv ) with, au,v = S OFT M AXv Query(hu )⊤ Key(hv )/ k (12)
                 v

Here k is the dimension of the latent space, the softmax operation is over the node v, and Wc ∈
Rk×dim(h) . Subsequently, for each node u, we use a feedforward network, preceded and succeeded
by layer normalization operations, which are given by the following set of equations.
  ζu,1 = LN(Attu + hu ; γ1 , γ2 ), ζu,2 = W2⊤ R E LU(W1⊤ ζu,1 ), ζu,3 = LN(ζu,1 + ζu,2 ; γ3 , γ4 )
Here, LN is the layer normalization operation (Ba et al., 2016). Finally, we feed the vector ζu,3 for the
last node u in the sequence ρ, i.e., u = ρ(|Vm |) along with the feature vector xi into a feed-forward
network parameterized by WF to model the prediction mθ∗ (xi ). Thus, the final output of the model
encoder gβ (Hm , xi ) is given by
                                      om,xi = FFβ2 (ζρ|Vm |,3 , xi )                                   (13)
Here, W• and γ• are trainable parameters and collectively form the set of parameters β.


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


3.2   N EURAL ARCHITECTURE OF I NDUCTIVE -S UB S EL N ET
We approximate π using a neural network πψ using a neural network which takes three inputs –
(xj , yj ), the corresponding output of the model approximator, i.e., om,xj = Fϕ (Gm , xj ) and the
node representation matrix Hm and provides us a positive selection score πψ (Hm , xj , yj , om,xj ). In
practice, πψ is a three-layer feed-forward network, which contains Leaky-ReLU activation functions
for the first two layers and sigmoid activation at the last layer.

4     PARAMETER ESTIMATION AND INFERENCE
Given a dataset {(xi , yi ) | i ∈ D} and the output of the trained models {mθ∗ (xi )}i∈D , our goal is to
estimate ϕ and π (resp. ψ) for the transductive (inductive) model. We first illustrate the bottlenecks
that prevent us from end-to-end training for estimating these parameters. Then, we introduce a
multi-stage training method to overcome these limitations. Finally, we present the inference method.

4.1   B OTTLENECK FOR END TO END TRAINING
End to end optimization of the above problem is difficult for the following reasons. (i) Our architecture
representation Hm only represents the architectures and thus should be independent of parameter of
the architecture θ and the instances x. End to end training can make them sensitive to these quantities.
(ii) To enable the model approximator Fϕ accurately fit the output of the trained model mθ , we
need an explicit training for ϕ with the target mθ . Adding the corresponding loss as an additional
regularizer imposes an additional hyperparameter tuning.

4.2   M ULTI - STAGE TRAINING
In our multi-stage training method, we first train the model approximator Fϕ by minimizing the sum
of the KL divergence between the gold output probabilities, and then train our subset sampler Prπ
(resp. Prπψ ) for the transductive (inductive) model as well as fine-tuning ϕ.
Training the model approximator Fϕ . We train Fϕ in two steps. In the first step, we perform
unsupervised training of GNNα using graph variational autoencoder (GVAE). This ensures that the
architecture representations Hm remain insensitive to the model parameters. We build the encoder
and decoder of our GVAE by following existing works on graph VAEs (Yan et al., 2020) in the
context graph based modeling of neural architectures. Given a graph Gm , the encoder q(Zm | Gm )
which takes the node embeddings {hu }u∈Vm and maps it into the latent space Zm = {zu }u∈Vm .
Specifically, we model the encoder q(Zm | Gm ) as: q(zu | Gm ) = N (µ(hu ), Σ(hu )). Here, both
µ and Σ are neural networks. Given a latent representation Zm = {zu }u∈Vm , the decoder models
a generative distribution of the graph Gm where the presence of an edge is modeled as Bernoulli
distribution B ERNOULLI(σ(zu⊤ zv )). Thus, we model the decoder as:
                                 Q                    Q
                   p(Gm | Z) = (u,v)∈Em σ(zu⊤ zv ) · (u,v)̸∈Em [1 − σ(zu⊤ zv )]             (14)
Here, σ is a parameterized sigmoid function. Finally, we estimate α, µ, Σ and σ by maximizing the
evidence lower bound (ELBO) as follows:
                    max EZ∼q(• | Gm ) [p(Gm | Z)] − KL(q(• | Gm )||prior(•))                 (15)
                    α,µ,Σ,σ
Next, we train our model encoder gβ by minimizing the KL-Divergence between the approximated
prediction gβ (Hm , xi ) and the ground truth prediction mθ∗ (xi ), where both these quantities are
probabilities across different classes. Hence, the training problem is as follows:
                                     P
                         minimize       i∈D,m∈M KL(mθ ∗ (xi )||gβ (Hm , xi ))                  (16)
                              β
Training of the subset sampler. Finally, we fine-tune gβ and train π by solving (6) for the
Transductive-S UB S EL N ET (likewise train πψ by solving (7) for Inductive-S UB S EL N ET).

4.3   I NFERENCE
During inference, our goal is to select a subset S with |S| = b for a new model m′ , which would
facilitate efficient training of m′ . As discussed in Section 2.4, we compute π for Transductive-
S UB S EL N ET by explicitly solving the optimization problem: minπ ES∈Pr π (•) [Λ(S; m; π, Fϕ )] and
then draw S ∼ Prπ (•). For Inductive-S UB S EL N ET, we draw S ∼ Prπψ̂ (•) where ψ̂ is the learned
value of ψ during training.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.4   OVERVIEW OF TRAINING AND INFERENCE ROUTINES
Algorithms 1 and 2 summarize the algorithms for the training and inference procedure.
Training Subroutines. The training phase for Algorithm 1 Training procedure
both, Transductive-S UB S EL N ET first utilizes                                                     ∗
the T RAINA PPROX routine to train the model 1: function T RAIN T RANSDUCTIVE(D, M, {θ })
                                                                                                   ∗
approximator given the dataset, trained model 2:         α̂, β̂, Hm ←T RAINA PPROX(D, M, {θ })
parameters, and the set of neural architectures. 1: function T RAIN I NDUCTIVE(D, M, {θ∗ })
Internally, the routine calls the T RAIN GNN sub-
                                                   2:    α̂, β̂, Hm ←T RAINA PPROX(D, M, {θ∗ })
routine to train the parameters (α) of the GNN
                                                   3:    o ← [gβ̂ ({Hm , xi })]i,m
network, BFSO RDERING subroutine to reorder
the embeddings based on the BFS order and 4:             ψ̂ ← T RAIN PI(o, {Hm }, {xi })
the T RAIN M ODEL E NC subroutine to train the     1: function T RAINA PPROX(D, M, {θ ∗ })
attention-based model encoder’s parameters (β). 2:       α̂ ← T RAIN GNN(M)
The T RAIN I NDUCTIVE routine further calls the 3:       for m ∈ Mtrain do
T RAIN P I subroutine to train the parameters of 4:           Hm ← GNNα̂ (m)
the neural subset selector.                        5:         P OS ← BFSO RDERING(Gm )
Inference Subroutines. Given an unseen ar- 6:            β̂ ← T RAIN M ODEL E NC({xi }, P OS, {θ∗ })
chitecture and parameters of the trained neural
networks, the inference phase for both variants Algorithm 2 Inference procedure
of S UB S EL N ET first generates the model en-
coder output for all the data points. Post this, 1: function I NFERT RANSDUCTIVE      (D, α̂, β̂, m′ )
                                                                             ′
the I NFERT RANSDUCTIVE routine solves the 2:            Hm′ ← GNNα̂ (m )
optimization problem on π explicitly for the un-   3:    Fϕ (Gm′ , xi ) ← gβ̂ (Hm′ , xi ) ∀i ∈ D
seen architecture and selects the subset from      4:    π ∗ ← minπ ES∈Prπ (•) [Λ(S; m′ ; π; Fϕ )]
the dataset. On the other hand, I NFER I NDUC - 5:       S ∗ ∼ Prπ∗ (•)
TIVE utilizes the trained parameters of the neural 6:    T RAIN N EW M ODEL(m′ ; S ∗ )
subset selector. Finally, both routines call the 1: function I NFER I NDUCTIVE(D, α̂, β̂, m′ )
T RAIN N EW M ODEL to train and evaluate the       2:    Hm′ ← GNNα̂ (m′ )
unseen architecture on selected subset.            3:    F (G ′ , x ) ← g (H ′ , x ) ∀i ∈ D
                                                              ϕ   m     i      β̂   m     i

5     E XPERIMENTS                                     4:   Compute πψ̂ (xi , yi ) ∀i ∈ D
                                                       5:   S ∗ ∼ Prπψ̂ (•)
In this section, we provide comprehensive eval-
                                                       6:   T RAIN N EW M ODEL(m′ ; S ∗ )
uation of S UB S EL N ET against several strong
baselines on three real world datasets. In Ap-
pendix D, we present additional results.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Datasets. We use FMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), CIFAR10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2014) and CI-
FAR100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) datasets for our experiments. We transform an input image
Xi to a vector xi of dimension 2048 by feeding it to a pre-trained ResNet50 v1.5 (?) model and
using the output from the penultimate layer as the image representation.
Model architectures and baselines. We use model architectures from NAS-Bench-101 (Ying et al.,
2019) for our experiments. We compare Transductive-S UB S EL N ET and Inductive-S UB S EL N ET
against two non-adaptive subset Pselection methods – (i) Facility location (Fujishige, 2005; Iyer, 2015)
where we maximize F L(S) = j∈D maxi∈S x⊤          i xj to find S, (ii) Pruning (Sorscher et al., 2022),
and four adaptive subset selection methods – (iii) Glister (Killamsetty et al., 2021b), (iv) Grad–
Match (Killamsetty et al., 2021a), (v) EL2N (Paul et al., 2021), (vi) GraNd (Paul et al., 2021); and;
(vii) Full selection where we use complete training data. The non-adaptive subset selectors select
the subset before the training begins and thus, never access the rest of the training set again during
the training iterations. On the other hand, the adaptive subset selectors refine the choice of subset
during training iterations and thus they need to access the full training set at each training iteration.
Appendix C contains additional details about the baselines.
Evaluation protocol. We split the model architectures M into 60% training (Mtr ), 20% validation
(Mval ) and 20% test (Mtest ) folds. Similarly, we split the dataset D into Dtr , Dval and Dtest . We
present Mtr , Mval , Dtr and Dval to our method and estimate ϕb and ψb (for Inductive-S UB S EL N ET


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Transductive-SubSelNet                        FL                   GLISTER                            GraNd
                               Inductive-SubSelNet                           Pruning              Grad-Match                         EL2N
                 1.00                                             0.75                                               0.3
                                                                                                                                        full selection:

      Pr(y = ŷ) →


                                                                                                          Pr(y = ŷ) →
                                                       Pr(y = ŷ) →
                 0.75                                                                                                                   (1.0, 0.91)
                                                                  0.50                                               0.2
                 0.50
                                     full selection:              0.25                                               0.1
                 0.25                                                                   full selection:
                                     (1.0, 0.97)                                        (1.0, 0.96)
                 0.00
                          50         150 200 250
                                                                  0.00
                                                                           50          150 200 250
                                                                                                                     0.0
                                                                                                                              50      150
                                                                                                                                           0.1
                                                                                                                                          200 250
                                                                                                                                        0.0
                          Speed up (Tf /T ) →                              Speed up (Tf /T ) →                                Speed up (Tf /T0
                                                                                                                                             )→           20   40
                 1.00                                             0.75                                               0.3
                                                                                    full selection:                                  full selection:
      Pr(y = ŷ) →


                                                                                                          Pr(y = ŷ) →
                                                       Pr(y = ŷ) →
                 0.75                                                               (2.4 × 106, 0.96)                                (2.7 × 106, 0.91)
                                                                  0.50                                               0.2
                 0.50
                 0.25             full selection:
                                                                  0.25                                               0.1
                                  (2.1 × 106, 0.97)
                 0.00                                             0.00                                               0.0
                     0    25    50     75 100                         0      25       50    75     100                  0       25    50     75    100
                     RT                                               RT                                                 RT
                     0 memory(t)dt (GB-min) →                         0 memory(t)dt (GB-min) →                           0 memory(t)dt (GB-min) →

                          (a) FMNIST                                       (b) CIFAR10                                        (c) CIFAR100

Figure 1: Trade off between accuracy and speedup (top row) and accuracy and memory consumption
(bottom row) for all the methods – Facility location (Fujishige, 2005; Iyer, 2015), Pruning (Sorscher
et al., 2022), Glister (Killamsetty et al., 2021b), Grad-Match (Killamsetty et al., 2021a), EL2N (Paul
et al., 2021); GraNd (Paul et al., 2021); and; Full selection on all three datasets - FMNIST, CIFAR10
and CIFAR100. In all cases, we vary |S| = b ∈ (0.005|D|, 0.05|D|) and measure accuracy on 20%
test architectures and 20% test instances.

model). None of the baseline methods supports any generalizable learning protocol across different
model architectures and thus cannot leverage the training architectures during test.
Given an architecture m′ ∈ Mtest , we select the subset S from Dtr using our subset sampler (Prπ
for Transductive-S UB S EL N ET or Prπψb for Inductive-S UB S EL N ET). Similarly, all the non-adaptive
subset selectors select S ⊂ Dtr using their own algorithms. Once S is selected, we train the test
models m′ ∈ Mtest on S. We perform our experiments with different |S| = b ∈ (0.005|D|, 0.05|D|)
and compare the performance betweenP       different methods using three quantities: (1) Accuracy
                                           P
Pr(y = ŷ) measured using |D1test | i∈Dtest m′ ∈Mtest 1(maxj m′θ∗ (xi )[j] = yi ). (2) Computational
efficiency, i.e., the speedup achieved with respect to training with full dataset. It is measured with
respect to Tf /T . Here, Tf is the time taken for training with full dataset; and, T is the time taken
for the entire inference task, which is the average time for selecting subsets across the test models
m′ ∈ Mtest plus the average training time of these test models on the respective selected subsets.
(3) Resource efficiency in terms of the amount of memory consumed during the entire inference
                                                    RT
task, described in item (2), which is measured as 0 memory(t) dt where memory(t) is amount of
memory consumed at timestamp t.
5.2      R ESULTS
Comparison with baselines. Here, we compare different methods in terms of the trade off between
accuracy and computational efficiency as well as accuracy and resource efficiency. In Figure 1,
we probe the variation between these quantities by varying the size of the selected subset |S| =
b ∈ (0.005|D|, 0.05|D|). We make the following observations. (1) Our methods trade-off between
accuracy vs. computational efficiency as well as accuracy vs. resource efficiency more effectively
than all the methods. For FMNIST, both the variants of our method strikingly output 75% accuracy,
whereas they are 100 times faster than full selection. Transductive-S UB S EL N ET performs slightly
better than Inductive-S UB S EL N ET in terms of the overall trade-off between accuracy and efficiency
for FMNIST and CIFAR10 datasets. However, for CIFAR100, Transductive-S UB S EL N ET performs
significantly better than Inductive-S UB S EL N ET. The time taken for both Transductive-S UB S EL N ET
and Inductive-S UB S EL N ET seems comparable— this is because the subset selection time for both
of them are significantly less than the final training time on the selected subset. (2) EL2N is the
second best method. It provides the best trade-off between accuracy and time as well as accuracy and
GPU memory, among all the baselines. It aims at choosing difficult training instances having high
prediction error. As a result, once trained on them, the model can predict the labels of easy instances


                                                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


too. However, it chooses instances after running the initial few epochs. (3) FL adopts a greedy
algorithm for subset selection and therefore, it consumes a large time and memory during subset
selection itself. Consequently, the overall efficiency significantly decreases although the complexity
of the training time on the selected subset remains the same as our models in terms of time and
memory. (4) In addition to EL2N, Glister, Grad-Match and GraNd are adaptive subset selection
methods that operate with moderately small (> 5%) subset sizes. In a region, where the subset size is
extremely small, i.e., 1% − 5%, they perform very poorly. Moreover, they maximize a monotone
function at each gradient update step, which results in significant overhead in terms of time. These
methods process the entire training data to refine the choice of the subset and consequently, they end
up consuming a lot of memory. (5) GraNd selects the instances having high uncertainty after running
each model for five epochs and often the model is not well trained by then.
Finer analysis of the inference time. Next, we demarcate the Table 2: Inference time in seconds
subset selection phase from the training phase of the test models                        Trans. Induct.   FL
on the selected subset during the inference time analysis. Table 2      Subset selection  0.23   0.067  226.29

summarizes the results for top three non-adaptive subset selection         Training       70.1    70.1   70.1

methods for b = 0.005|D| on CIFAR100. We observe that: (1)
the final training times of all three methods are roughly same; (2) the selection time for Transductive-
S UB S EL N ET is significantly more than Inductive-S UB S EL N ET, although it remains extremely small
as compared to the final training on the inferred subset; and, (3) the selection time of FL is large— as
close as 323% of the training time.
Hybrid-S UB S EL N ET. From Figure 1, we observe that Transductive-S UB S EL N ET performs sig-
nificantly better than Inductive-S UB S EL N ET. However, since Transductive-S UB S EL N ET solves a
fresh optimization problem for each new architecture, it performs better at the cost of time and GPU
memory. On the other hand, Inductive-
                                                             B = 25000       B = 45000
S UB S EL N ET performs significantly worse                  B = 30000       Transductive (B = 50000)
as it relies on a trained neural network to                  B = 35000       Inductive (B = NA)
learn the same optimization problem. Here,          0.3                         0.3
                                                                              Pr(y = ŷ) →
                                                    Pr(y = ŷ) →


we design a hybrid version of our model,            0.2                         0.2
                                                                                                   0.1
called as Hybrid-S UB S EL N ET.        Here,                                                             10     20
                                                                                0.1
given the budget of the subset b, we first          0.1

choose B > b instances using Inductive-             0.0
                                                       0    100   200    300
                                                                                0.0
                                                                                   0    10    20     30
S UB S EL N ET and the final b instances by                                  RT
                                                       Speed up (Tf /T ) →    0 memory(t)dt   (GB-min)  →
running the explicit optimization routines in                 Figure 3: Hybrid-S UB S EL N ET
Transductive-S UB S EL N ET. Figure 3 sum-
marizes the results for B = {25K, 30K, 35K, 45K, 50K} . We observe that the trade off curves
for the Hybrid-S UB S EL N ET lie in between Inductive-S UB S EL N ET and Transductive-S UB S EL N ET.
For low value of B, i.e., B = 25K, the trade off line of Hybrid-S UB S EL N ET remains close to
Inductive-S UB S EL N ET. As we increase B, the trade-off curve of accuracy vs speed up as well as the
accuracy vs GPU usage becomes better, which allows Hybrid-S UB S EL N ET to smoothly transition
from the trade off curve of Inductive-S UB S EL N ET to Transductive-S UB S EL N ET. At B = 45K, the
trade-off curve almost coincides with Transductive-S UB S EL N ET. Such properties allow a user to
choose an appropriate B that can accurately correspond to a target operating point in the form of
(Accuracy, Speed up) or (Accuracy, memory usage).

6    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we develop S UB S EL N ET, a subset selection framework, which can be trained on a set
of model architectures, to be able to predict a suitable training subset before training a model, for
an unseen architecture. To do so, we first design a neural model approximator, which predicts the
output of a new candidate architecture without explicitly training it. We use that output to design
transductive and inductive variants of our model. The transductive model solves a small optimization
problem to compute the subset for a new architecture m every single time. In contrast, the inductive
model resorts to a neural subset sampler instead of an optimizer.
Our work does not incorporate the gradients of the trained model in model approximator and it would
be interesting to explore its impact on the subset selection. Further we can extend our setup to an
adaptive setting, where we can incorporate signals from different epochs with a sequence encoder to
train a subset selector.



                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   E THICS STATEMENT
We do not foresee any negative impact of our work from ethics viewpoint.

8   R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We uploaded the code in supplementary material. Details of implementation are given in Appendix C.

R EFERENCES
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Ramakrishna Bairi, Rishabh Iyer, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and Jeff Bilmes. Summarization of multi-
  document topic hierarchies using submodular mixtures. In ACL, pp. 553–563, 2015.
Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. Designing neural network architec-
  tures using reinforcement learning. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net,
  2017. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1c2cvqee.
Christos Boutsidis, Petros Drineas, and Malik Magdon-Ismail. Near-optimal coresets for least-squares
  regression. IEEE transactions on information theory, 59(10):6880–6892, 2013.
Abir De, Paramita Koley, Niloy Ganguly, and Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez. Regression under human
  assistance. AAAI, 2020.
Abir De, Nastaran Okati, Ali Zarezade, and Manuel Gomez-Rodriguez. Classification under human
  assistance. AAAI, 2021.
Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. Nas-bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible neural architecture
  search, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.00326.
Dan Feldman. Core-sets: Updated survey. In Sampling Techniques for Supervised or Unsupervised
 Tasks, pp. 23–44. Springer, 2020.
Satoru Fujishige. Submodular functions and optimization. Elsevier, 2005.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
  message passing for quantum chemistry. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  1263–1272. PMLR, 2017.
Sariel Har-Peled and Soham Mazumdar. On coresets for k-means and k-median clustering. In
  Proceedings of the thirty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 291–300,
  2004.
Rishabh Krishnan Iyer. Submodular optimization and machine learning: Theoretical results, unifying
  and scalable algorithms, and applications. PhD thesis, 2015.
Vishal Kaushal, Rishabh Iyer, Suraj Kothawade, Rohan Mahadev, Khoshrav Doctor, and Ganesh
  Ramakrishnan. Learning from less data: A unified data subset selection and active learning
  framework for computer vision. In 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
  Vision (WACV), pp. 1289–1299. IEEE, 2019.
Krishnateja Killamsetty, Durga Sivasubramanian, Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Ganesh Ramakrishnan,
  Abir De, and Rishabh Iyer. Grad-match: A gradient matching based data subset selection for
  efficient learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.00123, 2021a.
Krishnateja Killamsetty, Durga Subramanian, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and Rishabh Iyer. Glister: A
  generalization based data selection framework for efficient and robust learning. In AAAI, 2021b.
Krishnateja Killamsetty, Xujiang Zhao, Feng Chen, and Rishabh Iyer. Retrieve: Coreset selection for
  efficient and robust semi-supervised learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:14488–14501, 2021c.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Katrin Kirchhoff and Jeff Bilmes. Submodularity for data selection in machine translation. In
  Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
 (EMNLP), pp. 131–141, 2014.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Vinod Nair, and Geoffrey Hinton.              The cifar-10 dataset.       In online:
  https://www.cs.toronto.edu/∼kriz/cifar.html, 2014.
Chenxi Liu, Barret Zoph, Maxim Neumann, Jonathon Shlens, Wei Hua, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei, Alan
  Yuille, Jonathan Huang, and Kevin Murphy. Progressive neural architecture search, 2017. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.00559.
Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search, 2018.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.09055.
Yuzong Liu, Rishabh Iyer, Katrin Kirchhoff, and Jeff Bilmes. Svitchboard ii and fisver i: High-quality
  limited-complexity corpora of conversational english speech. In Sixteenth Annual Conference of
  the International Speech Communication Association, 2015.
Mario Lucic, Matthew Faulkner, Andreas Krause, and Dan Feldman. Training gaussian mixture
 models at scale via coresets. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):5885–5909, 2017.
Jovita Lukasik, David Friede, Arber Zela, Frank Hutter, and Margret Keuper. Smooth variational
  graph embeddings for efficient neural architecture search. In International Joint Conference on
  Neural Networks, IJCNN 2021, Shenzhen, China, July 18-22, 2021, 2021.
Renqian Luo, Fei Tian, Tao Qin, Enhong Chen, and Tie-Yan Liu. Neural architecture optimiza-
  tion. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/file/
  933670f1ac8ba969f32989c312faba75-Paper.pdf.
Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Jeff Bilmes, and Jure Leskovec. Coresets for data-efficient training of
  machine learning models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6950–6960.
  PMLR, 2020a.
Baharan Mirzasoleiman, Jeff Bilmes, and Jure Leskovec. Coresets for data-efficient training of
  machine learning models. In Proc. ICML, 2020b.
Christopher Morris, Martin Ritzert, Matthias Fey, William L. Hamilton, Jan Eric Lenssen, Gaurav
  Rattan, and Martin Grohe. Weisfeiler and leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-First
  Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Ninth AAAI Symposium on
  Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19. AAAI Press, 2019.
  ISBN 978-1-57735-809-1. doi: 10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33014602. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1609/aaai.v33i01.33014602.
Xuefei Ning, Changcheng Tang, Wenshuo Li, Songyi Yang, Tianchen Zhao, Niansong Zhang, Tianyi
  Lu, Shuang Liang, Huazhong Yang, and Yu Wang. Awnas: A modularized and extensible nas
  framework, 2020.
Hoang NT and Takanori Maehara. Revisiting graph neural networks: All we have is low-pass filters,
  2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.09550.
Mansheej Paul, Surya Ganguli, and Gintare Karolina Dziugaite. Deep learning on a data diet: Finding
 important examples early in training. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
 20596–20607, 2021.
Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neural architecture
  search via parameters sharing. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the
  35th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 4095–4104. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/pham18a.html.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Esteban Real, Sherry Moore, Andrew Selle, Saurabh Saxena, Yutaka Leon Suematsu, Jie Tan,
  Quoc Le, and Alex Kurakin. Large-scale evolution of image classifiers, 2017. URL https:
  //arxiv.org/abs/1703.01041.
Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. Regularized evolution for image
  classifier architecture search, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.01548.
Durga Sivasubramanian, Rishabh K. Iyer, Ganesh Ramakrishnan, and Abir De. Training data subset
  selection for regression with controlled generalization error. In ICML, 2021.
Ben Sorscher, Robert Geirhos, Shashank Shekhar, Surya Ganguli, and Ari S Morcos. Beyond neural
  scaling laws: beating power law scaling via data pruning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14486, 2022.
Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and
 Quoc V. Le. Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. 2018. doi: 10.48550/
 ARXIV.1807.11626. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.11626.
Kai Wei, Rishabh Iyer, and Jeff Bilmes. Fast multi-stage submodular maximization. In International
  conference on machine learning, pp. 1494–1502. PMLR, 2014a.
Kai Wei, Yuzong Liu, Katrin Kirchhoff, Chris Bartels, and Jeff Bilmes. Submodular subset selection
  for large-scale speech training data. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
  and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 3311–3315. IEEE, 2014b.
Kai Wei, Yuzong Liu, Katrin Kirchhoff, and Jeff Bilmes. Unsupervised submodular subset selec-
  tion for speech data. In 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
  Processing (ICASSP), pp. 4107–4111. IEEE, 2014c.
Kai Wei, Rishabh Iyer, and Jeff Bilmes. Submodularity in data subset selection and active learning.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1954–1963, 2015.
Colin White, Willie Neiswanger, Sam Nolen, and Yash Savani. A study on encodings for neural
  architecture search. In H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (eds.),
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pp. 20309–20319. Curran As-
  sociates, Inc., 2020. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
  ea4eb49329550caaa1d2044105223721-Paper.pdf.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks?, 2018a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.00826.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00826, 2018b.
Shen Yan, Yu Zheng, Wei Ao, Xiao Zeng, and Mi Zhang. Does unsupervised architecture representa-
  tion learning help neural architecture search? In NeurIPS, 2020.
Shen Yan, Kaiqiang Song, Fei Liu, and Mi Zhang. Cate: Computation-aware neural architecture
  encoding with transformers. In ICML, 2021.
Chris Ying, Aaron Klein, Eric Christiansen, Esteban Real, Kevin Murphy, and Frank Hutter. NAS-
  bench-101: Towards reproducible neural architecture search. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 7105–7114. PMLR, 09–15 Jun
  2019. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/ying19a.html.
Jiaxuan You, Rex Ying, Xiang Ren, William L. Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. Graphrnn: A deep
   generative model for graphs. CoRR, abs/1802.08773, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
   1802.08773.
Muhan Zhang, Shali Jiang, Zhicheng Cui, Roman Garnett, and Yixin Chen. D-vae: A variational
 autoencoder for directed acyclic graphs. pp. 1586–1598, 2019.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Barret Zoph and Quoc V. Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning, 2016. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.01578.
Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V. Le. Learning transferable architectures
  for scalable image recognition, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.07012.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    Efficient Data Subset Selection to Generalize Training Across
            Models: Transductive and Inductive Networks
                             (Appendix)
A    R ELATED WORK
Our work is closely related to representation learning for model architectures, network architecture
search, data subset selection.
Representation learning for model architectures. Recent work in network representation learning
use GNN based encoder-decoder to encapsulate the local structural information of a neural network
into a fixed-length latent space (Zhang et al., 2019; Ning et al., 2020; Yan et al., 2020; Lukasik et al.,
2021). By employing an asynchronous message passing scheme over the directed acyclic graph
(DAG), GNN-based methods model the propagation of input data over the actual network structure.
Apart from encodings based solely on the structure of the network, White et al. (2020); Yan et al.
(2021) produce computation-aware encodings that map architectures with similar performance to the
same region in the latent space. Following the work of Yan et al. (2020), we use a graph isomorphism
network as an encoder but instead of producing a single graph embedding, our method produces a
collection of node embeddings, ordered by breadth-first-search (BFS) ordering of the nodes. Our
work also differs in that we do not employ network embeddings to perform downstream search
strategies. Instead, architecture embeddings are used in training a novel model approximator that
predicts the logits of a particular architecture, given an architecture embedding and a data embedding.
Network architecture search. There is an ever-increasing demand for the automatic search of
neural networks for various tasks. The networks discovered by NAS methods often come from an
underlying search space, usually designed to constrain the search space size. One such method is
to use cell-based search spaces (Luo et al., 2018; Zoph et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Pham et al.,
2018; Ying et al., 2019; Dong & Yang, 2020). Although we utilize the NAS-Bench-101 search space
for architecture retrieval, our work is fundamentally different from NAS. In contrast to the NAS
methods, which search for the best possible architecture from the search space using either sampling
or gradient-descent based methods (Baker et al., 2017; Zoph & Le, 2016; Real et al., 2017; 2018;
Liu et al., 2018; Tan et al., 2018), our work focuses on efficient data subset selection given a dataset
and an architecture, which is sampled from a search space. Our work utilizes graph representation
learning on the architectures sampled from the mentioned search spaces to project an architecture
under consideration to a continuous latent space, utilize the model expression from the latent space as
proxies for the actual model and proceed with data subset selection using the generated embedding,
model proxy and given dataset.
Data subset selection. Data subset selection is widely used in literature for efficient learning, coreset
selection, human centric learning, etc. Several works cast the efficient data subset selection task
as instance of submodular or approximate-submodular optimization problem (Killamsetty et al.,
2021a; Wei et al., 2014a;b;c; Killamsetty et al., 2021b; Sivasubramanian et al., 2021). Another line
of work focus on selecting coresets which are expressed as the weighted combination of subset
of data, approximating some characteristics, e.g., loss function, model prediction (Feldman, 2020;
Mirzasoleiman et al., 2020b; Har-Peled & Mazumdar, 2004; Boutsidis et al., 2013; Lucic et al.,
2017). Our work is closely connected to simultaneous model learning and subset selection (De et al.,
2021; 2020; Sivasubramanian et al., 2021). These existing works focus on jointly optimizing the
training loss, with respect to the subset of instances and the parameters of the underlying model.
Among them (De et al., 2021; 2020) focus on distributing decisions between human and machines,
whereas (Sivasubramanian et al., 2021) aims for efficient learning. However, these methods adopt
a combinatorial approach for selecting subsets and consequently, they are not generalizable across
architectures. In contrast, our work focuses on differentiable subset selection mechanism, which can
generalize across architectures.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  I LLUSTRATION OF S UB S EL N ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     m2M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="Pu6zYbmXj7cy/v5RTUORPsjIHG0=">AAAB+XicdVDLSgMxFM3UV62vUZdugkVwNWS0Y+2u6MaNUME+oDOUTJq2oZnMkGQKZeifuHGhiFv/xJ1/Y6atoKIHAodz7uWenDDhTGmEPqzCyura+kZxs7S1vbO7Z+8ftFScSkKbJOax7IRYUc4EbWqmOe0kkuIo5LQdjq9zvz2hUrFY3OtpQoMIDwUbMIK1kXq2HflMQD/CekQwz25nPbuMHA+5Na8GF+QcGYLcStW7gK6D5iiDJRo9+93vxySNqNCEY6W6Lkp0kGGpGeF0VvJTRRNMxnhIu4YKHFEVZPPkM3hilD4cxNI8oeFc/b6R4UipaRSayTyi+u3l4l9eN9WDyyBjIkk1FWRxaJByqGOY1wD7TFKi+dQQTCQzWSEZYYmJNmWVTAlfP4X/k9aZ43oOuquU61fLOorgCByDU+CCKqiDG9AATUDABDyAJ/BsZdaj9WK9LkYL1nLnEPyA9fYJ2H2T0A==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BFS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="3JgOnndGIxirKyAAUXwuZm6ziu4=">AAAB8XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKoscQQTxGNA9MljA7mU2GzM4uM71iWPIXXjwo4tW/8ebfOHkcNFrQUFR1090VJFIYdN0vJ7e0vLK6ll8vbGxube8Ud/caJk4143UWy1i3Amq4FIrXUaDkrURzGgWSN4Ph5cRvPnBtRKzucJRwP6J9JULBKFrpvoP8EbPq1e24Wyy5ZXcK8pd4c1KCOWrd4menF7M04gqZpMa0PTdBP6MaBZN8XOikhieUDWmfty1VNOLGz6YXj8mRVXokjLUthWSq/pzIaGTMKApsZ0RxYBa9ifif104xvPAzoZIUuWKzRWEqCcZk8j7pCc0ZypEllGlhbyVsQDVlaEMq2BC8xZf/ksZJ2TsruzenpUp1HkceDuAQjsGDc6jANdSgDgwUPMELvDrGeXbenPdZa86Zz+zDLzgf3450kNY=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ⇡ or ⇡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="44A7A7rPoIdZ9e62TrOYwBOaV4w=">AAAB9HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXYBE8lUQUPRa9eKxgP6ANZbPdtEs3u3F3Uiyhv8OLB0W8+mO8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLE8ENet63s7K6tr6xWdgqbu/s7u2XDg4bRqWasjpVQulWSAwTXLI6chSslWhG4lCwZji8nfrNEdOGK/mA44QFMelLHnFK0EpBB9kTZokyk7YfdEtlr+LN4C4TPydlyFHrlr46PUXTmEmkghjT9r0Eg4xo5FSwSbGTGpYQOiR91rZUkpiZIJsdPXFPrdJzI6VtSXRn6u+JjMTGjOPQdsYEB2bRm4r/ee0Uo+sg4zJJkUk6XxSlwkXlThNwe1wzimJsCaGa21tdOiCaULQ5FW0I/uLLy6RxXvEvK979Rbl6k8dRgGM4gTPw4QqqcAc1qAOFR3iGV3hzRs6L8+58zFtXnHzmCP7A+fwBIi2SVA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   h 1 pos[1]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="I4qg8iaXsiiWYjKhHuBEauH9TK4=">AAAB8XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKosegF48RTAwmS5idzCZD5rHMzAphyV948aCIV//Gm3/jbLIHTSxoKKq66e6KEs6M9f1vr7Syura+Ud6sbG3v7O5V9w/aRqWa0BZRXOlOhA3lTNKWZZbTTqIpFhGnD9H4Jvcfnqg2TMl7O0loKPBQspgRbJ302EtElI2m/aDSr9b8uj8DWiZBQWpQoNmvfvUGiqSCSks4NqYb+IkNM6wtI5xOK73U0ASTMR7SrqMSC2rCbHbxFJ04ZYBipV1Ji2bq74kMC2MmInKdAtuRWfRy8T+vm9r4KsyYTFJLJZkvilOOrEL5+2jANCWWTxzBRDN3KyIjrDGxLqQ8hGDx5WXSPqsHF3X/7rzWuC7iKMMRHMMpBHAJDbiFJrSAgIRneIU3z3gv3rv3MW8tecXMIfyB9/kD/pWQdw==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="0yyAJCsP1kclF/whjAO2hgH+TB8=">AAAB8HicbVA9SwNBEJ2LXzF+RS1tFoNgFe5E0TJoYxnBxEgSwt5mLlmyu3fs7gnhyK+wsVDE1p9j579xk1yhiQ8GHu/NMDMvTAQ31ve/vcLK6tr6RnGztLW9s7tX3j9omjjVDBssFrFuhdSg4AoblluBrUQjlaHAh3B0M/UfnlAbHqt7O06wK+lA8Ygzap30OOhlnRAtnfTKFb/qz0CWSZCTCuSo98pfnX7MUonKMkGNaQd+YrsZ1ZYzgZNSJzWYUDaiA2w7qqhE081mB0/IiVP6JIq1K2XJTP09kVFpzFiGrlNSOzSL3lT8z2unNrrqZlwlqUXF5ouiVBAbk+n3pM81MivGjlCmubuVsCHVlFmXUcmFECy+vEyaZ9XgourfnVdq13kcRTiCYziFAC6hBrdQhwYwkPAMr/Dmae/Fe/c+5q0FL585hD/wPn8AB8OQjg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="nWEGia6Wrai3p2HZ0P74CHZFsjc=">AAACA3icbVC7TsNAEDyHVwgvAx00JyIkqshGICgjaCiDRB5SbEXnyzk55Wyf7taIyLJEw6/QUIAQLT9Bx99wSVxAwlSzM7va3Qmk4Boc59sqLS2vrK6V1ysbm1vbO/buXksnqaKsSRORqE5ANBM8Zk3gIFhHKkaiQLB2MLqe+O17pjRP4jsYS+ZHZBDzkFMCRurZB57k2AP2ABlOFM6xqXuZJzXPe3bVqTlT4EXiFqSKCjR69pfXT2gasRioIFp3XUeCnxEFnAqWV7xUM0noiAxY19CYREz72fSHHB8bpY9Dc0OYxICn6u+JjERaj6PAdEYEhnrem4j/ed0Uwks/47FMgcV0tihMBYYETwLBfa4YBTE2hFDFza2YDokiFExsFROCO//yImmd1tzzmnN7Vq1fFXGU0SE6QifIRReojm5QAzURRY/oGb2iN+vJerHerY9Za8kqZvbRH1ifP7w6l5Y=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h1 pos[1]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="44A7A7rPoIdZ9e62TrOYwBOaV4w=">AAAB9HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXYBE8lUQUPRa9eKxgP6ANZbPdtEs3u3F3Uiyhv8OLB0W8+mO8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLE8ENet63s7K6tr6xWdgqbu/s7u2XDg4bRqWasjpVQulWSAwTXLI6chSslWhG4lCwZji8nfrNEdOGK/mA44QFMelLHnFK0EpBB9kTZokyk7YfdEtlr+LN4C4TPydlyFHrlr46PUXTmEmkghjT9r0Eg4xo5FSwSbGTGpYQOiR91rZUkpiZIJsdPXFPrdJzI6VtSXRn6u+JjMTGjOPQdsYEB2bRm4r/ee0Uo+sg4zJJkUk6XxSlwkXlThNwe1wzimJsCaGa21tdOiCaULQ5FW0I/uLLy6RxXvEvK979Rbl6k8dRgGM4gTPw4QqqcAc1qAOFR3iGV3hzRs6L8+58zFtXnHzmCP7A+fwBIi2SVA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="I4qg8iaXsiiWYjKhHuBEauH9TK4=">AAAB8XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKosegF48RTAwmS5idzCZD5rHMzAphyV948aCIV//Gm3/jbLIHTSxoKKq66e6KEs6M9f1vr7Syura+Ud6sbG3v7O5V9w/aRqWa0BZRXOlOhA3lTNKWZZbTTqIpFhGnD9H4Jvcfnqg2TMl7O0loKPBQspgRbJ302EtElI2m/aDSr9b8uj8DWiZBQWpQoNmvfvUGiqSCSks4NqYb+IkNM6wtI5xOK73U0ASTMR7SrqMSC2rCbHbxFJ04ZYBipV1Ji2bq74kMC2MmInKdAtuRWfRy8T+vm9r4KsyYTFJLJZkvilOOrEL5+2jANCWWTxzBRDN3KyIjrDGxLqQ8hGDx5WXSPqsHF3X/7rzWuC7iKMMRHMMpBHAJDbiFJrSAgIRneIU3z3gv3rv3MW8tecXMIfyB9/kD/pWQdw==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="g0OibCAePhrnyWWCFxtSQfASzkM=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokoeizqwWML9gPaUDbbSbt2swm7G6GE/gIvHhTx6k/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/nZXVtfWNzcJWcXtnd2+/dHDY1HGqGDZYLGLVDqhGwSU2DDcC24lCGgUCW8Hoduq3nlBpHssHM07Qj+hA8pAzaqxUv+uVym7FnYEsEy8nZchR65W+uv2YpRFKwwTVuuO5ifEzqgxnAifFbqoxoWxEB9ixVNIItZ/NDp2QU6v0SRgrW9KQmfp7IqOR1uMosJ0RNUO96E3F/7xOasJrP+MySQ1KNl8UpoKYmEy/Jn2ukBkxtoQyxe2thA2poszYbIo2BG/x5WXSPK94lxW3flGu3uRxFOAYTuAMPLiCKtxDDRrAAOEZXuHNeXRenHfnY9664uQzR/AHzucPmLuMzA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="WgtwdEuZgjabAyeo6iJhfbvlZUQ=">AAAB8HicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKosegF48RzEOSJcxOZpMh81hnZoWw5Cu8eFDEq5/jzb9xkuxBEwsaiqpuuruihDNjff/bK6ysrq1vFDdLW9s7u3vl/YOmUakmtEEUV7odYUM5k7RhmeW0nWiKRcRpKxrdTP3WE9WGKXlvxwkNBR5IFjOCrZMeuomIstak99grV/yqPwNaJkFOKpCj3it/dfuKpIJKSzg2phP4iQ0zrC0jnE5K3dTQBJMRHtCOoxILasJsdvAEnTilj2KlXUmLZurviQwLY8Yicp0C26FZ9Kbif14ntfFVmDGZpJZKMl8UpxxZhabfoz7TlFg+dgQTzdytiAyxxsS6jEouhGDx5WXSPKsGF1X/7rxSu87jKMIRHMMpBHAJNbiFOjSAgIBneIU3T3sv3rv3MW8tePnMIfyB9/kDDgaQkg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Update↵
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="R8iJKJLF1eH0nRD1TzdkPNl1WC0=">AAACAXicbVDJSgNBEO2JW4xb1IvgZTAInsKMKHoMevEYwSyQDENNp5I06VnorhHDEC/+ihcPinj1L7z5N3aWgyY+KHi8V0VVvSCRQpPjfFu5peWV1bX8emFjc2t7p7i7V9dxqjjWeCxj1QxAoxQR1kiQxGaiEMJAYiMYXI/9xj0qLeLojoYJeiH0ItEVHMhIfvGgTfhAmme1pAOEIz9rg0z6MPKLJafsTGAvEndGSmyGql/8andinoYYEZegdct1EvIyUCS4xFGhnWpMgA+ghy1DIwhRe9nkg5F9bJSO3Y2VqYjsifp7IoNQ62EYmM4QqK/nvbH4n9dKqXvpZSJKUsKITxd1U2lTbI/jsDtCISc5NAS4EuZWm/dBAScTWsGE4M6/vEjqp2X3vOzcnpUqV7M48uyQHbET5rILVmE3rMpqjLNH9sxe2Zv1ZL1Y79bHtDVnzWb22R9Ynz+qMZeq</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ..                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="6l4H0Xqko7ewaii5aYvsXrB67fY=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4Kokoeix68dii/YA2lM120q7dbMLuRiihv8CLB0W8+pO8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLEsG1cd1vZ2V1bX1js7BV3N7Z3dsvHRw2dZwqhg0Wi1i1A6pRcIkNw43AdqKQRoHAVjC6nfqtJ1Sax/LBjBP0IzqQPOSMGivV73ulsltxZyDLxMtJGXLUeqWvbj9maYTSMEG17nhuYvyMKsOZwEmxm2pMKBvRAXYslTRC7WezQyfk1Cp9EsbKljRkpv6eyGik9TgKbGdEzVAvelPxP6+TmvDaz7hMUoOSzReFqSAmJtOvSZ8rZEaMLaFMcXsrYUOqKDM2m6INwVt8eZk0zyveZcWtX5SrN3kcBTiGEzgDD66gCndQgwYwQHiGV3hzHp0X5935mLeuOPnMEfyB8/kDr3eM2w==</latexit>


 m2M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="B1pwU2JRVAB4dpn6t+NGyIzL2QQ=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSSi6LHoxWMF+wFtKJvNpl272Q27k0Ip/Q9ePCji1f/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZemApu0PO+ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqGpVpyhpUCaXbITFMcMkayFGwdqoZSULBWuHwbua3RkwbruQjjlMWJKQvecwpQSs1u6NIoemVK17Vm8NdJX5OKpCj3it/dSNFs4RJpIIY0/G9FIMJ0cipYNNSNzMsJXRI+qxjqSQJM8Fkfu3UPbNK5MZK25LoztXfExOSGDNOQtuZEByYZW8m/ud1MoxvggmXaYZM0sWiOBMuKnf2uhtxzSiKsSWEam5vdemAaELRBlSyIfjLL6+S5kXVv6p6D5eV2m0eRxFO4BTOwYdrqME91KEBFJ7gGV7hzVHOi/PufCxaC04+cwx/4Hz+AMzBj0Y=</latexit>


 <latexit sha1_base64="Pu6zYbmXj7cy/v5RTUORPsjIHG0=">AAAB+XicdVDLSgMxFM3UV62vUZdugkVwNWS0Y+2u6MaNUME+oDOUTJq2oZnMkGQKZeifuHGhiFv/xJ1/Y6atoKIHAodz7uWenDDhTGmEPqzCyura+kZxs7S1vbO7Z+8ftFScSkKbJOax7IRYUc4EbWqmOe0kkuIo5LQdjq9zvz2hUrFY3OtpQoMIDwUbMIK1kXq2HflMQD/CekQwz25nPbuMHA+5Na8GF+QcGYLcStW7gK6D5iiDJRo9+93vxySNqNCEY6W6Lkp0kGGpGeF0VvJTRRNMxnhIu4YKHFEVZPPkM3hilD4cxNI8oeFc/b6R4UipaRSayTyi+u3l4l9eN9WDyyBjIkk1FWRxaJByqGOY1wD7TFKi+dQQTCQzWSEZYYmJNmWVTAlfP4X/k9aZ43oOuquU61fLOorgCByDU+CCKqiDG9AATUDABDyAJ/BsZdaj9WK9LkYL1nLnEPyA9fYJ2H2T0A==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                W       .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="tDH39+LohsJD+SAULXq3DFUlXQ4=">AAAB8HicbVBNSwMxEJ2tX7V+VT16CRbBU9kVRY9FLx4r2A9pl5JNs21okg1JtlCW/govHhTx6s/x5r8xbfegrQ8GHu/NMDMvUpwZ6/vfXmFtfWNzq7hd2tnd2z8oHx41TZJqQhsk4YluR9hQziRtWGY5bStNsYg4bUWju5nfGlNtWCIf7UTRUOCBZDEj2DrpqatElLWmvXGvXPGr/hxolQQ5qUCOeq/81e0nJBVUWsKxMZ3AVzbMsLaMcDotdVNDFSYjPKAdRyUW1ITZ/OApOnNKH8WJdiUtmqu/JzIsjJmIyHUKbIdm2ZuJ/3md1MY3YcakSi2VZLEoTjmyCZp9j/pMU2L5xBFMNHO3IjLEGhPrMiq5EILll1dJ86IaXFX9h8tK7TaPowgncArnEMA11OAe6tAAAgKe4RXePO29eO/ex6K14OUzx/AH3ucPFZqQlw==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="B1pwU2JRVAB4dpn6t+NGyIzL2QQ=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSSi6LHoxWMF+wFtKJvNpl272Q27k0Ip/Q9ePCji1f/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZemApu0PO+ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqGpVpyhpUCaXbITFMcMkayFGwdqoZSULBWuHwbua3RkwbruQjjlMWJKQvecwpQSs1u6NIoemVK17Vm8NdJX5OKpCj3it/dSNFs4RJpIIY0/G9FIMJ0cipYNNSNzMsJXRI+qxjqSQJM8Fkfu3UPbNK5MZK25LoztXfExOSGDNOQtuZEByYZW8m/ud1MoxvggmXaYZM0sWiOBMuKnf2uhtxzSiKsSWEam5vdemAaELRBlSyIfjLL6+S5kXVv6p6D5eV2m0eRxFO4BTOwYdrqME91KEBFJ7gGV7hzVHOi/PufCxaC04+cwx/4Hz+AMzBj0Y=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GNN↵                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="Y7a+Tr2GpREll+LIxOSJDsXbBI0=">AAAB/HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/oj16CRbBU0lE0WPRg55KBfsBTQib7bZdutmE3YkYQvwrXjwo4tUf4s1/47bNQVsfDDzem2FmXhBzpsC2v43Syura+kZ5s7K1vbO7Z+4fdFSUSELbJOKR7AVYUc4EbQMDTnuxpDgMOO0Gk+up332gUrFI3EMaUy/EI8GGjGDQkm9WXaCPkN00m7mfuZjHY5z7Zs2u2zNYy8QpSA0VaPnmlzuISBJSAYRjpfqOHYOXYQmMcJpX3ETRGJMJHtG+pgKHVHnZ7PjcOtbKwBpGUpcAa6b+nshwqFQaBrozxDBWi95U/M/rJzC89DIm4gSoIPNFw4RbEFnTJKwBk5QATzXBRDJ9q0XGWGICOq+KDsFZfHmZdE7rznndvjurNa6KOMroEB2hE+SgC9RAt6iF2oigFD2jV/RmPBkvxrvxMW8tGcVMFf2B8fkDNxiVIg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              {Attnu |u 2 Vm }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="4dWOx9fhjEoD49Su0b9GiyBtrHQ=">AAACBXicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh71sFgETyURRY9VLx4r2A9oQthsN+3SzSbsTsQSe/HiX/HiQRGv/gdv/hu3bQ7a+mDg8d4MM/OCRHANtv1tFRYWl5ZXiqultfWNza3y9k5Tx6mirEFjEat2QDQTXLIGcBCsnShGokCwVjC4GvutO6Y0j+UtDBPmRaQnecgpASP55X03c4HdQ3YBIEd+ih9w6nKJm37kjvxyxa7aE+B54uSkgnLU/fKX241pGjEJVBCtO46dgJcRBZwKNiq5qWYJoQPSYx1DJYmY9rLJFyN8aJQuDmNlSgKeqL8nMhJpPYwC0xkR6OtZbyz+53VSCM+9jMskBSbpdFGYCgwxHkeCu1wxCmJoCKGKm1sx7RNFKJjgSiYEZ/bledI8rjqnVfvmpFK7zOMooj10gI6Qg85QDV2jOmogih7RM3pFb9aT9WK9Wx/T1oKVz+yiP7A+fwCcxZih</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Wk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="QeQvOKGBHBjdIctYR1dbCB3lILo=">AAAB8HicbVDLSgNBEOz1GeMr6tHLYBA8hV1R9Bj04jGCeUiyhNnJJBkyM7vM9AphyVd48aCIVz/Hm3/jJNmDJhY0FFXddHdFiRQWff/bW1ldW9/YLGwVt3d29/ZLB4cNG6eG8TqLZWxaEbVcCs3rKFDyVmI4VZHkzWh0O/WbT9xYEesHHCc8VHSgRV8wik567CQqypqT7qhbKvsVfwayTIKclCFHrVv66vRiliqukUlqbTvwEwwzalAwySfFTmp5QtmIDnjbUU0Vt2E2O3hCTp3SI/3YuNJIZurviYwqa8cqcp2K4tAuelPxP6+dYv86zIROUuSazRf1U0kwJtPvSU8YzlCOHaHMCHcrYUNqKEOXUdGFECy+vEwa55XgsuLfX5SrN3kcBTiGEziDAK6gCndQgzowUPAMr/DmGe/Fe/c+5q0rXj5zBH/gff4ABO6QjA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="B7yKnfgUj1HFVbQfsLHquSnpR9c=">AAAB9HicbVBNS8NAEN34WetX1aOXYBE8lUQUPRa9eKxgP6ANZbOdtEs3u3F3Uiyhv8OLB0W8+mO8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLE8ENet63s7K6tr6xWdgqbu/s7u2XDg4bRqWaQZ0poXQrpAYEl1BHjgJaiQYahwKa4fB26jdHoA1X8gHHCQQx7UsecUbRSkEH4QmzRJlJOw26pbJX8WZwl4mfkzLJUeuWvjo9xdIYJDJBjWn7XoJBRjVyJmBS7KQGEsqGtA9tSyWNwQTZ7OiJe2qVnhspbUuiO1N/T2Q0NmYch7Yzpjgwi95U/M9rpxhdBxmXSYog2XxRlAoXlTtNwO1xDQzF2BLKNLe3umxANWVocyraEPzFl5dJ47ziX1a8+4ty9SaPo0COyQk5Iz65IlVyR2qkThh5JM/klbw5I+fFeXc+5q0rTj5zRP7A+fwBiYGSmA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   h u pos[u]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="wM2alntSXXwQ8gMpFZ5EVDL94ac=">AAAB8nicbVDLSgNBEJyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKosegF48RzAOSJcxOZpMh81hmeoWw7Gd48aCIV7/Gm3/jJNmDJhY0FFXddHdFieAWfP/bK62tb2xulbcrO7t7+wfVw6O21amhrEW10KYbEcsEV6wFHATrJoYRGQnWiSZ3M7/zxIzlWj3CNGGhJCPFY04JOKnXT2SUjfNBluaDas2v+3PgVRIUpIYKNAfVr/5Q01QyBVQQa3uBn0CYEQOcCpZX+qllCaETMmI9RxWRzIbZ/OQcnzlliGNtXCnAc/X3REaktVMZuU5JYGyXvZn4n9dLIb4JM66SFJiii0VxKjBoPPsfD7lhFMTUEUINd7diOiaGUHApVVwIwfLLq6R9UQ+u6v7DZa1xW8RRRifoFJ2jAF2jBrpHTdRCFGn0jF7Rmwfei/fufSxaS14xc4z+wPv8AfgFkbM=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="B7yKnfgUj1HFVbQfsLHquSnpR9c=">AAAB9HicbVBNS8NAEN34WetX1aOXYBE8lUQUPRa9eKxgP6ANZbOdtEs3u3F3Uiyhv8OLB0W8+mO8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLE8ENet63s7K6tr6xWdgqbu/s7u2XDg4bRqWaQZ0poXQrpAYEl1BHjgJaiQYahwKa4fB26jdHoA1X8gHHCQQx7UsecUbRSkEH4QmzRJlJOw26pbJX8WZwl4mfkzLJUeuWvjo9xdIYJDJBjWn7XoJBRjVyJmBS7KQGEsqGtA9tSyWNwQTZ7OiJe2qVnhspbUuiO1N/T2Q0NmYch7Yzpjgwi95U/M9rpxhdBxmXSYog2XxRlAoXlTtNwO1xDQzF2BLKNLe3umxANWVocyraEPzFl5dJ47ziX1a8+4ty9SaPo0COyQk5Iz65IlVyR2qkThh5JM/klbw5I+fFeXc+5q0rTj5zRP7A+fwBiYGSmA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       h u pos[u]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="wM2alntSXXwQ8gMpFZ5EVDL94ac=">AAAB8nicbVDLSgNBEJyNrxhfUY9eBoPgKeyKosegF48RzAOSJcxOZpMh81hmeoWw7Gd48aCIV7/Gm3/jJNmDJhY0FFXddHdFieAWfP/bK62tb2xulbcrO7t7+wfVw6O21amhrEW10KYbEcsEV6wFHATrJoYRGQnWiSZ3M7/zxIzlWj3CNGGhJCPFY04JOKnXT2SUjfNBluaDas2v+3PgVRIUpIYKNAfVr/5Q01QyBVQQa3uBn0CYEQOcCpZX+qllCaETMmI9RxWRzIbZ/OQcnzlliGNtXCnAc/X3REaktVMZuU5JYGyXvZn4n9dLIb4JM66SFJiii0VxKjBoPPsfD7lhFMTUEUINd7diOiaGUHApVVwIwfLLq6R9UQ+u6v7DZa1xW8RRRifoFJ2jAF2jBrpHTdRCFGn0jF7Rmwfei/fufSxaS14xc4z+wPv8AfgFkbM=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = {↵, }                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        InitNode↵ SymmAggr↵
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="exse2eB532y7HRYzAna1psEvVeI=">AAACAHicbVBNS8NAEN34WetX1IMHL4tF8CAlEUURhKIXjxXsBzShTLabdukmWXY3Qgm5+Fe8eFDEqz/Dm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8QHCmtON8WwuLS8srq6W18vrG5ta2vbPbVEkqCW2QhCeyHYCinMW0oZnmtC0khSjgtBUMb8d+65FKxZL4QY8E9SPoxyxkBLSRuvb+lScG7Bp7mQdcDODEC6gGL+/aFafqTIDniVuQCipQ79pfXi8haURjTTgo1XEdof0MpGaE07zspYoKIEPo046hMURU+dnkgRwfGaWHw0SaijWeqL8nMoiUGkWB6YxAD9SsNxb/8zqpDi/9jMUi1TQm00VhyrFO8DgN3GOSEs1HhgCRzNyKyQAkEG0yK5sQ3NmX50nztOqeV537s0rtpoijhA7QITpGLrpANXSH6qiBCMrRM3pFb9aT9WK9Wx/T1gWrmNlDf2B9/gDyI5X/</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="3QaL5vmYQPn6UnUX/9wGbS9oTHk=">AAACA3icbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qt70EiyCp5KIoseiF71IBfsBTSib7bRdutmE3YlYQsGLf8WLB0W8+ie8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLYsE1Os63lVtYXFpeya8W1tY3NreK2zt1HSWKQY1FIlLNgGoQXEINOQpoxgpoGAhoBIPLsd+4B6V5JO9wGIMf0p7kXc4oGqld3PMQHlCz9FpyvIk6MGqnHhVxn47axZJTdiaw54mbkRLJUG0Xv7xOxJIQJDJBtW65Tox+ShVyJmBU8BINMWUD2oOWoZKGoP108sPIPjRKx+5GypREe6L+nkhpqPUwDExnSLGvZ72x+J/XSrB77qdcxgmCZNNF3UTYGNnjQOwOV8BQDA2hTHFzq836VFGGJraCCcGdfXme1I/L7mnZuT0pVS6yOPJknxyQI+KSM1IhV6RKaoSRR/JMXsmb9WS9WO/Wx7Q1Z2Uzu+QPrM8fHOqYdQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 F :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="pz8nO4xV5CYLety+i1dycktQsb4=">AAAB73icbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE0WNREI8V7Ae0oWy2m3bpZhN3J0IJ/RNePCji1b/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLK6tr6RnGztLW9s7tX3j9omjjVjDdYLGPdDqjhUijeQIGStxPNaRRI3gpGN1O/9cS1EbF6wHHC/YgOlAgFo2il9m0v6yZDMemVK27VnYEsEy8nFchR75W/uv2YpRFXyCQ1puO5CfoZ1SiY5JNSNzU8oWxEB7xjqaIRN342u3dCTqzSJ2GsbSkkM/X3REYjY8ZRYDsjikOz6E3F/7xOiuGVnwmVpMgVmy8KU0kwJtPnSV9ozlCOLaFMC3srYUOqKUMbUcmG4C2+vEyaZ1Xvouren1dq13kcRTiCYzgFDy6hBndQhwYwkPAMr/DmPDovzrvzMW8tOPnMIfyB8/kDIteQCA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="/z/Ia+o7qFUcTcmcDl0gbLPSg5E=">AAACA3icbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qt70EiyCp5KIoseqF48V7Qc0IWy2m3bp7ibsTsQSCl78K148KOLVP+HNf+O2zUFbHww83pthZl6YcKbBcb6twsLi0vJKcbW0tr6xuVXe3mnqOFWENkjMY9UOsaacSdoABpy2E0WxCDlthYOrsd+6p0qzWN7BMKG+wD3JIkYwGCko73lAH0CT7HYoxEWvp0ZB5mGe9PEoKFecqjOBPU/cnFRQjnpQ/vK6MUkFlUA41rrjOgn4GVbACKejkpdqmmAywD3aMVRiQbWfTX4Y2YdG6dpRrExJsCfq74kMC62HIjSdAkNfz3pj8T+vk0J07mdMJilQSaaLopTbENvjQOwuU5QAHxqCiWLmVpv0scIETGwlE4I7+/I8aR5X3dOqc3NSqV3mcRTRPjpAR8hFZ6iGrlEdNRBBj+gZvaI368l6sd6tj2lrwcpndtEfWJ8/MWyYgg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ..                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="B1pwU2JRVAB4dpn6t+NGyIzL2QQ=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSSi6LHoxWMF+wFtKJvNpl272Q27k0Ip/Q9ePCji1f/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZemApu0PO+ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqGpVpyhpUCaXbITFMcMkayFGwdqoZSULBWuHwbua3RkwbruQjjlMWJKQvecwpQSs1u6NIoemVK17Vm8NdJX5OKpCj3it/dSNFs4RJpIIY0/G9FIMJ0cipYNNSNzMsJXRI+qxjqSQJM8Fkfu3UPbNK5MZK25LoztXfExOSGDNOQtuZEByYZW8m/ud1MoxvggmXaYZM0sWiOBMuKnf2uhtxzSiKsSWEam5vdemAaELRBlSyIfjLL6+S5kXVv6p6D5eV2m0eRxFO4BTOwYdrqME91KEBFJ7gGV7hzVHOi/PufCxaC04+cwx/4Hz+AMzBj0Y=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        om,xxi .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="B1pwU2JRVAB4dpn6t+NGyIzL2QQ=">AAAB7XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSSi6LHoxWMF+wFtKJvNpl272Q27k0Ip/Q9ePCji1f/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZemApu0PO+ncLa+sbmVnG7tLO7t39QPjxqGpVpyhpUCaXbITFMcMkayFGwdqoZSULBWuHwbua3RkwbruQjjlMWJKQvecwpQSs1u6NIoemVK17Vm8NdJX5OKpCj3it/dSNFs4RJpIIY0/G9FIMJ0cipYNNSNzMsJXRI+qxjqSQJM8Fkfu3UPbNK5MZK25LoztXfExOSGDNOQtuZEByYZW8m/ud1MoxvggmXaYZM0sWiOBMuKnf2uhtxzSiKsSWEam5vdemAaELRBlSyIfjLL6+S5kXVv6p6D5eV2m0eRxFO4BTOwYdrqME91KEBFJ7gGV7hzVHOi/PufCxaC04+cwx/4Hz+AMzBj0Y=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="JgXjpE1v18fmWDT57RWYLd8edB4=">AAAB/nicbZDLSsNAFIYn9VbrLSqu3AwWwYWURBRdFt24rGAv0IYwmU7boXMJMxOxhICv4saFIm59Dne+jdM0C239YeDjP+dwzvxRzKg2nvftlJaWV1bXyuuVjc2t7R13d6+lZaIwaWLJpOpESBNGBWkaahjpxIogHjHSjsY303r7gShNpbg3k5gEHA0FHVCMjLVC96AX8yiVWZjy0xwfs5BmoVv1al4uuAh+AVVQqBG6X72+xAknwmCGtO76XmyCFClDMSNZpZdoEiM8RkPStSgQJzpI8/MzeGydPhxIZZ8wMHd/T6SIaz3hke3kyIz0fG1q/lfrJmZwFaRUxIkhAs8WDRIGjYTTLGCfKoINm1hAWFF7K8QjpBA2NrGKDcGf//IitM5q/kXNuzuv1q+LOMrgEByBE+CDS1AHt6ABmgCDFDyDV/DmPDkvzrvzMWstOcXMPvgj5/MHL5KWRg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       <latexit sha1_base64="ZCVHXx3oXDPoorp84n8CdP6I8H0=">AAAB83icbVA9TwJBEJ3DL8Qv1NJmIzHBhtyRGC2JNnZiIkgCF7K3zMGGvb3L7h6GEP6GjYXG2Ppn7Pw3LnCFgi+Z5OW9mczMCxLBtXHdbye3tr6xuZXfLuzs7u0fFA+PmjpOFcMGi0WsWgHVKLjEhuFGYCtRSKNA4GMwvJn5jyNUmsfywYwT9CPalzzkjBordcr0nNxZf8TxqVssuRV3DrJKvIyUIEO9W/zq9GKWRigNE1Trtucmxp9QZTgTOC10Uo0JZUPax7alkkao/cn85ik5s0qPhLGyJQ2Zq78nJjTSehwFtjOiZqCXvZn4n9dOTXjlT7hMUoOSLRaFqSAmJrMASI8rZEaMLaFMcXsrYQOqKDM2poINwVt+eZU0qxXvouLeV0u16yyOPJzAKZTBg0uowS3UoQEMEniGV3hzUufFeXc+Fq05J5s5hj9wPn8AKRuRHQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (a) Overview                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LayerNorm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="9q7+EQv9Kxf88+mgULoyLS0OqTQ=">AAAB+XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/oh69BIvgqSSi6LHoxYNIBfsBbSib7aRdupuE3UmxhP4TLx4U8eo/8ea/cdvmoK0PBh7vzTAzL0gE1+i631ZhZXVtfaO4Wdra3tnds/cPGjpOFYM6i0WsWgHVIHgEdeQooJUooDIQ0AyGN1O/OQKleRw94jgBX9J+xEPOKBqpa9sdhCfM7ugY1H2s5KRrl92KO4OzTLyclEmOWtf+6vRilkqIkAmqddtzE/QzqpAzAZNSJ9WQUDakfWgbGlEJ2s9ml0+cE6P0nDBWpiJ0ZurviYxKrccyMJ2S4kAvelPxP6+dYnjlZzxKUoSIzReFqXAwdqYxOD2ugKEYG0KZ4uZWhw2oogxNWCUTgrf48jJpnFW8i4r7cF6uXudxFMkROSanxCOXpEpuSY3UCSMj8kxeyZuVWS/Wu/Uxby1Y+cwh+QPr8wcr8JQB</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FF 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="dyguSBBenig8tK06PLoiNvQgm60=">AAAB/HicbVDJSgNBEO2JW4xbNEcvg0HwFGaCosegEDxGMAtkhqGnU5M06VnorhHDMP6KFw+KePVDvPk3dpaDJj4oeLxXRVU9PxFcoWV9G4W19Y3NreJ2aWd3b/+gfHjUUXEqGbRZLGLZ86kCwSNoI0cBvUQCDX0BXX98M/W7DyAVj6N7nCTghnQY8YAzilryyhUH4RGzZjP3MscHpF4998pVq2bNYK4Se0GqZIGWV/5yBjFLQ4iQCapU37YSdDMqkTMBeclJFSSUjekQ+ppGNATlZrPjc/NUKwMziKWuCM2Z+nsio6FSk9DXnSHFkVr2puJ/Xj/F4MrNeJSkCBGbLwpSYWJsTpMwB1wCQzHRhDLJ9a0mG1FJGeq8SjoEe/nlVdKp1+yLmnV3Xm1cL+IokmNyQs6ITS5Jg9ySFmkTRibkmbySN+PJeDHejY95a8FYzFTIHxifP+6elPI=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EdgeEmbed↵
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="CpMPGj91YH2KFRQVFVxF9qTRWb4=">AAACBHicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/oh57CRbBU0lE0WNRCh4r2A9oS9lspu3S3STsTsQSevDiX/HiQRGv/ghv/hu3bQ7a+mDg8d4MM/P8WHCNrvtt5VZW19Y38puFre2d3T17/6Cho0QxqLNIRKrlUw2Ch1BHjgJasQIqfQFNf3Q99Zv3oDSPwjscx9CVdBDyPmcUjdSzix2EB9QsrQYDqEofgkkv7VARD+mkZ5fcsjuDs0y8jJRIhlrP/uoEEUskhMgE1brtuTF2U6qQMwGTQifREFM2ogNoGxpSCbqbzp6YOMdGCZx+pEyF6MzU3xMplVqPpW86JcWhXvSm4n9eO8H+ZTflYZwghGy+qJ8IByNnmogTcAUMxdgQyhQ3tzpsSBVlaHIrmBC8xZeXSeO07J2X3duzUuUqiyNPiuSInBCPXJAKuSE1UieMPJJn8krerCfrxXq3PuatOSubOSR/YH3+AJ7QmLc=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           g                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="0yyAJCsP1kclF/whjAO2hgH+TB8=">AAAB8HicbVA9SwNBEJ2LXzF+RS1tFoNgFe5E0TJoYxnBxEgSwt5mLlmyu3fs7gnhyK+wsVDE1p9j579xk1yhiQ8GHu/NMDMvTAQ31ve/vcLK6tr6RnGztLW9s7tX3j9omjjVDBssFrFuhdSg4AoblluBrUQjlaHAh3B0M/UfnlAbHqt7O06wK+lA8Ygzap30OOhlnRAtnfTKFb/qz0CWSZCTCuSo98pfnX7MUonKMkGNaQd+YrsZ1ZYzgZNSJzWYUDaiA2w7qqhE081mB0/IiVP6JIq1K2XJTP09kVFpzFiGrlNSOzSL3lT8z2unNrrqZlwlqUXF5ouiVBAbk+n3pM81MivGjlCmubuVsCHVlFmXUcmFECy+vEyaZ9XgourfnVdq13kcRTiCYziFAC6hBrdQhwYwkPAMr/Dmae/Fe/c+5q0FL585hD/wPn8AB8OQjg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ReLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="Vrao7+ieY/f76Ua3ews0a9Ni0NE=">AAAB8nicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/qh69BIvgqSSi6LHoxYOHKqYtpKFstpN26WYTdidiCf0ZXjwo4tVf481/47bNQasPBh7vzTAzL0wF1+g4X1ZpaXllda28XtnY3Nreqe7utXSSKQYeS0SiOiHVILgEDzkK6KQKaBwKaIejq6nffgCleSLvcZxCENOB5BFnFI3kdxEeMb+DG2/Sq9acujOD/Ze4BamRAs1e9bPbT1gWg0QmqNa+66QY5FQhZwImlW6mIaVsRAfgGyppDDrIZydP7COj9O0oUaYk2jP150ROY63HcWg6Y4pDvehNxf88P8PoIsi5TDMEyeaLokzYmNjT/+0+V8BQjA2hTHFzq82GVFGGJqWKCcFdfPkvaZ3U3bO6c3taa1wWcZTJATkkx8Ql56RBrkmTeISRhDyRF/JqofVsvVnv89aSVczsk1+wPr4BdUiRXQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GNN↵
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                <latexit sha1_base64="Y7a+Tr2GpREll+LIxOSJDsXbBI0=">AAAB/HicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/oj16CRbBU0lE0WPRg55KBfsBTQib7bZdutmE3YkYQvwrXjwo4tUf4s1/47bNQVsfDDzem2FmXhBzpsC2v43Syura+kZ5s7K1vbO7Z+4fdFSUSELbJOKR7AVYUc4EbQMDTnuxpDgMOO0Gk+up332gUrFI3EMaUy/EI8GGjGDQkm9WXaCPkN00m7mfuZjHY5z7Zs2u2zNYy8QpSA0VaPnmlzuISBJSAYRjpfqOHYOXYQmMcJpX3ETRGJMJHtG+pgKHVHnZ7PjcOtbKwBpGUpcAa6b+nshwqFQaBrozxDBWi95U/M/rJzC89DIm4gSoIPNFw4RbEFnTJKwBk5QATzXBRDJ9q0XGWGICOq+KDsFZfHmZdE7rznndvjurNa6KOMroEB2hE+SgC9RAt6iF2oigFD2jV/RmPBkvxrvxMW8tGcVMFf2B8fkDNxiVIg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LayerNorm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="9q7+EQv9Kxf88+mgULoyLS0OqTQ=">AAAB+XicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/oh69BIvgqSSi6LHoxYNIBfsBbSib7aRdupuE3UmxhP4TLx4U8eo/8ea/cdvmoK0PBh7vzTAzL0gE1+i631ZhZXVtfaO4Wdra3tnds/cPGjpOFYM6i0WsWgHVIHgEdeQooJUooDIQ0AyGN1O/OQKleRw94jgBX9J+xEPOKBqpa9sdhCfM7ugY1H2s5KRrl92KO4OzTLyclEmOWtf+6vRilkqIkAmqddtzE/QzqpAzAZNSJ9WQUDakfWgbGlEJ2s9ml0+cE6P0nDBWpiJ0ZurviYxKrccyMJ2S4kAvelPxP6+dYnjlZzxKUoSIzReFqXAwdqYxOD2ugKEYG0KZ4uZWhw2oogxNWCUTgrf48jJpnFW8i4r7cF6uXudxFMkROSanxCOXpEpuSY3UCSMj8kxeyZuVWS/Wu/Uxby1Y+cwh+QPr8wcr8JQB</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   xi , yi )}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 {(x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 <latexit sha1_base64="S+qES1fzYhcYsDFq4jx7+Jd8WrM=">AAAB/HicdVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vaJduBotQQcpErdZd0Y3LCvYBTQiT6bQdOnkwMxFDiL/ixoUibv0Qd/6N07SCih64cDjnXu69x4s4kwqhD6OwsLi0vFJcLa2tb2xumds7HRnGgtA2CXkoeh6WlLOAthVTnPYiQbHvcdr1JpdTv3tLhWRhcKOSiDo+HgVsyAhWWnLNsp1W7cj30rvMZYeJyw7szDUrqFZH1vkpgqiGcuSkYR1b0JorFTBHyzXf7UFIYp8GinAsZd9CkXJSLBQjnGYlO5Y0wmSCR7SvaYB9Kp00Pz6D+1oZwGEodAUK5ur3iRT7Uia+pzt9rMbytzcV//L6sRo2nJQFUaxoQGaLhjGHKoTTJOCACUoUTzTBRDB9KyRjLDBROq+SDuHrU/g/6RzVrHoNXZ9UmhfzOIpgF+yBKrDAGWiCK9ACbUBAAh7AE3g27o1H48V4nbUWjPlMGfyA8fYJtayU0A==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = {↵, }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="0jd2OelXgt2a1wGdq+5M1QDuNyY=">AAACBnicbVBNS8NAEN34WetX1KMIi0Wol5IURI9FL56kgv2ANpTNZtIu3WTD7kYsoScv/hUvHhTx6m/w5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDPPTzhT2nG+raXlldW19cJGcXNre2fX3ttvKpFKCg0quJBtnyjgLIaGZppDO5FAIp9Dyx9eTfzWPUjFRHynRwl4EenHLGSUaCP17KNycIpvIJWE40gEwDFJEikeWES0kD275FScKfAicXNSQjnqPfurGwiaRhBryolSHddJtJcRqRnlMC52UwUJoUPSh46hMYlAedn0jTE+MUqAQyFNxRpP1d8TGYmUGkW+6TTXDdS8NxH/8zqpDi+8jMVJqiGms0VhyrEWeJIJDpgEqvnIEEIlM7diOiCSUG2SK5oQ3PmXF0mzWnHPKs5ttVS7zOMooEN0jMrIReeohq5RHTUQRY/oGb2iN+vJerHerY9Z65KVzxygP7A+fwB3YJiC</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (d) Neural model approximator F :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    <latexit sha1_base64="exse2eB532y7HRYzAna1psEvVeI=">AAACAHicbVBNS8NAEN34WetX1IMHL4tF8CAlEUURhKIXjxXsBzShTLabdukmWXY3Qgm5+Fe8eFDEqz/Dm//GbZuDtj4YeLw3w8y8QHCmtON8WwuLS8srq6W18vrG5ta2vbPbVEkqCW2QhCeyHYCinMW0oZnmtC0khSjgtBUMb8d+65FKxZL4QY8E9SPoxyxkBLSRuvb+lScG7Bp7mQdcDODEC6gGL+/aFafqTIDniVuQCipQ79pfXi8haURjTTgo1XEdof0MpGaE07zspYoKIEPo046hMURU+dnkgRwfGaWHw0SaijWeqL8nMoiUGkWB6YxAD9SsNxb/8zqpDi/9jMUi1TQm00VhyrFO8DgN3GOSEs1HhgCRzNyKyQAkEG0yK5sQ3NmX50nztOqeV537s0rtpoijhA7QITpGLrpANXSH6qiBCMrRM3pFb9aT9WK9Wx/T1gWrmNlDf2B9/gDyI5X/</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="pz8nO4xV5CYLety+i1dycktQsb4=">AAAB73icbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0lE0WNREI8V7Ae0oWy2m3bpZhN3J0IJ/RNePCji1b/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEhh0HW/ncLK6tr6RnGztLW9s7tX3j9omjjVjDdYLGPdDqjhUijeQIGStxPNaRRI3gpGN1O/9cS1EbF6wHHC/YgOlAgFo2il9m0v6yZDMemVK27VnYEsEy8nFchR75W/uv2YpRFXyCQ1puO5CfoZ1SiY5JNSNzU8oWxEB7xjqaIRN342u3dCTqzSJ2GsbSkkM/X3REYjY8ZRYDsjikOz6E3F/7xOiuGVnwmVpMgVmy8KU0kwJtPnSV9ozlCOLaFMC3srYUOqKUMbUcmG4C2+vEyaZ1Xvouren1dq13kcRTiCYzgFDy6hBndQhwYwkPAMr/DmPDovzrvzMW8tOPnMIfyB8/kDIteQCA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="g0OibCAePhrnyWWCFxtSQfASzkM=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokoeizqwWML9gPaUDbbSbt2swm7G6GE/gIvHhTx6k/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/nZXVtfWNzcJWcXtnd2+/dHDY1HGqGDZYLGLVDqhGwSU2DDcC24lCGgUCW8Hoduq3nlBpHssHM07Qj+hA8pAzaqxUv+uVym7FnYEsEy8nZchR65W+uv2YpRFKwwTVuuO5ifEzqgxnAifFbqoxoWxEB9ixVNIItZ/NDp2QU6v0SRgrW9KQmfp7IqOR1uMosJ0RNUO96E3F/7xOasJrP+MySQ1KNl8UpoKYmEy/Jn2ukBkxtoQyxe2thA2poszYbIo2BG/x5WXSPK94lxW3flGu3uRxFOAYTuAMPLiCKtxDDRrAAOEZXuHNeXRenHfnY9664uQzR/AHzucPmLuMzA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ⇡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="ds5LkjUL3wAp+C3KUUJhVsD2FcQ=">AAAB/XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/4sfNy2IRPJVEFD0WvXisYGshCWGz3bRLN5uwuxFqKP4VLx4U8er/8Oa/cdvmoK0PBh7vzTAzL8o4U9pxvq3K0vLK6lp1vbaxubW9Y+/udVSaS0LbJOWp7EZYUc4EbWumOe1mkuIk4vQ+Gl5P/PsHKhVLxZ0eZTRIcF+wmBGsjRTaB37CRFj4GRsjz49yzqkOQrvuNJwp0CJxS1KHEq3Q/vJ7KckTKjThWCnPdTIdFFhqRjgd1/xc0QyTIe5Tz1CBE6qCYnr9GB0bpYfiVJoSGk3V3xMFTpQaJZHpTLAeqHlvIv7nebmOL4OCiSzXVJDZojjnSKdoEgXqMUmJ5iNDMJHM3IrIAEtMtAmsZkJw519eJJ3ThnvecG7P6s2rMo4qHMIRnIALF9CEG2hBGwg8wjO8wpv1ZL1Y79bHrLVilTP78AfW5w+v9JVf</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      min[•]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="UMUdbncZjsHAYuBjyDtq0gpOBHQ=">AAAB8XicbVBNSwMxEJ2tX7V+VT16CRbBU9kVRY9FLx4r2FrsLiWbZtvQJBuSrFCW/gsvHhTx6r/x5r8xbfegrQ8GHu/NMDMvVpwZ6/vfXmlldW19o7xZ2dre2d2r7h+0TZppQlsk5anuxNhQziRtWWY57ShNsYg5fYhHN1P/4Ylqw1J5b8eKRgIPJEsYwdZJj6FivTxUhk161Zpf92dAyyQoSA0KNHvVr7CfkkxQaQnHxnQDX9kox9oywumkEmaGKkxGeEC7jkosqIny2cUTdOKUPkpS7UpaNFN/T+RYGDMWsesU2A7NojcV//O6mU2uopxJlVkqyXxRknFkUzR9H/WZpsTysSOYaOZuRWSINSbWhVRxIQSLLy+T9lk9uKj7d+e1xnURRxmO4BhOIYBLaMAtNKEFBCQ8wyu8ecZ78d69j3lryStmDuEPvM8f73uRFg==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="g0OibCAePhrnyWWCFxtSQfASzkM=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokoeizqwWML9gPaUDbbSbt2swm7G6GE/gIvHhTx6k/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/nZXVtfWNzcJWcXtnd2+/dHDY1HGqGDZYLGLVDqhGwSU2DDcC24lCGgUCW8Hoduq3nlBpHssHM07Qj+hA8pAzaqxUv+uVym7FnYEsEy8nZchR65W+uv2YpRFKwwTVuuO5ifEzqgxnAifFbqoxoWxEB9ixVNIItZ/NDp2QU6v0SRgrW9KQmfp7IqOR1uMosJ0RNUO96E3F/7xOasJrP+MySQ1KNl8UpoKYmEy/Jn2ukBkxtoQyxe2thA2poszYbIo2BG/x5WXSPK94lxW3flGu3uRxFOAYTuAMPLiCKtxDDRrAAOEZXuHNeXRenHfnY9664uQzR/AHzucPmLuMzA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ⇡
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="g0OibCAePhrnyWWCFxtSQfASzkM=">AAAB6HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KokoeizqwWML9gPaUDbbSbt2swm7G6GE/gIvHhTx6k/y5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/nZXVtfWNzcJWcXtnd2+/dHDY1HGqGDZYLGLVDqhGwSU2DDcC24lCGgUCW8Hoduq3nlBpHssHM07Qj+hA8pAzaqxUv+uVym7FnYEsEy8nZchR65W+uv2YpRFKwwTVuuO5ifEzqgxnAifFbqoxoWxEB9ixVNIItZ/NDp2QU6v0SRgrW9KQmfp7IqOR1uMosJ0RNUO96E3F/7xOasJrP+MySQ1KNl8UpoKYmEy/Jn2ukBkxtoQyxe2thA2poszYbIo2BG/x5WXSPK94lxW3flGu3uRxFOAYTuAMPLiCKtxDDRrAAOEZXuHNeXRenHfnY9664uQzR/AHzucPmLuMzA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (e) Training
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="QVPvyTWTFHkKrXbXp8FailS17KA=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBahXkpSED0WvXisaGuhDWWznbRLN5uwuxFK6E/w4kERr/4ib/4bt20O2vpg4PHeDDPzgkRwbVz32ymsrW9sbhW3Szu7e/sH5cOjto5TxbDFYhGrTkA1Ci6xZbgR2EkU0igQ+BiMb2b+4xMqzWP5YCYJ+hEdSh5yRo2V7qt43i9X3Jo7B1klXk4qkKPZL3/1BjFLI5SGCap113MT42dUGc4ETku9VGNC2ZgOsWuppBFqP5ufOiVnVhmQMFa2pCFz9fdERiOtJ1FgOyNqRnrZm4n/ed3UhFd+xmWSGpRssShMBTExmf1NBlwhM2JiCWWK21sJG1FFmbHplGwI3vLLq6Rdr3kXNfeuXmlc53EU4QROoQoeXEIDbqEJLWAwhGd4hTdHOC/Ou/OxaC04+cwx/IHz+QOPcY1Q</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="D2MnMa8JuX2jBNQVeLkqLFhtHXE=">AAAB73icbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0kKoseiF48V+gVtKJPtpl262cTdjVBC/4QXD4p49e9489+4bXPQ1gcDj/dmmJkXJIJr47rfTmFjc2t7p7hb2ts/ODwqH5+0dZwqylo0FrHqBqiZ4JK1DDeCdRPFMAoE6wSTu7nfeWJK81g2zTRhfoQjyUNO0Vip21TIJZejQbniVt0FyDrxclKBHI1B+as/jGkaMWmoQK17npsYP0NlOBVsVuqnmiVIJzhiPUslRkz72eLeGbmwypCEsbIlDVmovycyjLSeRoHtjNCM9ao3F//zeqkJb/yMyyQ1TNLlojAVxMRk/jwZcsWoEVNLkCpubyV0jAqpsRGVbAje6svrpF2reldV96FWqd/mcRThDM7hEjy4hjrcQwNaQEHAM7zCm/PovDjvzseyteDkM6fwB87nDyXGkAg=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    {oom,x }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="J171A/+Y4zX/ZaJnrcN4/NY2mhA=">AAAB+nicbVDLSsNAFJ34rPWV6tLNYBFcSElE0WXRjcsK9gFNCJPptB06jzAzUUvMp7hxoYhbv8Sdf+O0zUJbD1w4nHMv994TJ4xq43nfztLyyuraemmjvLm1vbPrVvZaWqYKkyaWTKpOjDRhVJCmoYaRTqII4jEj7Xh0PfHb90RpKsWdGSck5GggaJ9iZKwUuZUgCxIeZzKPMn7ymAd55Fa9mjcFXCR+QaqgQCNyv4KexCknwmCGtO76XmLCDClDMSN5OUg1SRAeoQHpWioQJzrMpqfn8MgqPdiXypYwcKr+nsgQ13rMY9vJkRnqeW8i/ud1U9O/DDMqktQQgWeL+imDRsJJDrBHFcGGjS1BWFF7K8RDpBA2Nq2yDcGff3mRtE5r/nnNuz2r1q+KOErgAByCY+CDC1AHN6ABmgCDB/AMXsGb8+S8OO/Ox6x1ySlm9sEfOJ8/9Z+Ucw==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            {oom,x }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="J171A/+Y4zX/ZaJnrcN4/NY2mhA=">AAAB+nicbVDLSsNAFJ34rPWV6tLNYBFcSElE0WXRjcsK9gFNCJPptB06jzAzUUvMp7hxoYhbv8Sdf+O0zUJbD1w4nHMv994TJ4xq43nfztLyyuraemmjvLm1vbPrVvZaWqYKkyaWTKpOjDRhVJCmoYaRTqII4jEj7Xh0PfHb90RpKsWdGSck5GggaJ9iZKwUuZUgCxIeZzKPMn7ymAd55Fa9mjcFXCR+QaqgQCNyv4KexCknwmCGtO76XmLCDClDMSN5OUg1SRAeoQHpWioQJzrMpqfn8MgqPdiXypYwcKr+nsgQ13rMY9vJkRnqeW8i/ud1U9O/DDMqktQQgWeL+imDRsJJDrBHFcGGjS1BWFF7K8RDpBA2Nq2yDcGff3mRtE5r/nnNuz2r1q+KOErgAByCY+CDC1AHN6ABmgCDB/AMXsGb8+S8OO/Ox6x1ySlm9sEfOJ8/9Z+Ucw==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              = {↵, }
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="YTNPo+yA4pSkn0GuPYQEYaK/b+w=">AAAB/3icbVBNS8NAEN34WetXVPDiZbEIHqQkouhFKHrxWMF+QBPKZLtplm42YXcjlNiDf8WLB0W8+je8+W/ctjlo64OBx3szzMwLUs6Udpxva2FxaXlltbRWXt/Y3Nq2d3abKskkoQ2S8ES2A1CUM0EbmmlO26mkEAectoLBzdhvPVCpWCLu9TClfgx9wUJGQBupa+97acSusJd7wNMITryAavBGXbviVJ0J8DxxC1JBBepd+8vrJSSLqdCEg1Id10m1n4PUjHA6KnuZoimQAfRpx1ABMVV+Prl/hI+M0sNhIk0JjSfq74kcYqWGcWA6Y9CRmvXG4n9eJ9PhpZ8zkWaaCjJdFGYc6wSPw8A9JinRfGgIEMnMrZhEIIFoE1nZhODOvjxPmqdV97zq3J1VatdFHCV0gA7RMXLRBaqhW1RHDUTQI3pGr+jNerJerHfrY9q6YBUze+gPrM8fcBKVuw==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 = {↵, },
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      <latexit sha1_base64="Sre3V5/y63N7OPvnONvXZTHM+ts=">AAACBXicbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/oh71sFgED6UkouhFKHrxWMF+QBPKZLtpl26SZXcjlNCLF/+KFw+KePU/ePPfuG1z0NYHA4/3ZpiZFwjOlHacb6uwtLyyulZcL21sbm3v2Lt7TZWkktAGSXgi2wEoyllMG5ppTttCUogCTlvB8Gbitx6oVCyJ7/VIUD+CfsxCRkAbqWsfemLArrCXecDFACpeQDV44wr2hGJdu+xUnSnwInFzUkY56l37y+slJI1orAkHpTquI7SfgdSMcDoueamiAsgQ+rRjaAwRVX42/WKMj43Sw2EiTcUaT9XfExlESo2iwHRGoAdq3puI/3mdVIeXfsZikWoak9miMOVYJ3gSCe4xSYnmI0OASGZuxWQAEog2wZVMCO78y4ukeVp1z6vO3Vm5dp3HUUQH6AidIBddoBq6RXXUQAQ9omf0it6sJ+vFerc+Zq0FK5/ZR39gff4Aei2X6w==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="AQXfOhc4JTDGgvu9+UNsEcnn/Ws=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBahXkpSED0WvXisaGuhDWWznbRLN5uwuxFK6E/w4kERr/4ib/4bt20O2vpg4PHeDDPzgkRwbVz32ymsrW9sbhW3Szu7e/sH5cOjto5TxbDFYhGrTkA1Ci6xZbgR2EkU0igQ+BiMb2b+4xMqzWP5YCYJ+hEdSh5yRo2V7qvBeb9ccWvuHGSVeDmpQI5mv/zVG8QsjVAaJqjWXc9NjJ9RZTgTOC31Uo0JZWM6xK6lkkao/Wx+6pScWWVAwljZkobM1d8TGY20nkSB7YyoGellbyb+53VTE175GZdJalCyxaIwFcTEZPY3GXCFzIiJJZQpbm8lbEQVZcamU7IheMsvr5J2veZd1Ny7eqVxncdRhBM4hSp4cAkNuIUmtIDBEJ7hFd4c4bw4787HorXg5DPH8AfO5w+K4o1N</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (b)Transductive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="YT3RiWhpQgvICi/DpGMDIfbehi0=">AAAB6nicbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBahXkpSED0WvXisaGuhDWWznbRLN5uwuxFK6E/w4kERr/4ib/4bt20O2vpg4PHeDDPzgkRwbVz32ymsrW9sbhW3Szu7e/sH5cOjto5TxbDFYhGrTkA1Ci6xZbgR2EkU0igQ+BiMb2b+4xMqzWP5YCYJ+hEdSh5yRo2V7qvsvF+uuDV3DrJKvJxUIEezX/7qDWKWRigNE1Trrucmxs+oMpwJnJZ6qcaEsjEdYtdSSSPUfjY/dUrOrDIgYaxsSUPm6u+JjEZaT6LAdkbUjPSyNxP/87qpCa/8jMskNSjZYlGYCmJiMvubDLhCZsTEEsoUt7cSNqKKMmPTKdkQvOWXV0m7XvMuau5dvdK4zuMowgmcQhU8uIQG3EITWsBgCM/wCm+OcF6cd+dj0Vpw8plj+APn8weMZ41O</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (c) Inductive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             <latexit sha1_base64="o53TZTelzCR7uX4cFkgZqr1KTJs=">AAAB83icbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0kKoseiF48V+gVtKJvNtF262YTdTaGE/g0vHhTx6p/x5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/ncLW9s7uXnG/dHB4dHxSPj1r6zhVDFssFrHqBlSj4BJbhhuB3UQhjQKBnWDysPA7U1Sax7JpZgn6ER1JPuSMGiv1m4pKHabM8CkOyhW36i5BNomXkwrkaAzKX/0wZmmE0jBBte55bmL8jCrDmcB5qZ9qTCib0BH2LJU0Qu1ny5vn5MoqIRnGypY0ZKn+nshopPUsCmxnRM1Yr3sL8T+vl5rhnZ9xmaQGJVstGqaCmJgsAiAhV8iMmFlCmeL2VsLGVFFmbEwlG4K3/vImadeq3k3VfapV6vd5HEW4gEu4Bg9uoQ6P0IAWMEjgGV7hzUmdF+fd+Vi1Fpx85hz+wPn8AXCbkfA=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="BEJs3/NHgraFHDLkVcDqpT/333M=">AAAB8HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KklB9Fj0orcK9kPaUDabTbt0swm7k0Ip/RVePCji1Z/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEph0HW/nbX1jc2t7cJOcXdv/+CwdHTcNEmmGW+wRCa6HVDDpVC8gQIlb6ea0ziQvBUMb2d+a8S1EYl6xHHK/Zj2lYgEo2ilp3sVZgzFiPdKZbfizkFWiZeTMuSo90pf3TBhWcwVMkmN6Xhuiv6EahRM8mmxmxmeUjakfd6xVNGYG38yP3hKzq0SkijRthSSufp7YkJjY8ZxYDtjigOz7M3E/7xOhtG1PxEqzZArtlgUZZJgQmbfk1BozlCOLaFMC3srYQOqKUObUdGG4C2/vEqa1Yp3WXEfquXaTR5HAU7hDC7AgyuowR3UoQEMYniGV3hztPPivDsfi9Y1J585gT9wPn8A9gSQgQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Transductive                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Inductive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          <latexit sha1_base64="o53TZTelzCR7uX4cFkgZqr1KTJs=">AAAB83icbVBNS8NAEJ3Ur1q/qh69LBbBU0kKoseiF48V+gVtKJvNtF262YTdTaGE/g0vHhTx6p/x5r9x2+agrQ8GHu/NMDMvSATXxnW/ncLW9s7uXnG/dHB4dHxSPj1r6zhVDFssFrHqBlSj4BJbhhuB3UQhjQKBnWDysPA7U1Sax7JpZgn6ER1JPuSMGiv1m4pKHabM8CkOyhW36i5BNomXkwrkaAzKX/0wZmmE0jBBte55bmL8jCrDmcB5qZ9qTCib0BH2LJU0Qu1ny5vn5MoqIRnGypY0ZKn+nshopPUsCmxnRM1Yr3sL8T+vl5rhnZ9xmaQGJVstGqaCmJgsAiAhV8iMmFlCmeL2VsLGVFFmbEwlG4K3/vImadeq3k3VfapV6vd5HEW4gEu4Bg9uoQ6P0IAWMEjgGV7hzUmdF+fd+Vi1Fpx85hz+wPn8AXCbkfA=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="BEJs3/NHgraFHDLkVcDqpT/333M=">AAAB8HicbVBNS8NAEJ34WetX1aOXxSJ4KklB9Fj0orcK9kPaUDabTbt0swm7k0Ip/RVePCji1Z/jzX/jts1BWx8MPN6bYWZekEph0HW/nbX1jc2t7cJOcXdv/+CwdHTcNEmmGW+wRCa6HVDDpVC8gQIlb6ea0ziQvBUMb2d+a8S1EYl6xHHK/Zj2lYgEo2ilp3sVZgzFiPdKZbfizkFWiZeTMuSo90pf3TBhWcwVMkmN6Xhuiv6EahRM8mmxmxmeUjakfd6xVNGYG38yP3hKzq0SkijRthSSufp7YkJjY8ZxYDtjigOz7M3E/7xOhtG1PxEqzZArtlgUZZJgQmbfk1BozlCOLaFMC3srYQOqKUObUdGG4C2/vEqa1Yp3WXEfquXaTR5HAU7hDC7AgyuowR3UoQEMYniGV3hztPPivDsfi9Y1J585gT9wPn8A9gSQgQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SubSelNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <latexit sha1_base64="sTjI6dnMkTTd9pyz750dpUAqORg=">AAAB+3icbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/Yj16CRbBU0kKoseiF09Sqf2ANpTNdtIu3XywO5GWkL/ixYMiXv0j3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbmebHgCm372yhsbG5t7xR3S3v7B4dH5nG5raJEMmixSESy61EFgofQQo4CurEEGngCOt7kdu53nkAqHoWPOIvBDego5D5nFLU0MMt9hCkqljYTrwniHjAbmBW7ai9grRMnJxWSozEwv/rDiCUBhMgEVarn2DG6KZXImYCs1E8UxJRN6Ah6moY0AOWmi9sz61wrQ8uPpK4QrYX6eyKlgVKzwNOdAcWxWvXm4n9eL0H/2k15GCcIIVsu8hNhYWTNg7CGXAJDMdOEMsn1rRYbU0kZ6rhKOgRn9eV10q5Vncuq/VCr1G/yOIrklJyRC+KQK1Ind6RBWoSRKXkmr+TNyIwX4934WLYWjHzmhPyB8fkDkOWUxQ==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SubSelNet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  <latexit sha1_base64="sTjI6dnMkTTd9pyz750dpUAqORg=">AAAB+3icbVBNS8NAEN3Ur1q/Yj16CRbBU0kKoseiF09Sqf2ANpTNdtIu3XywO5GWkL/ixYMiXv0j3vw3btsctPXBwOO9GWbmebHgCm372yhsbG5t7xR3S3v7B4dH5nG5raJEMmixSESy61EFgofQQo4CurEEGngCOt7kdu53nkAqHoWPOIvBDego5D5nFLU0MMt9hCkqljYTrwniHjAbmBW7ai9grRMnJxWSozEwv/rDiCUBhMgEVarn2DG6KZXImYCs1E8UxJRN6Ah6moY0AOWmi9sz61wrQ8uPpK4QrYX6eyKlgVKzwNOdAcWxWvXm4n9eL0H/2k15GCcIIVsu8hNhYWTNg7CGXAJDMdOEMsn1rRYbU0kZ6rhKOgRn9eV10q5Vncuq/VCr1G/yOIrklJyRC+KQK1Ind6RBWoSRKXkmr+TNyIwX4934WLYWjHzmhPyB8fkDkOWUxQ==</latexit>


Figure 4: Illustration of S UB S EL N ET. (a) Overview of S UB S EL N ET: Given a model architecture
m ∈ M, S UB S EL N ET takes the graph structure of model architecture Gm and a dataset D as input
to a neural model approximator Fϕ , which predicts the output of the trained model mθ∗ (x). Then
this is fed as input to the subset sampler π (for transductive model) or πψ (for inductive model) to
obtain the training subset S. Fϕ consists of a graph neural network GNN α and a model encode gβ .
(b) Transductive-S UB S EL N ET: Given the dataset D and the predictions om,xj | j ∈ D from the
model approximator Fϕ , we compute the training subset S by solving an optimization problem for
each m ∈ M. (c) Inductive-S UB S EL N ET: Here, we do not have to solve the optimization problem
each time for a new architecture m. Instead, we use a neural network πψ which learns to solve
the optimization problem of the transductive model during training and thus, directly provides the
training subset S during test. (d) Architecture of the neural model approximator Fϕ : It first feeds
Gm into a graph neural network GNNα , which outputs the node representations {hu }. Together
with a sequence of positional encoding obtained from a BFS ordering, {hu } are fed into a attention
network followed by a feed forward network, which outputs {om,xi } for an instance (xi , yi ). (e)
The output of training procedure for the two variants of our model.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C       A DDITIONAL DETAILS ABOUT EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
C.1      DATASET
Datasets (D).
Table 5: A brief description of the datasets used along with the transformations applied during training

                           Dataset    No. of Train-Test   Shape     Transformations
                                      Classes Split                 Applied
                           CIFAR10    10     (50K,10K)    32x32x3   RandomCrop,
                                                                    Normalize
                           CIFAR100   100    (50K,10K)    32x32x3   RandomCrop,
                                                                    Normalize
                           FMNIST     10     (60K,10K)    28x28x1   Normalize

Architectures (M). Although our task is not Neural Architecture Search, we leverage the NASBench-
101 search space as an architecture pool. The cell-based search space was designed for the bench-
marking of various NAS methods. It consists of 423, 624 unique architectures with the following
constraints – (1) number of nodes in each cell is at most 7, (2) number of edges in each cell is at most
9, (3) barring the input and output, there are three unique operations, namely 1 × 1 convolution, 3 × 3
convolution and 3 × 3 max-pool. We utilize the architectures from the search space in generating the
sequence of embeddings along with sampling architectures for the training and testing of the encoder
and datasets for the subset selector.

C.2      I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS ABOUT BASELINES
Facility Location (FL). We implemented facility location on all the three datasets using the apricot 1
library. The similarity matrix was computed using Euclidean distance between data points, and the
objective function was maximized using the naive greedy algorithm.
Pruning. It selects a subset from the entire dataset based on the uncertainty of the datapoints while
partial training. In our setup, we considered ResNet-18 as a master model, which is trained on each
dataset for 5 epochs. Post training, the uncertainty measure is calculated based on the probabilities of
each class, and the points with highest uncertainty are considered in the subset. We train the master
model at a learning rate of 0.025.
Glister and Grad-Match. We implemented GLISTER (Killamsetty et al., 2021b) and Grad-Match
(Killamsetty et al., 2021a) using the CORDS library. We trained the models for 50 epochs, using batch
size of 20, and selected the subset after every 10 epochs. The loss was minimized using SGD with
learning rate of 0.01, momentum of 0.9 and weight decay with regularization constant of 5 × 10−4 .
We used cosine annealing for scheduling the learning rate with Tmax of 50 epochs, and used 10% of
the training data as the validation set. Details of specific hyperparameters for stated as follows.
Glister uses a greedy selection approach to minimize a bi-level objective function. In our implemen-
tation, we used stochastic greedy optimization with learning rate 0.01, applied on the data points of
each mini-batch. Online-Glister approximates the objective function with a Taylor series expansion
up to an arbitrary number of terms to speed up the process; we used 15 terms in our experiments.
Grad-Match applies the orthogonal matching (OMP) pursuit algorithm to the data points of each
mini-batch to match gradient of a subset to the entire training/validation set. Here, we set the learning
rate is set to 0.01. The regularization constant in OMP is 1.0 and the algorithm optimizes the objective
function within an error margin of 10−4 .
GraNd. This is an adaptive subset selection strategy in which the norm of the gradient of the loss
function is used as a score to rank a data point. The gradient scores are computed after the model has
trained on the full dataset for the first few epochs. For the rest of epochs, the model is trained only on
the top-k data points, selected using the gradient scores. In our implementation, we let the model
train on the full dataset for the first 5 epochs, and computed the gradient of the loss only with respect
to the last layer fully connected layer.
EL2N. When the loss function used to compute the GraNd scores is the cross entropy loss, the norm
of the gradient for a data point x can be approximated by E||p(x) − y||2 , where p(x) is the discrete
    1
        https://github.com/jmschrei/apricot


                                                     16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


probability distribution over the classes, computed by taking softmax of the logits, and y is the
one-hot encoded true label corresponding to the data point x. Similar to our implementation of GraNd,
we computed the EL2N scores after letting the models train on the full data for the first 5 epochs.

C.3   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS ABOUT OUR MODEL
GNNα . As we utilize NASBench-101 space as the underlying set of neural architectures, each
computational node in the architecture can comprise of one of five operations and the one-hot-
encoded feature vector fu . Since the set is cell-based, there is an injective mapping between the
neural architecture and the cell structure. We aim to produce a sequence of embeddings for the cell,
which in turn corresponds to that of the architecture. For each architecture, we use the initial feature
fu ∈ R5 in (8) as a five dimensional one-hot encoding for each operation. This is fed into I NIT N ODE
(8) to obtain an 16 dimensional output. Here, I NIT N ODE consists of a 5 × 16 linear, ReLU and
16 × 16 linear layers cascaded with each other. Each of E DGE E MBED and U PDATE consists of a
5 × 128 linear-BatchNorm-ReLU cascaded with a 128 × 16 linear layer. Moreover, the symmetric
aggregator is a sum aggregator.
We repeat this layer K times, and each iteration gathers information from k < K hops. After all
the iterations, we generate an embedding for each node, and following (You et al., 2018) we use the
BFS-tree based node-ordering scheme to generate the sequence of embeddings for each network.
The GVAE-based architecture was trained for 10 epochs with the number of recursive layers K set
to 5, and the Adam optimizer was used with learning rate of 10−3 . The entire search space was
considered as the dataset, and a batch-size of 32 was used. Post training, we call the node embeddings
collectively as the architecture representation.
To train the latent space embeddings, the parameters α are trained in an encoder-decoder fashion
using a variational autoencoder. The mean µ and variance σ on the final node embeddings hu are:

                     µ = FCN hu u∈V        and σ = exp FCN hu u∈V
                                                          m                                                  m

The decoder aims to reconstruct the original cell structure (i.e the nodes and the corresponding
operations), which are one-hot encoded. It is modeled using single-layer fully connected networks
followed by a sigmoid layer.


                              2.5                                                    2.5
                 KL-Divergence →


                                                                        KL-Divergence →


                              2.0                                                    2.0
                              1.5                                                    1.5
                              1.0                                                    1.0
                              0.5                                                    0.5
                              0.0                                                    0.0
                                    0    20   40     60       80                           0     20   40     60   80
                                           Epochs →                                               Epochs →
                                        (a) FMNIST                                             (b) CIFAR10

Figure 6: Kullback-Leibler divergence values (KL(mθ∗ (xi ) || gβ (Hm , xi ))) computed during the
training of the model encoder gβ over 80 epochs.

Model Encoder gβ . The model encoder gβ is essentially a single-head attention block that acts on a
sequence of node embeddings Hm = {hu |u ∈ Vm }. The Query, Key and Value matrices, Wquery ,
Wkey and Wvalue ∈ R16×8 , and the matrix WC ∈ R8×16 . The fully connected network acting on
ζu,1 consists of matrices W1 ∈ R16×64 and W2 ∈ R64×16 . All the trainable matrices along with the
layer normalizations were implemented using the Linear and LayerNorm functions in Pytorch.
The last item of the output sequence ζu,3 is concatenated with the data embedding xi and fed to
another 2-layer fully-connected network with hidden dimension 256 and dropout probability of 0.3.
The model encoder is trained by minimizing the KL-divergence between gβ (Hm , xi ) and mθ∗ (xi ).
We used an AdamW optimizer with learning rate of 10−3 , ϵ = 10−8 , betas = (0.9, 0.999) and
weight decay of 0.005. We also used Cosine Annealing to decay the learning rate, and used gradient
clipping with maximum norm set to 5. Figure 6 shows the convergence of the outputs of the model
encoder gβ (Hm , xi ) with the outputs of the model mθ∗ (xi ).


                                                                   17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Neural Network πψ . The inductive model is a three-layer fully-connected neural network with
two Leaky ReLU activations and a sigmoid activation after the last layer. The input to πψ is the
concatenation (Hm ; om,i ; xi ; yi ). The hidden dimensions of the two intermediary layers are 64 and
16, and the final layer is a single neuron that outputs
                                                    P the score corresponding to a data point xi .
While training πψ we add a regularization term λ′ ( i∈D πψ (Hm , om,i , xi , yi ) − |S|) to ensure that
nearly |S| samples have high scores out of the entire dataset D. Both the regularization constants λ
(in equation 6) and λ′ are set to 0.1. We train the model weights using an Adam optimizer with a
learning rate of 0.001. During training, at each iteration we draw instances using Prπ and use the
log-derivative trick to compute the gradient of the objective. During each computation step, we use
one instance of the ranked list to compute the unbiased estimate of the objective in (6) .

D     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
D.1    A BLATION STUDY
We perform ablation study of S UB S EL N ET from three perspectives.
Impact of ablation of subset sampler. First, we attempt to understand the impact of the subset
sampler. To that aim, we compare the performance of S UB S EL N ET against two baselines, namely
- Bottom-b-loss and Bottom-b-loss+gumbel. In Bottom-b-loss, we sort the data instances based on
their predicted loss ℓ(Fϕ (Gm , x), y) and consider those points with the bottom b values. In Bottom-
b-loss+gumbel, we add noise sampled from the gumbel distribution with µ = 0 and β = 0.025, and
sort the instances based on these noisy loss values, i.e., ℓ(Fϕ (Gm , x), y) + Gumbel(0, β = 0.025).
We observe that Bottom-b-loss and Bottom-b-loss+gumbel do not perform that well in spite of
being efficient in terms of time and memory. Figure 7 compares the performance of the variants of
S UB S EL N ET, Bottom-b-loss and Bottom-b-loss+gumbel.

                                           Transductive-SubSelNet                                 Loss
                                           Inductive-SubSelNet                                    Loss + Gumbel

                    1.00                                         0.75                                          0.3
                                                                                                    Pr(y = ŷ) →
                                                      Pr(y = ŷ) →
         Pr(y = ŷ) →


                    0.75                                         0.50                                          0.2
                    0.50
                                                                 0.25                                          0.1
                    0.25
                    0.00                                         0.00                                          0.0
                                                                                                                         50
                              50       150 200 250
                              Speed up (Tf /T ) →
                                                                           50        150 200 250
                                                                            Speed up (Tf /T ) →
                                                                                                                              0.1150 200 250
                                                                                                                         Speed up (Tf /T ) →
                                                                                                                              0.0
                    1.00                                         0.75                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                               100   200
         Pr(y = ŷ) →


                                                      Pr(y = ŷ) →


                                                                                                   Pr(y = ŷ) →


                    0.75
                                                                 0.50                                         0.2
                    0.50
                                                                 0.25                                         0.1
                    0.25
                    0.00                                         0.00                                         0.0
                        0       10    20     30                      0          10     20     30                 0            10    20     30
                        RT                                           RT                                            RT
                        0    memory(t)dt (GB-min) →                  0    memory(t)dt (GB-min) →                   0    memory(t)dt (GB-min) →

                             (a) FMNIST                                   (b) CIFAR10                                   (c) CIFAR100

Figure 7: Comparison of Transductive-S UB S EL N ET and Inductive-S UB S EL N ET with Bottom-b-loss
(Loss) and Bottom-b-loss+gumbel (Loss + Gumbel). In the former, we select top-b instances in
terms of their predicted loss ℓ(Fϕ (Gm , x), y) computed using the model approximator In Bottom-
b-loss+gumbel, we add gumbel noise Gumbel(0, 0.025) to the loss and sort the instances based on
these noisy loss values.

Exploring alternative architecture of the model encoder gβ . We consider three alternative
architecture to our current model encoder gβ .
• F EEDFORWARD: We consider a two-layer fully-connected network, in which we concatenate the
  mean of Hm with xi . We used ReLu activation between the layers and the hidden dimension was
  set to 256. We used dropout for regularization with probability 0.3.


                                                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                                        P
• D EEP S ET: We consider permutation invariant networks of the form ρ( h∈H ϕ(h); xi ) where ρ
  and ϕ are neural networks and H is the sequence under consideration. We ρ is a fully-connected
  network with 4 layers, ReLU activation, and hidden dimension of 64, and ϕ is a two-layer fully-
  connected network with ReLU activation and has output dimension 10.
• LSTM: We consider an LSTM-based encoder with hidden dimension of 16 and dropout probability
  of 0.2. The output of the last LSTM block is concatenated with xi and fed to a linear layer with
  hidden dimension 256, dropout probability of 0.3 and ReLU as the activation function.
Since the goal of the model encoder is to produce outputs which mimic the architectures, we measure
the KL divergence between the outputs of the gold models and of the encoder to denote the closeness
of the output distribution. Table. 8 summarizes performance of different model encoders. We make
the following observations: (1) Transformer-based model encoder outperforms every other method
by a significant margin across both the datasets. (2) The BFS sequential modeling of an architecture
with transformers leads to better representation that enables closer model approximation compared to
other sequential methods like LSTM. (3) Non-sequential model approximators like Feedforward and
DeepSets led to poor model approximation.
Table 8: Comparison of the performance of several model encoder architectures gβ on the CIFAR-10
and FMNIST datasets, based on the Kullback–Leibler divergence values between the gold model
outputs and predicted model outputs.

                               Model approximator      CIFAR-10    FMNIST
                               Feedforward                 0.171    0.124
                               DeepSet                     0.105    0.122
                               LSTM                        0.102    0.113
                               Self-Attention Based        0.089    0.109

Performance of subset selectors using different model encoders. We consider three different
design choices of model approximator (our (Transformer), Feedforward, and LSTM) along with
three different subset selection strategies (Our subset sampler, top-b instances based on uncertainty,
and top-b based on loss) which result in nine different combinations of model approximation and
subset selection strategies. We measure uncertainty using the entropy of the predicted distribution
of the target classes and report the average test accuracy of the models when they are trained on the
underlying pre-selected subset in the following table -
Table 9: Test accuracy of the nine combinations of model approximators and selection strategies on
the pre-selected CIFAR10 subset of size 5%.

                             Design                                Accuracy
                             Feedforward + S UB S EL N ET            0.527
                             Feedforward + Uncertainty               0.329
                             Feedforward + Loss                      0.296
                             LSTM + S UB S EL N ET                   0.526
                             LSTM + Uncertainty                      0.417
                             LSTM + Loss                             0.283
                             Transformer + S UB S EL N ET            0.548
                             Transformer + Uncertainty               0.198
                             Transformer + Loss                      0.210

We make the following observations -
      1. The complete design of our method, i.e., Our model approximator (Transformer) + Our
         subset sampler (S UB S EL N ET) performs best.
      2. If we use simple unsupervised subset selection heuristics, e.g., loss or uncertainty based
         subset selection, then our model approximator performs much worse than Feedforward or


                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          LSTM, whereas this trend is opposite if we use our subset sampler for selecting the subset.
          This may be due to overfitting of the transformer architecture in presence of uncertainty or
          loss based selection, which is compensated by our subset sampler.

D.2    R ECOMMENDING MODEL ARCHITECTURE
When dealing with a pool of architectures designed for the same task, choosing the correct architecture
for the task might be a daunting task - since it is impractical to train all the architectures from scratch.
In view of this problem, we show that training on smaller carefully chosen subsets might be beneficial
for a quicker alternative to choosing the correct architectures. We first extract the top 15 best
performing architectures A∗ having highest accuracy, when trained on full data. We mark them as
"gold". Then, we gather top 15 architectures A when trained on the subset provided by our models.
Then, we compare A and A∗ using the Kendall tau rank correlation coefficient (KTau) along with
Jaccard coefficent |A ∩ A∗ |/|A ∪ A∗ |.
Figure 10 summarizes the results for top three non-adaptive subset selectors in terms of the accuracy,
namely - Transductive-S UB S EL N ET, Inductive-S UB S EL N ET and FL. We make the following ob-
servations: (1) One of our variant outperforms FL in most of the cases in CIFAR10 and CIFAR100.
(2) There is no consistent winner between Transductive-S UB S EL N ET and Inductive-S UB S EL N ET,
although Inductive-S UB S EL N ET outperforms both Transductive-S UB S EL N ET and FL consistently
in CIFAR100 in terms of the Jaccard coefficient.
                                      Transductive-SubSelNet                   Inductive-SubSelNet                  FL

                    0.5                                                                               1.0
                                                             0.8
         Coeffecient →


                                                  Coeffecient →


                                                                                           Coeffecient →
                    0.4
          Jaccard


                                                   Jaccard


                                                                                            Jaccard
                                                             0.6                                      0.5
                    0.3

                    0.2                                      0.4
                          300     600 1800 3000                    250     500 1500 2500                    250 0.1
                                                                                                                 500 1500 2500
                                Subset Size →                            Subset Size →                             0.0 Size →
                                                                                                                  Subset
                                                                                                                           0       2
                 0.8                                                                               0.7
                                                          0.6
                                                                                                   0.6
          Kτ →


                                                   Kτ →


                                                                                            Kτ →


                 0.6
                                                          0.4
                                                                                                   0.5
                 0.4
                                                          0.2                                      0.4
                          300    600 1800 3000                     250    500 1500 2500                     250    500 1500 2500
                                Subset Size →                            Subset Size →                            Subset Size →

                           (a) FMNIST                              (b) CIFAR10                              (c) CIFAR100

Figure 10: Comparison of the top three non-adaptive subset selectors (Transductive-S UB S EL N ET,
Inductive-S UB S EL N ETand FL) on ranking and choosing of the top-15 architectures on the basis of
Jaccard Coefficient and Kendall tau rank correlation coefficient (Kτ ).

D.3    AVOIDING UNDERFITTING AND OVERFITTING
Since the amount of training data is small, there is a possibility of overfitting. However, the coefficient
λ of the entropy regularizer λH(P rπ ), can be increased to draw instances from the different regions
of the feature space, which in turn can reduce the overfitting. In practice, we tuned λ on the validation
set to control such overfitting.
We present the accuracies on (training, validation, test) folds for both Transductive-S UB S EL N ET and
Inductive-S UB S EL N ET in Table 11.
We make the following observations:
      1. From training to test, in most cases, the decrease in accuracy is ∼ 7%.
      2. This small accuracy gap is further reduced from validation to test. Here, in most cases, the
         decrease in accuracy is ∼ 4%.
We perform early stopping using the validation set which acts as an additional regularizer and
therefore, the amount of overfitting is significantly low.


                                                                          20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 11: Variation of accuracy with subset size of both the variants of S UB S EL N ET on training,
validation and test set of CIFAR10

                          Training                             Validation                       Testing
 Subset Size
                 Transductive        Inductive        Transductive        Inductive   Transductive      Inductive
      10%            0.728              0.660            0.702             0.632         0.678               0.606
      20%            0.852              0.673            0.809             0.658         0.770               0.644
      40%            0.890              0.691            0.856             0.678         0.825               0.666
      70%            0.942              0.738            0.912             0.717         0.884               0.698



D.4    P ERFORMANCE OF SUBSET SELECTION STRATEGIES ON LARGER SUBSET SIZES

We conducted similar experiments as Section 5.1 for CIFAR10 and FMNIST on larger subset sizes
(b) of 0.1|D|, 0.2|D|, 0.4|D| and 0.7|D|. For each dataset and the above mentioned subset sizes, we
evaluate the decrease in accuracy (ratio of the accuracy on the subset to accuracy on the full dataset),
speed-up (ratio of the time taken to train the full dataset to the sum of times taken for subset selection
and subset training), and GPU usage in GB-min. We report the variation of these metrics with respect
to the subset sizes in the following tables –


Table 12: Decrease in accuracy (Accuracy on selected subset/Accuracy on full data) for CIFAR10
and FMNIST for b ∈ (0.1|D|, 0.7|D|).

 Subset Size   Dataset   Transductive     Inductive    FacLoc    Pruning    GLISTER   GradMatch    GraNd       EL2N
      10%                    0.70           0.69        0.56      0.40        0.78       0.72        0.28      0.70
      20%                    0.81           0.74        0.67      0.61        0.88       0.87        0.30      0.79
               CIFAR10
      40%                    0.86           0.80        0.78      0.78        0.93       0.93        0.39      0.85
      70%                    0.93           0.87        0.85      0.88        0.96       0.96        0.71      0.91
      10%                    0.92           0.90        0.86      0.42        0.95       0.95        0.35      0.91
      20%                    0.94           0.91        0.90      0.62        0.96       0.96        0.40      0.93
               FMNIST
      40%                    0.95           0.92        0.93      0.73        0.97       0.97        0.50      0.95
      70%                    0.96           0.93        0.95      0.88        0.97       0.97        0.79      0.96


Table 13: Speed-up (Time for full training/(Time taken for subset selection + Training on the selected
subset)) for CIFAR10 and FMNIST for b ∈ (0.1|D|, 0.7|D|).

 Subset Size   Dataset   Transductive     Inductive    FacLoc    Pruning    GLISTER   GradMatch    GraNd       EL2N
      10%                    24.13         24.13        5.89      16.81       6.15       7.23        17.76     17.76
      20%                    11.82         11.83        4.70      9.74        4.19       4.91        10.06     10.06
               CIFAR10
      40%                    5.75           5.75        3.31      5.21        2.69       3.20        5.29      5.29
      70%                    3.43           3.43        2.38      3.23        1.72       2.07        3.26      3.26
      10%                    25.68         25.67        4.32      15.60       7.70       7.77        12.28     12.28
      20%                    10.57         10.57        3.48      8.35        5.42       5.47        7.29      7.29
               FMNIST
      40%                    6.04           6.04        2.79      5.24        3.30       3.04        4.81      4.81
      70%                    3.38           3.38        2.05      3.12        1.96       2.30        2.96      2.96



                                                         21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      Table 14: GPU memory (GB-min) for CIFAR10 and FMNIST for b ∈ (0.1|D|, 0.7|D|)

 Subset Size   Dataset   Transductive   Inductive   FacLoc   Pruning   GLISTER   GradMatch   GraNd    EL2N
    10%                     32.66        32.65      461.77    41.41     370.08    314.87     67.80    107.70
    20%                     66.65        66.64      495.75    74.88     543.75    463.62     101.26   190.19
               CIFAR10
    40%                    137.15        137.13     566.26   144.31     847.87    711.67     170.69   361.32
    70%                    229.97        229.95     659.07   235.73    1326.46    1101.66    262.11   586.65
    10%                     23.73        23.73      641.65    32.21     168.70    167.32     88.69    87.85
    20%                     57.64        57.64      675.56    66.12     239.84    237.38     122.60   121.76
               FMNIST
    40%                    100.85        100.85     718.77   109.32     394.35    427.87     165.80   164.97
    70%                    180.03        180.04     797.95   188.50     664.70    565.88     244.98   244.15


Note that in the case of CIFAR10, we denote the decrease factors of 0.91-0.96 in green, and the
decrease factors of 0.85 - 0.88 in purple. In case of FMNIST, we denote the decrease factors of
0.94-0.97 in green and the decrease factors of 0.90 - 0.93 in purple.
We make the following observations:
      1. We show a better trade-off between accuracy and time and accuracy and memory than
         almost all the baselines.
      2. Observations in CIFAR10: When we tuned the subset sizes, we notice that S UB S EL N ET,
         GLISTER, Grad-Match and EL2N can achieve a comparable decrease factor of 0.91-0.93.
         In terms of speed-up and memory usage, we see that
          (a) S UB S EL N ET achieves a 1.3x speed-up as compared to GLISTER and 1.1x speed-up as
               compared to Grad-Match and EL2N
          (b) GLISTER consumes 3.7x GPU memory, Grad-Match consumes 3.1x GPU memory
               and EL2N consumes 2.5x GPU memory as compared to S UB S EL N ET
         We notice that none of the other subset selection strategies achieve a high-enough accuracy,
         and we beat them in terms of speed-up and memory usage. Moreover, for the case when the
         subset selection methods achieve a decrease factor of 0.85 - 0.88, we see that
          (a) S UB S EL N ET achieves a 2.4x speed-up as compared to FacLoc, 1.8x speed-up as
               compared to Pruning, 1.4x speed-up as compared to GLISTER, 1.2x speed-up as
               compared to Grad-Match and 1.1x speed-up as compared to EL2N
          (b) FacLoc consumes 4.8x GPU memory, Pruning consumes 1.7x GPU memory, GLISTER
               consumes 4x GPU memory, Grad-Match consumes 3.4x GPU memory and EL2N
               consumes 2.6x GPU memory as compared to S UB S EL N ET.
      3. Observations in FMNIST: When we tuned the subset sizes, we notice that S UB S EL N ET,
         Facloc, GLISTER, Grad-Match and EL2N can achieve a comparable decrease factor of
         0.94-0.97. In terms of speed-up and memory usage, we see that
          (a) S UB S EL N ET achieves a 3.8x speed-up as compared to FacLoc, 1.4x speed-up as
               compared to GLISTER and Grad-Match, and 2.2x speed-up as compared to EL2N.
          (b) FacLoc consumes 12.5x GPU Memory, and GLISTER, Grad-Match and EL2N con-
               sume 2.9x GPU memory as compared to S UB S EL N ET.
         We notice that none of the other subset selection strategies achieve a high-enough accuracy,
         and we beat them in terms of speed-up and memory usage. Moreover, for the case when the
         subset selection methods achieve a decrease factor of 0.90-0.93, we see that
          (a) S UB S EL N ET achieves a 7.4x speed-up as compared to FacLoc, 2.1x speed-up as
               compared to GLISTER, 2.9x speed-up as compared to Grad-Match and 2.1x speed-up
               as compared to EL2N
          (b) FacLoc consumes 28.5x GPU memory, GLISTER consumes 4.5x GPU memory, Grad-
               Match consumes 6.1x GPU memory and EL2N consumes 3.7x GPU memory as
               compared to S UB S EL N ET.
We present the trade-off between the accuracy and speed-up, and accuracy and memory consumption
in Figure 15.


                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Transductive-SubSelNet     FL                       GLISTER           GraNd
                                Inductive-SubSelNet        Pruning                  Grad-Match        EL2N

                    1.0                                                    1.0
                                                                                                 full selection:


                                                                Pr(y = ŷ) →
        Pr(y = ŷ) →0.8                                                    0.8                   (1.0, 0.96)
                                             full selection:
                    0.6                      (1.0, 0.97)                   0.6
                                                                                                           0.1
                    0.4                                                    0.4                             0.0
                                                                                                                 0    20   40
                    0.2                                                    0.2
                       0            10      20      30    40                  0          10           20         30
                                 Speed up (Tf /T ) →                                 Speed up (Tf /T ) →
                1.0                                                        1.0
     Pr(y = ŷ) →


                                                                Pr(y = ŷ) →
                0.8                                                        0.8
                0.6                                                        0.6
                                         full selection:
                0.4                                                        0.4                full selection:
                                         (2.1 × 106, 0.97)
                                                                                              (2.4 × 106, 0.96)
                0.2                                                        0.2
                           50      250 450 650 850                                 100 400 700 1000 1300
                       RT                                                      RT
                       0    memory(t)dt (GB-min) →                             0    memory(t)dt (GB-min) →
                                   (a) FMNIST                                           (b) CIFAR10

Figure 15: Trade off between accuracy and speedup (top row) and accuracy and memory consumption
(bottom row) for all the methods – Facility location (Fujishige, 2005; Iyer, 2015), Pruning (Sorscher
et al., 2022), Glister (Killamsetty et al., 2021b), Grad-Match (Killamsetty et al., 2021a), EL2N (Paul
et al., 2021); GraNd (Paul et al., 2021); and; Full selection on FMNIST and CIFAR10. In all cases,
we vary |S| = b ∈ (0.1|D|, 0.7|D|).

E    P ROS AND CONS OF USING GNN S
We have used a GNN in our model encoder to encode the architecture representations into an
embedding. We chose a GNN for the task due to following reasons -
      1. Message passing between the nodes (which may be the input, output, or any of the operations)
         allows us to generate embeddings that capture the contextual structural information of the
         node, i.e., the embedding of each node captures not only the operation for that node but also
         the operations preceding that node to a large extent.
      2. It has been shown by (Morris et al., 2019) and (Xu et al., 2018a) that GNNs are as powerful as
         the Weisfeiler-Lehman algorithm and thus give a powerful representation for the graph. Thus,
         we obtain smooth embeddings of the nodes/edges that can effectively distill information
         from its neighborhood without significant compression.
      3. GNNs embed model architecture into representations independent of the underlying dataset
         and the model parameters. This is because it operates on only the nodes and edges— the
         structure of the architecture and does not use the parameter values or input data.
However, the GNN faces the following drawbacks -
      1. GNN uses a symmetric aggregator for message passing over node neighbors to ensure that
         the representation of any node should be invariant to a permutation of its neighbors. Such a
         symmetric aggregator renders it a low-pass filter, as shown in (NT & Maehara, 2019), which
         attenuates important high-frequency signals.
      2. We are training one GNN using several architectures. This can lead to the insensitivity of the
         embedding to change in the architecture. In the context of model architecture, if we change
         the operation of one node in the architecture (either remove, add or change the operation),
         then the model’s output can significantly change. However, the embedding of GNN may
         become immune to such changes, since the GNN is being trained over many architectures.


                                                               23
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F   C HOICE OF SUBMODULAR FUNCTION FOR THE OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM
In ( 1) we introduced the original combinatorial problem for subset selection where optimization
variable S— the subset of instances — makes the underlying problem combinatorial. Here, we can
use submodular functions like Graph-Cut, Facility-Location, and Log-Determinant as the diversity
functions, which would allow us to use greedy algorithms to maximize the objective in ( 1). But,
as discussed in Section 4.1, this suffers from two bottlenecks — expensive computation issues and
lack of generalizability. Therefore, we do not follow these approaches and resort to our proposed
approach called S UB S EL N ET.
In contrast to the optimization problem in (1), which was a combinatorial set optimization problem,
the optimization problem in S UB S EL N ET(6) is a continuous optimization problem where the goal
is to estimate P rπ . In such a problem, where the probability distribution is the key optimization
variable, entropy is a more natural measure of diversity than the other submodular measures.


                                                24
