Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Maximum Likelihood Learning of Energy-
Based Models for Simulation-Based Inference
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                        Abstract

        We introduce two synthetic likelihood methods for Simulation-Based In-
        ference (SBI), to conduct either amortized or targeted inference from ex-
        perimental observations when a high-fidelity simulator is available. Both
        methods learn a conditional energy-based model (EBM) of the likelihood
        using synthetic data generated by the simulator, conditioned on parameters
        drawn from a proposal distribution. The learned likelihood can then be
        combined with any prior to obtain a posterior estimate, from which sam-
        ples can be drawn using MCMC. Our methods uniquely combine a flexible
        Energy-Based Model and the minimization of a KL loss: this is in contrast
        to other synthetic likelihood methods, which either rely on normalizing
        flows, or minimize score-based objectives; choices that come with known
        pitfalls. Our first method, Amortized Unnormalized Neural Likelihood
        Estimation (AUNLE), introduces a tilting trick during training that allows
        to significantly lower the computational cost of inference by enabling the
        use of efficient MCMC techniques. Our second method, Sequential UNLE
        (SUNLE), utilizes a new conditional EBM learning technique in order to
        re-use simulation data and improve posterior accuracy on a specific dataset.
        We demonstrate the properties of both methods on a range of synthetic
        datasets, and apply them to a neuroscience model of the pyloric network in
        the crab, matching the performance of other synthetic likelihood methods
        at a fraction of the simulation budget.


1   Introduction
Simulation-based modeling expresses a system as a probabilistic program (Ghahramani, 2015),
which describes, in a mechanistic manner, how samples from the system are drawn given the
parameters of the said system. This probabilistic program can be concretely implemented in
a computer - as a simulator - from which synthetic parameter-samples pairs can be drawn.
This setting is common in many scientific and engineering disciplines such as stellar events
in cosmology (Alsing et al., 2018; Schafer & Freeman, 2012), particle collisions in a particle
accelerator for high energy physics (Eberl, 2003; Sjöstrand et al., 2008), and biological
neural networks in neuroscience (Markram et al., 2015; Pospischil et al., 2008). Describing
such systems using a probabilistic program often turns out to be easier than specifying the
underlying probabilistic model with a tractable probability distribution. We consider the
task of inference for such systems, which consists in computing the posterior distribution
of the parameters given observed (non-synthetic) data. When a likelihood function of the
simulator is available alongside with a prior belief on the parameters, inferring the posterior
distribution of the parameters given data is possible using Bayes’ rule. Traditional inference
methods such as variational techniques (Wainwright & Jordan, 2008) or Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (Andrieu et al., 2003) can then be used to produce approximate posterior samples
of the parameters that are likely to have generated the observed data. Unfortunately, the
likelihood function of a simulator is computationally intractable in general, thus making the
direct application of traditional inference techniques unusable for simulation-based modelling.
Simulation-Based Inference (SBI) methods (Cranmer et al., 2020) are methods specifically
designed to perform inference in the presence of a simulator with an intractable likelihood.
These methods repeatedly generate synthetic data using the simulator to build an estimate of


                                              1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the posterior, that either can be used for any observed data (resulting in a so-called amortized
inference procedure) or that is targeted for a specific observation. While the accuracy of
inference increases as more simulations are run, so does computational cost, especially when
the simulator is expensive, which is common in many physics applications (Cranmer et al.,
2020). In high-dimensional settings, early simulation-based inference techniques such as
Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) (Marin et al., 2012) struggle to generate high
quality posterior samples at a reasonable cost, since ABC repeatedly rejects simulations that
fail to reproduce the observed data (Beaumont et al., 2002). More recently, model-based
inference methods (Wood, 2010; Papamakarios et al., 2019; Hermans et al., 2020; Greenberg
et al., 2019), which encode information about the simulator via a parametric density (-ratio)
estimator of the data, have been shown to drastically reduce the number of simulations
needed to reach a given inference precision (Lueckmann et al., 2021). The computational
gains are particularly important when comparing ABC to targeted SBI methods, implemented
in a multi-round procedure that refines the estimation of the model around the observed
data by sequentially simulating data points that are closer to the observed ones (Greenberg
et al., 2019; Papamakarios et al., 2019; Hermans et al., 2020).
Previous model-based SBI methods have used their parametric estimator to learn the
likelihood (e.g. the conditional density specifying the probability of an observation being
simulated given a specific parameter set, Wood 2010; Papamakarios et al. 2019; Pacchiardi &
Dutta 2022), the likelihood-to-marginal ratio (Hermans et al., 2020), or the posterior function
directly (Greenberg et al., 2019). We focus in this paper on likelihood-based (also called
Synthetic Likelihood; SL, in short) methods, of which two main instances exist: (Sequential)
Neural Likelihood (Papamakarios et al., 2019), which learns a likelihood estimate using
a normalizing flow trained by optimizing a Maximum Likelihood (ML) loss; and Score
Matched Neural Likelihood (Pacchiardi & Dutta, 2022), which learns an unnormalized (or
Energy-Based, LeCun et al. 2006) likelihood model trained using conditional score matching.
Recently, SNL was applied successfully to challenging neural data (Deistler et al., 2021).
However, limitations still remain in the approaches taken by both SNL and SMNL. One
the one hand, flow-based models may need to use very complex architectures to properly
approximate distributions with rich structure such as multi-modality (Kong & Chaudhuri,
2020; Cornish et al., 2020). On the other hand, score matching, the objective of SMNLE,
minimizes the Fisher Divergence between the data and the model, a divergence that fails to
capture important features of probability distributions such as mode proportions (Wenliang &
Kanagawa, 2020; Zhang et al., 2022). This is unlike Maximimum-Likelihood based-objectives,
whose maximizers satisfy attractive theoretical properties (Bickel & Doksum, 2015).
Contributions. In this work, we introduce Amortized Unnormalized Likelihood Neural
Estimation (AUNLE), and Sequential UNLE, a pair of SBI Synthetic Likelihood methods
performing respectively sequential and targeted inference. Both methods learn a Conditional
Energy Based Model of the simulator’s likelihood using a Maximum Likelihood (ML) objective,
and perform MCMC on the posterior estimate obtained after invoking Bayes’ Rule. While
posteriors arising from conditional EBMs exhibit a particular form of intractability called
double intractability, which requires the use of tailored MCMC techniques for inference, we
train AUNLE using a new approach which we call tilting. This approach automatically
removes this intractability in the final posterior estimate, making AUNLE compatible with
standard MCMC methods, and significantly reducing the computational burden of inference.
Our second method, SUNLE, departs from AUNLE by using a new training technique for
conditional EBMs which is suited when the proposal distribution is not analytically available.
While SUNLE returns a doubly intractable posterior, we show that inference can be carried
out accurately through robust implementations of doubly-intractable MCMC methods. We
demonstrate the properties of AUNLE and SUNLE on an array of synthetic benchmark
models (Lueckmann et al., 2021), and apply SUNLE to a neuroscience model of the crab
Cancer borealis, increasing posterior accuracy over prior art while needing only a fraction of
the simulations required by the most efficient prior method (Glöckler et al., 2021).

2   Background
Simulation Based Inference (SBI) refers to the set of methods aimed at estimating the
posterior p(θ|xo ) of some unobserved parameters θ given some observed variable xo recorded
from a physical system, and a prior p(θ). In SBI, one assumes access to a simulator


                                               2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Performance of SMNLE, NLE and AUNLE traing using a simulator with a bimodal
likelihood p(x|θ), and a gaussian prior p(θ) using 1000 samples. Top: Simulator likelihood
p(x|θ0 ) for some fixed θ0 . Bottom: posterior estimate.
G : (θ, u) 7−→ y = G(θ, u), from which samples y|θ can be drawn, and whose associated
likelihood p(y|θ) accurately matches the likelihood p(x|θ) of the physical system of interest.
Here, u represents draws of all random variables involved in performing draws of x|θ. By
a slight abuse of notation, we will not distinguish between the physical random variable x
representing data from the physical system of interest, and the simulated random variable
y draw from the simulator: we will use x for both. The complexity of the simulator
(Cranmer et al., 2020) prevents access to a simple form for the likelihood p(x|θ), making
standard Bayesian inference impossible. Instead, SBI methods perform inference by drawing
parameters from a proposal distribution π(θ), and use these parameters as inputs to the
simulator G to obtain a set of simulated pairs (x, θ) which they use to compute a posterior
estimate of p(θ|x). Specific SBI submethods have been designed to handle separately the
case of amortized inference, where the practitioner seeks to obtain a posterior estimate valid
for any xo (which might not be known a priori), and targeted inference, where the posterior
estimate should maximize accuracy for a specific observed variable xo . While amortized
inference methods set their proposal distribution π to be the prior p, targeted inference
methods iteratively refine their proposal π to focus their simulated observations around the
targeted xo through a sequence of simulation-training rounds (Papamakarios et al., 2019).

2.1   (Conditional) Energy-Based Models.

Energy-Based Models (LeCun et al., 2006) are unnormalized probabilistic models of the form
                               e−Eψ (x)
                                                   Z
                      qψ (x) =          , Z(ψ) = e−Eψ (x) dx,
                                 Z(ψ)
where Z(ψ) is the intractable normalizing constant of the model, and Eψ is called the energy
function, usually set to be a neural network with weights ψ. By directly modelling the density
p(x) of the data through a flexible energy function, simple EBMs can capture rich geometries
and multi-modality, whereas other model classes such a normalizing flows may require a
more complex architecture (Cornish et al., 2020). The flexibility of EBMs comes at the cost
of having an intractable density qψ (x) due to the presence of the normalizer Z(ψ), increasing
the challenge of both training and sampling. In particular, an EBM’s log-likelihood log qψ
and associated gradient ∇ψ log qψ both contain terms involving the (intractable) normalizer
Z(ψ):                         intractable                                  intractable
                              z }| {                                    z      }|      {    (1)
     log qψ (x) = −Eψ (x) − log Z(ψ), ∇ψ log qψ (x) = −∇ψ Eψ (x) + Ex∼qψ ∇ψ Eψ (x) .
making exact training of EBMs via Maximum Likelihood impossible. Approximate likelihood
optimization can be performed using a Gradient-Based algorithm where at each iteration


                                              3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


k, the intractable expectation (under the EBM qψk ) present in ∇ψ log qψk is replaced by
                                            PN
one under a particle approximation qb = N1 i=1 wi δyi of qψ . The particles y (i) forming qb
are traditionally set to be samples from a MCMC chain with invariant distribution qψk ,
with uniform weights wi = N1 , while recent work on EBM for high-dimensional image data
uses an adaptation of Langevin Dynamics (Raginsky et al., 2017; Du & Mordatch, 2019;
Nijkamp et al., 2019; Kelly & Grathwohl, 2021). We outline the traditional ML learning
procedure for EBM in Algorithm 2, where make_particle_approx(q, q̂0 ) is a generic routine
producing a particle approximation of a target unnormalized density q and an initial particle
approximation q̂0 .
                                                                               −Eψ (θ,x)
Energy-Based Models are naturally extended to both joint EBMs qψ (θ, x) = e Z(ψ) (Kelly
& Grathwohl, 2021; Grathwohl et al., 2020) and conditional EBMs (CEBMs Khemakhem
et al. 2020; Pacchiardi & Dutta 2022) of the form:
                                 e−Eψ (x,θ)
                                                       Z
                      qψ (x|θ) =            , Z(θ; ψ) = e−Eψ (x,θ) dx.              (2)
                                  Z(θ, ψ)
Unlike joint and standard EBMs, conditional EBMs define a family of conditional densities
qψ (x|θ), each of which is endowed with an intractable normalizer Z(θ, ψ).

2.2   Synthetic Likelihood Methods for SBI

Synthetic Likelihood (SL) methods (Wood, 2010; Papamakarios et al., 2019; Pacchiardi &
Dutta, 2022) form a class of SBI methods that learn a conditional density model qψ (x|θ) of
the unknown likelihood p(x|θ) for every possible pair of observations and parameters (x, θ).
The set {qψ (x|θ), ψ ∈ Ψ} is a model class parameterised by some vector ψ ∈ Ψ, which recent
methods set to be a neural network with weights ψ. We describe the existing Neural SL
variants to date.
Neural Likelihood Estimation (NLE, Papamakarios et al. 2019) sets qψ to a (normalized)
flow-based model, and is optimized by maximizing the average conditional log-likelihood
Eπ(θ)p(x|θ) log qψ (x|θ). NLE performs inference by invoking Bayes’ rule to obtain an unnor-
                                          q (x|θ)p(θ)
malized posterior estimate pψ (θ|x) = R qψψ(x|θ)p(θ)dθ ∝ p(θ)qψ (x|θ) from which samples can
be drawn either using MCMC, or Variational Inference (Glöckler et al., 2021).
Score Matched Neural Likelihood Estimation (SMNLE, Pacchiardi & Dutta 2022)
models the unknown likelihood using a conditional Energy-Based Model qψ (x|θ) of the form
of Equation (2), trained using a score matching objective adapted for conditional density
estimation. The use of an unnormalized likelihood model makes the posterior estimate
obtained via Bayes’ Rule known up to a θ-dependent term:
                                       e−Eψ (x,θ) p(θ)
                                                               Z
             qψ (θ|x) ∝ p(θ)qψ (x|θ) ∝                 , Z(θ) = e−Eψ (x,θ) dx.
                                          Z(θ)                                         (3)
                                          | {z }
                                         intractable

Posteriors of this form are called doubly intractable posteriors (Møller et al., 2006). In the
case where the likelihood qψ (x|θ) can be sampled from, Møller et al. (2006); Murray et al.
(2006) have proposed tractable MCMC methods that draw an auxiliary variable y ∼ qψ (x|θ)
at every iteration to compute the acceptance probability of the proposed sample. Importantly,
these MCMC methods still admit qψ (θ|x) as their invariant distribution, making inference
as exact as in standard MCMC methods. In the case of SMNLE however, qψ (x|θ) cannot be
tractably sampled from; SMNLE instead uses an approximate doubly intractable method,
which replaces the exact sample y by the result of an MCMC chain with invariant distribution
qψ (x|θ). Even though this variant introduces an additional approximation not present in
standard (“singly” intractable) MCMC algorithms, the distance between the true posterior
and the distributions of the MCMC samples can be bounded under specific assumptions
(Alquier et al., 2016).
Both the likelihood objective of NLE and the score-based objective of SMNLE do not involve
the analytic expression of the proposal π, making it easy to adapt these methods for either


                                              4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


amortized or targeted inference. To address the limitations of both methods mentioned in
the introduction, we next propose a method that combines the use of flexible Energy-Based
Models as in SMNLE, while being optimized using a likelihood loss as in NLE.

3     Unnormalized Neural Likelihood Estimation
In this section, we present our two methods, Amortized-UNLE and Sequential-UNLE. Both
AUNLE and SUNLE approximate the unknown likelihood p(x|θ) for any possible pair of (x, θ)
using a conditional Energy-Based Model qψ (x|θ) as in Equation (2), where Eψ is some neural
network. Additionally, AUNLE and SUNLE are both trained using a likelihood-based loss;
however, the training objectives and inference phases differ to account for the specificities of
amortized and targeted inference, as detailed below.

3.1   Amortized UNLE
Given a likelihood model qψ (x|θ), a natural learning procedure would involve fitting a model
qψ (x|θ)π(θ) of the true “joint synthetic” distribution π(θ)p(x|θ), as NLE does. However, we
show that using an alternative – tilted – version of this model allows to compute a posterior
that is more tractable than the ones computed by other SL methods relying on conditional
EBMs such as SMNLE (Pacchiardi & Dutta, 2022). Our method, AUNLE, fits a joint
probabilistic model qψ,π of the form:

                               π(θ)e−Eψ (x,θ)
                                                         Z
                qψ,π (x, θ) :=                , Zπ (ψ) = π(θ)e−Eψ (x,θ) dxdθ.             (4)
                                  Zπ (ψ)
by maximizing its log-likelihood La (ψ) := Eπ(θ)p(x|θ) [log qψ,π (x, θ)] using an instance of
Algorithm 2. The gain in tractability offered by AUNLE is a direct consequence of the
following proposition, its joint model.
Proposition 1. Let Pψ := {qψ (·|θ) , ψ ∈ Ψ}, and qψ ∈ Pψ . Then we have:

       • (likelihood modelling) qψ,π (x|θ) = qψ (x|θ)
       • (joint model tilting) qψ,π (x, θ) = f (θ)π(θ)qψ (x|θ), for f (θ) := Z(θ, ψ)/Zπ (ψ)
       • ((Z, θ)-uniformization) If p(·|θ) ∈ Pψ , then the ψ ⋆ minimizing La (ψ) satisfies:
         qψ (x|θ) = p(x|θ), and Z(θ, ψ ⋆ ) = Zπ (ψ ⋆ ).

Proof. The first point follows by holding θ fixed in qψ,π (x, θ). To prove the second point,
                                     −E(x,θ)               −E(x,θ)
notice that qψ,π (x, θ) = Z(θ,ψ)
                          Z(θ,ψ)
                                 π(θ)e
                                    Zπ (ψ) = Z(θ,ψ)
                                              Zπ (ψ) π(θ) Z(θ,ψ) . For the last point, note that
                                                         e

at the optimum, we have that qψ⋆ ,π (x, θ) = π(θ)p(x|θ). Integrating out x on both sides of
the equality yields f (θ)π(θ) = π(θ), proving the result.

Proposition 1 shows that AUNLE indeed learns a likelihood model qψ (x|θ) through a joint
model qψ,π tilting the prior π with f (θ). Importantly, this tilting guarantees that the
optimal likelihood model will have a normalizing function Z(θ; ψ) constant (or uniform) in θ,
                                                                                       −Eψ ⋆
reducing AUNLE’s posterior to a standard unnormalized posterior qψ⋆ (θ|x) = p(θ) e Zπ (ψ(θ,x)
                                                                                           ⋆) ,
from which samples can be drawn using classical MCMC techniques, as for NLE. AUNLE’s
posterior contrasts with the posterior of SMNLE (Pacchiardi & Dutta, 2022), an amortized
SBI method which also computes a posterior using a conditional EBM of the likelihood, but
that remains doubly intractable, as discussed in Section 2. The gain in tractability of AUNLE’s
posterior is beneficial from an inference accuracy standpoint as it removes the need to use an
otherwise approximate doubly-intractable technique when performing inference. Importantly,
such a property is also beneficial from a computational cost standpoint, since approximate
doubly-intractable methods require running an (inner ) MCMC chain with target qψ⋆ (x|θ)
for every iteration of the (outer ) MCMC chain with target qψ⋆ (θ|x), roughly squaring the
computational cost of standard MCMC methods. This computational advantage is all the
more important since AUNLE returns an amortized posterior, valid for any observed data
xo , and which may be thus sampled from more than once. We confirm in Appendix B.3 that


                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the (Z, θ)-uniformization of AUNLE’s posterior, which is only guaranteed in a well-specified
setting, at the true optimum ψ ⋆ , holds well in practice.


Algorithm 1 Amortized-UNLE                        Algorithm 2 maximize_ebm_log_l(D, ψ0 )
Input: prior p(θ), simulator G, budget N          Input: Training Data D := {xi , θi }N   i=1 , Initial
Output: Posterior estimate qψ (θ|x)                 EBM parameters ψ0
Initialize ψ0 , qψ0 ,π ∝ e−Eψ0 (x,θ) π(θ)         Output: Density estimator qψ (x, θ)
Initialize π = p                                  Initialize qψ0 (x) ∝ e−Eψ0 (x,θ) , q̂0 ∝ i δ(xi ,θi )
                                                                                           P
for i = 0, . . . , N do                           for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
   Draw θ ∼ π, x ∼ G(θ, ·)                           qb := make_particle_approx(qψk , qb)
   Add (θ, x) to D                                    b = − 1 P ∇ψ Eψ (xi , θi )+Eqb∇ψ Eψ (x, θ)
                                                     G       N            k                    k
end for
Get ψ ⋆ := maximize_ebm_log_l(D, ψ0 )               ψk+1 = ADAM(ψk , G)
                                                                     b
Set qψ⋆ (θ|x) := e−Eψ⋆ (x,θ) p(θ)                 end for
Infer using MCMC on qψ⋆ (θ|x)                     Return qψK

3.2   Targeted Inference using Sequential-UNLE

In this section, we introduce our second method, Sequential-UNLE (or SUNLE in short),
which performs targeted inference for a specific observation xo . SUNLE follows the traditional
methodology of targeted inference by splitting the simulator budget N over R rounds (often
equally), where in each round r, a likelihood estimate qψr⋆ (x|θ) in the form of a conditional
EBM is trained using all the currently available simulated data D. This allows to construct a
new posterior estimate qψr⋆ (θ|x)=e−Eψr⋆ (x,θ) p(θ)/Z(ψr⋆ , θ) which is used to sample parameters
       N/R
{θ(i) }i=1 that are then provided to the simulator for generating new data xi ∼ G(θ(i) ). The
new data are added to the set D and are expected to be more similar to the observation of
interest xo . This procedure allows to focus the simulator budget on regions relevant to the
single observed data of interest xo , and, as such, is expected to be more efficient in terms of
the simulator use than amortized methods (Lueckmann et al., 2021). Next, we discuss the
learning procedure for the likelihood model and the posterior sampling.
Learning the likelihood. At each round r, the effective proposal π of the training data
available can be understood (provided the number of data points drawn at reach rounds is
randomized) as a mixture probability: π := 1r (π (0) (θ)+qψ1⋆ (θ|xo )+ . . . +qψr−1
                                                                                ⋆   (θ|xo )) which is
used to update the likelihood model. In this case, the analytical form of π is unavailable as it
requires computing the normalizing constants of the posterior estimates at each round, thus
making the tilting approach introduced for AUNLE impractical in the sequential setting.
Since currently available likelihood objectives (Kelly & Grathwohl, 2021; Du & Mordatch,
2019) for EBMs take as input unconditional (or joint) EBMs, a likelihood learning approach
building on such objectives would require modeling and learning the entire joint distribution
π(θ)p(x|θ) including the proposal π(θ). This latter point is problematic since π is not needed
for inference, and can be highly complex (as it is set to be the current posterior estimate),
increasing the difficulty of training. Instead, SUNLE learns a likelihood model maximizing
the average conditional log-likelihood,
                                                                               intractable
          N                                   N
       1 X                                 1 X
                                                                     z            }|         {
L(ψ) =       log qψ (xi |θi ), ∇ψ L(ψ) = −       (∇ψ Eψ (xi , θi ) + Eqψ (·|θi ) ∇ψ Eψ (x, θi )) (5)
       N i=1                               N i=1
where (xi , θi )N
                i=1 are the current samples. Unlike standard EBM objectives, this loss directly
targets the likelihood qψ (x|θ), thus bypassing the need for modelling the proposal π. We
propose in Algorithm 4 a method that optimizes this objective (previously used for normalizing
flows in Papamakarios et al., 2019) when the density estimator is a conditional EBM. The
intractable term of Equation (5) is an average over the EBM probabilities conditioned on all
parameters from the training set, and thus differs from the intractable term of (1), composed
of a single integral. Algorithm 4 approximates this term during training by keeping track of


                                                 6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


one particle approximation qbi = δx̃i per conditional density qψ (·|θi ) comprised of a single
particle. The algorithm proceeds by updating only a batch of size B of such particles using
an MCMC update with target probability chain qψk (·|θi ), where ψk is the EBM iterate
at iteration k of round r. Learning the likelihood using Algorithm 4 allows to use all the
existing simulated data during training without re-learning the proposal, maximizing sample
efficiency while minimizing learning complexity. The multi-round procedure of SUNLE is
summarized in Algorithm 3.
Posterior sampling. Unlike AUNLE, SUNLE’s likelihood estimate qψ does not inherit
the (Z, θ)-uniformization property guaranteed by Proposition 1. As a consequence, its
posterior qψR⋆ (θ|x) is doubly intractable as it involves the intractable normalizing constant
Z(ψr⋆ , θ). Nevertheless, we propose to sample from qψR⋆ (θ|x) using Doubly-Intractable MCMC
techniques. We consider a custom robust doubly intractable implementation that allows
for accurate inference even on challenging posteriors with no parameter tuning other than
compute-related parameters like the number of warmup steps.

Algorithm 3 Sequential-UNLE                          Algorithm 4 maximize_cebm_log_l(D, ψ0 )
Input: prior p(θ), simulator G, budget N , no.Input: Training data D := {θ(i) , x(i) }N , Ini-
                                                                                                 i=1
  rounds R                                             tial EBM parameters ψ0
Output: Posterior estimate qψ (θ|x)                  Output: Cond. Density estimator qψ (x|θ)
Initialize π (0) = p, ψ0 , qψ0 ,π ∝ e−Eψ0 (x,θ) π(θ) Initialize qψ ∝ e−Eψ0 (θ,x) , {q̂i = δxi }N
                                        N/R                          0                           i=1
Get D = {θ(i) ∼ π(θ), x(i) ∼ G(θ, ·)}i=1             for k = 0, . . . , K − 1 do
for r = 1, . . . , R do                               for i = 0, . . . , N − 1 do
 Get ψr⋆ := maximize_cebm_log_l(D, ψr−1      ⋆
                                                 )      qbi := make_particle_approx(qψk (·, θi ), qbi )
 Set πr+1 (θ|x) := e−Eψr⋆ (x,θ) p(θ)/Z(ψr⋆ ; θ)       end for P
          N/R
 Get {θi }i=1 ∼πψr⋆ via Doubly-Intr. MCMC              b −1
                                                       G=     N      ∇ψEψk (xi , θi ) +Eqbi ∇ψ Eψk (xi , θi )
                                        N/R
 Get D = D ∪ {θ , x ∼ G(θ , ·)}i=1
                     (i) (i)       (i)
                                                       ψk+1= ADAM(ψk , G)   b
end for                                              end for
Infer using Doubly-Intr. MCMC on qψR⋆ (θ|x) Return qψK

4       Experiments
In this section, we study the performance and properties of AUNLE and SUNLE in three
different settings: a toy model that highlights the failure modes of other synthetic likelihood
methods, a series of benchmark datasets for SBI, and a real life neuroscience model.
Experimental details AUNLE and SUNLE are implemented using jax (Frostig et al.,
2018). We approximate expectations of AUNLE’s joint EBM using 1000 independent MCMC
chains with a Langevin kernel parameterised by a step size σ, that automatically update
their step size to maintain an acceptance rate of 0.5 during a per-iteration warmup period,
before freezing the chain and computing a final particle approximation. Additionally, we
introduce a new method which replaces the MCMC chains by a single Sequential Monte Carlo
sampler (Chopin et al., 2020; Del Moral et al., 2006), which yields a similar performance as
the Langevin-MCMC approach discussed above, but is more robust for lower computational
budgets (see Appendix A.2). The particle approximations are persisted across iterations
(Tieleman, 2008; Du & Mordatch, 2019) to reduce the risk of learning a “short run” EBM
(Nijkamp et al., 2019; Xie et al., 2021) that would not approximate the true likelihood
correctly (see Appendix B.2 for a detailed discussion). All experiments are averaged across 5
random seeds (and additionally 10 different observations xo for benchmark problems). We
provide all code1 needed to reproduce the experiments of the paper. Training and inference
are computed using a single RTX5000 GPU. For benchmark models, a single round of EBM
training takes around 2 minutes on a GPU (see Appendix B.4).

4.1      A toy model with a multi-modal likelihood
First, we illustrate the issues that SNLE and SMNLE can face when applied to model certain
distributions using a simulator with a bi-modal likelihood. Such a likelihood is known to
be hard to model by normalizing flows, which, when fitted on multi-modal data, will assign
    1
        https://github.com/anon-autors-a-sunle-iclr/unle


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   Two Moons                             SLCP                         Lotka Volterra Gaussian Linear Uniform
      A-UNLE          1.0                               1.0                               1.0                               1.0
      (Ours)



               C2ST
      SMNLE           0.8                               0.8                               0.8                               0.8
      NLE             0.6                               0.6                               0.6                               0.6

                      1.0                               1.0                               1.0                               1.0
      S-UNLE
      (Ours)   C2ST
                      0.8                               0.8                               0.8                               0.8
      SNLE
                      0.6                               0.6                               0.6                               0.6
                            10³         10         10         10³         10         10         10³         10         10         10³         10         10
                                  Num. Simulations                  Num. Simulations                  Num. Simulations                  Num. Simulations

Figure 2: Performance of AUNLE (resp. SUNLE) compared with NLE and SMNLE (resp.
SNLE), using the Classifier Accuracy Metric (Lueckmann et al., 2021) (lower is better).
AUNLE and SUNLE exhibit robust performance across a wide array of problems. Additional
details on the experimental setup can be found in Appendix B.5.

high-density values to low-density regions of the data in order to “connect” between the
modes of the true likelihood (Cornish et al., 2020). Moreover, multi-modal distributions are
also poorly handled by score-matching, since score-matching minimizes the Fisher Divergence
between the model and the data distribution, a divergence which does not account for mode
proportions (Wenliang & Kanagawa, 2020). Figure 1 shows the likelihood model learned by
NLE and SMNLE on this simulator, which exhibit the pathologies mentioned above: the
score-matched likelihood only recovers a single mode of the likelihood, while the flow-based
likelihood has a distorted shape. In contrast, AUNLE estimates both the likelihood and the
posterior accurately. This suggests that AUNLE has an advantage when working with more
complex, possibly multi-modal, distributions, as we confirm later in Section 4.3.

4.2   Results on SBI Benchmark Datasets
We next study the performance of AUNLE and SUNLE on 4 SBI benchmark datasets with
well-defined likelihood and varying dimensionality and structure (Lueckmann et al., 2021):
SLCP: A toy SBI model introduced by (Papamakarios et al., 2019) with a unimodal gaussian
likelihood p(x|θ). The dependence of p(x|θ) on θ is nonlinear, yielding a complex posterior.
The Lotka-Volterra Model (Lotka, 1920): An ecological model describing the evolution
of the populations of two interacting species, usually referred to as preys and predators.
Two Moons: A famous 2-d toy model with posteriors comprised of two moon-shaped
regions, and yet not solved completely by SBI methods.
Gaussian Linear Uniform: A simple gaussian generative model, with a 10-dimensional
parameter space.
These models encompass a variety of posterior structures (see Appendix B.1 for posterior
pairplots): the two-moons and SLCP posteriors are multimodal, include cutoffs, and exhibit
sharp and narrow regions of high density, while posteriors of the Lotka-Volterra model
place mass on a very small region of the prior support. We compare the performance of
AUNLE and SUNLE with NLE and its sequential analogue SNLE, respectively: NLE and
SNLE represent the gold standard of current synthetic likelihood methods, and perform
particularly well on benchmark problems (Lueckmann et al., 2021). We use the same set
of hyperparameters for all models, and use a 4-layer MLP with 50 hidden units and swish
activations for the energy function. Results are shown in Figure 2.
While some fluctuations exist depending on the task considered, these results show that
the performance of AUNLE (and SUNLE when targeted inference is necessary) is on par
with that of (S)NLE, thus demonstrating that a generic method involving Energy-Based
models can be trained robustly, without extensive hyperparameter tuning. Interestingly,
the model where UNLE has the greatest advantage over NLE is Two Moons, which is
the benchmark that exhibits a likelihood with the most complex geometry; in comparison,


                                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the three remaining benchmarks have simple normal (or log-normal) likelihood, which are
unimodal distributions for which normalizing flows are particularly well suited. This point
underlines the benefits of using EBMs to fit challenging densities. Finally, we remark that
SMNLE, which addresses only amortized inference Pacchiardi & Dutta (2022) struggled in
practice for the toy problems investigated here.

4.3 Using SUNLE in a Real World neuroscience model
We investigate further the performance of SUNLE by running its inference procedure on a
simulator model of a pyloric network located in stomatogastric ganglion (STG) of the crab
Cancer borealis given an observed an neuronal recording (Haddad & Marder). This model
simulates 3 neurons, whose behaviors are governed by synapses and membrane conductances
that act as simulator parameters θ of dimension 31. The simulated observations are composed
of 15 summary statistics of the voltage traces produces by neurons of this network (Prinz
et al., 2003; 2004). Amortized SBI methods require tens of millions of samples, while currently,
the most sample-efficient targeted inference method for this problem is SNVI (a variant of
SNLE that replaces the MCMC-powered posterior sampling by a variational inference step
Glöckler et al. 2021) which uses 30 rounds simulating each 10000 samples.

       Posterior                                                                                        SNVI                  S-UNLE (ours)
          Mean mean/map
                     MAP             Empirical observation                                      100%


                                                             Energy. Distance % Valid Samples
                                                                                                 75%
 AB                            AB                                                                50%
 PD                            PD                                                                25%
                                                                                                  0%
 LP                             LP                                                              1.5
                                                                                                       50   100   150   200    250   300   350


                                                                                                1.0
 PY                             PY                                                              0.5
                                                                                                0.0
            Time [s]                       Time [s]                                                    50   100   150   200
                                                                                                        Simulator Budget (x10³)
                                                                                                                               250   300   350



Figure 3: Inference with SUNLE on a model of the pyloric network. Left: simulations
obtained by using the final posterior mean and maximum a posteriori (MAP) as a parameter.
Center: the empirical observation xo : arrows indicate the summary statistics. Top-right:
fraction of simulated observations with well-defined summary statistics (higher is better) at
each round for SNVI and SUNLE, with dashed lines indicating the maximum fraction for
each method. Bottom-right: performance of the posterior using the Energy Distance.
We perform targeted inference on this model using SUNLE with a MLP of 9 layers and 300
hidden units per layers for the energy Eψ , and perform doubly intractable MCMC to draw
new proposal parameters across rounds. All inference and training steps are initialized using
previously the available MCMC chains and EBM parameters. We report in Figure 3 the
evolution of the rate of simulated obvservations with valid summary statistics, - a metric
indicative of posterior quality - as well as the Energy-Scoring Rule (Gneiting & Raftery,
2007) of SUNLE and SNVI’s posteriors across rounds. The synthetic observation simulated
using SUNLE’s posterior mean closely matches the empirical observation (Figure 3, Left vs
Center). As shown in Figure 3, SUNLE matches the performance of SNVI in only 5 rounds,
reducing by 6 the simulation budget of SNVI to achieve a comparable inference quality.
After 10 rounds, SUNLE’s poterior significantly exceeds the performance of SNVI in terms
of number of valid samples obtained by taking the final posterior samples as parameters.
The total procedure takes only 3 hours (half of which is spent simulating samples), 10 times
less than SNVI.

Conclusion The expanding range of applications of Simulation-Based Inference poses new
challenges to the way SBI algorithms model data. In this work, we presented SBI methods
that use an expressive Energy-Based Model as their inference engine, fitted using Maximum
Likelihood. We demonstrated promising performance on synthetic benchmarks and on a
real-world neuroscience model. In future work, we hope to see applications of this method to
other fields where EBMs have been proven successful, such as physics (Noé et al., 2019) or
protein modelling (Ingraham et al., 2018).


                                                9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


References
Pierre Alquier, Nial Friel, Richard Everitt, and Aidan Boland. Noisy monte carlo: Conver-
  gence of markov chains with approximate transition kernels. Statistics and Computing,
  2016.
Justin Alsing, Benjamin Wandelt, and Stephen Feeney. Massive optimal data compression
  and density estimation for scalable, likelihood-free inference in cosmology. Monthly Notices
  of the Royal Astronomical Society, 2018.
Christophe Andrieu, Nando De Freitas, Arnaud Doucet, and Michael I Jordan. An introduc-
  tion to MCMC for machine learning. Machine learning, 2003.
Mark A Beaumont, Wenyang Zhang, and David J Balding. Approximate Bayesian computa-
 tion in population genetics. Genetics, 2002.
Peter J Bickel and Kjell A Doksum. Mathematical Statistics: Basic Ideas and Selected Topics,
  volumes I-II package. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2015.
Nicolas Chopin, Omiros Papaspiliopoulos, et al. An introduction to sequential Monte Carlo.
  Springer, 2020.
Rob Cornish, Anthony L. Caterini, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Relaxing
 bijectivity constraints with continuously indexed normalising flows. In International
 Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Kyle Cranmer, Johann Brehmer, and Gilles Louppe. The frontier of simulation-based
 inference. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(48):30055–30062, 2020.
Michael Deistler, Jakob H. Macke, and Pedro J. Gonçalves. Disparate energy consumption
 despite similar network activity. bioRxiv, 2021.
Pierre Del Moral, Arnaud Doucet, and Ajay Jasra. Sequential Monte Carlo samplers. Journal
  of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B, 2006.
Yilun Du and Igor Mordatch. Implicit generation and modeling with energy based models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
T Eberl. Nuclear instruments and methods in physics research, section a: Accelerators,
  spectrometers, detectors and associated. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., A, 2003.
Roy Frostig, Matthew James Johnson, and Chris Leary. Compiling machine learning programs
  via high-level tracing. Systems for Machine Learning, 2018.
Zoubin Ghahramani. Probabilistic machine learning and artificial intelligence. Nature, 2015.
Manuel Glöckler, Michael Deistler, and Jakob H Macke. Variational methods for simulation-
 based inference. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Tilmann Gneiting and Adrian E Raftery. Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and
  estimation. Journal of the American statistical Association, 2007.
Will Grathwohl, Kuan-Chieh Wang, Jorn-Henrik Jacobsen, David Duvenaud, Mohammad
 Norouzi, and Kevin Swersky. Your classifier is secretly an energy based model and you
 should treat it like one. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03263, 2020.
David Greenberg, Marcel Nonnenmacher, and Jakob Macke. Automatic posterior transfor-
 mation for likelihood-free inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
 2019.
Sara Ann Haddad and Eve Marder. Recordings from the c. borealis stomatogastric nervous
  system at different temperatures in the decentralized condition, july 2021. URL https://doi.
  org/10.5281/zenodo.


                                             10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Joeri Hermans, Volodimir Begy, and Gilles Louppe. Likelihood-free MCMC with amortized
  approximate ratio estimators. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Aapo Hyvärinen and Peter Dayan. Estimation of non-normalized statistical models by score
  matching. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2005.
John Ingraham, Adam Riesselman, Chris Sander, and Debora Marks. Learning protein
  structure with a differentiable simulator. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
  sentations, 2018.
Jacob Kelly and Will Sussman Grathwohl. No conditional models for me: Training joint
  ebms on mixed continuous and discrete data. In Energy Based Models Workshop-ICLR
  2021, 2021.
Ilyes Khemakhem, Ricardo Monti, Diederik Kingma, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Ice-beem:
   Identifiable conditional energy-based deep models based on nonlinear ica. Advances in
   Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Zhifeng Kong and Kamalika Chaudhuri. The expressive power of a class of normalizing
  flow models. In Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, 26–28 Aug 2020.
Yann LeCun, Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, M Ranzato, and F Huang. A tutorial on
  energy-based learning. Predicting structured data, 2006.
Alfred J Lotka. Analytical note on certain rhythmic relations in organic systems. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 1920.
J.-M. Lueckmann, J. Boelts, D. S. Greenberg, P. J. Gonçalves, and J. H. Macke. Benchmarking
   simulation-based inference. In Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Artificial
   Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2021.
Jean-Michel Marin, Pierre Pudlo, Christian P Robert, and Robin J Ryder. Approximate
  Bayesian computational methods. Statistics and Computing, 2012.
Henry Markram, Eilif Muller, Srikanth Ramaswamy, Michael W Reimann, Marwan Abdellah,
  Carlos Aguado Sanchez, Anastasia Ailamaki, Lidia Alonso-Nanclares, Nicolas Antille,
  Selim Arsever, et al. Reconstruction and simulation of neocortical microcircuitry. Cell,
  2015.
Jesper Møller, Anthony N Pettitt, Robert Reeves, and Kasper K Berthelsen. An efficient
  markov chain monte carlo method for distributions with intractable normalising constants.
  Biometrika, 2006.
Iain Murray, Zoubin Ghahramani, and David J. C. MacKay. Mcmc for doubly-intractable
  distributions. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
  Intelligence, 2006.
Erik Nijkamp, Mitch Hill, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu. Learning non-convergent non-
  persistent short-run mcmc toward energy-based model. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2019.
Frank Noé, Simon Olsson, Jonas Köhler, and Hao Wu. Boltzmann generators: Sampling
  equilibrium states of many-body systems with deep learning. Science, 2019.
Lorenzo Pacchiardi and Ritabrata Dutta. Score matched neural exponential families for
  likelihood-free inference. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2022.
George Papamakarios, David Sterratt, and Iain Murray. Sequential neural likelihood: Fast
 likelihood-free inference with autoregressive flows. In The 22nd International Conference
 on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, 2019.
Martin Pospischil, Maria Toledo-Rodriguez, Cyril Monier, Zuzanna Piwkowska, Thierry
 Bal, Yves Frégnac, Henry Markram, and Alain Destexhe. Minimal Hodgkin–Huxley type
 models for different classes of cortical and thalamic neurons. Biological Cybernetics, 2008.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Astrid A Prinz, Cyrus P Billimoria, and Eve Marder. Alternative to hand-tuning conductance-
  based models: construction and analysis of databases of model neurons. Journal of
  neurophysiology, 2003.
Astrid A Prinz, Dirk Bucher, and Eve Marder. Similar network activity from disparate
  circuit parameters. Nature neuroscience, 2004.
Maxim Raginsky, Alexander Rakhlin, and Matus Telgarsky. Non-convex learning via
 stochastic gradient langevin dynamics: a nonasymptotic analysis. In Conference on
 Learning Theory, 2017.
Chad M Schafer and Peter E Freeman. Likelihood-free inference in cosmology: Potential for
  the estimation of luminosity functions. In Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy V.
  Springer, 2012.
Torbjörn Sjöstrand, Stephen Mrenna, and Peter Skands. A brief introduction to pythia 8.1.
 Computer Physics Communications, 2008.
Yang Song and Diederik P Kingma. How to train your energy-based models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.03288, 2021.
Yang Song, Sahaj Garg, Jiaxin Shi, and Stefano Ermon. Sliced score matching: A scalable
  approach to density and score estimation. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Tijmen Tieleman. Training restricted boltzmann machines using approximations to the
  likelihood gradient. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning,
  2008.
Martin J Wainwright and Michael Irwin Jordan. Graphical models, exponential families, and
 variational inference. Now Publishers Inc, 2008.
Li K Wenliang and Heishiro Kanagawa. Blindness of score-based methods to isolated
  components and mixing proportions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.10087, 2020.
Simon N Wood. Statistical inference for noisy nonlinear ecological dynamic systems. Nature,
  2010.
Jianwen Xie, Yaxuan Zhu, Jun Li, and Ping Li. A tale of two flows: Cooperative learning of
  langevin flow and normalizing flow toward energy-based model. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Mingtian Zhang, Oscar Key, Peter Hayes, David Barber, Brooks Paige, and François-Xavier
 Briol. Towards healing the blindness of score matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07396,
 2022.


                                              12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Supplementary Material for the paper Maximum Likelihood Learning
of Energy-Based Models for Simulation-Based Inference
The supplementary materials includes the following materials:

      • A discussion of the computational rationale motivating the tilting approach of
        AUNLE.
      • We propose a training method for EBM which uses the family of Sequential Monte
        Carlo samplers to efficiently approximate expectations under the EBM during
        approximate likelihood maximization. We show that using these new methods can
        lead to increased stability and performance for a fixed budget.
      • An experiment in Appendix B.3 that suggest that the uniformization of AUNLE’s
        posterior holds in learned AUNLE models.
      • A discussion in Appendix B.2 about the (absence of) manifestation of the short-run
        effect [Nijkamp et al., 2019] in UNLE.
      • A detailed computational analysis in Appendix B.4 of AUNLE, which proves highly
        competitive over alternatives.
      • Figures in Appendix B.1 of UNLE’s posterior sapmles for benchmark and the pyloric
        network’s problems.
      • Finally, we provide additional details in Appendix B.6 on the results of SUNLE on
        the pyloric network: we provide an estimation of the pairwise marginals of the final
        posterior, which contains patterns also present in the pairwise marginals obtained
        by Glöckler et al. [2021].

A     Methological Details
A.1   Energy-Based Models as Doubly-Intractable Joint Energy-Based
      Models

AUNLE learns a likelihood model qψ (x|θ) by minimizing the likelihood of a tillted joint EBM
p(θ)e−Eψ (x,θ)
    Zπ (ψ)     . While the gain in tractability arising in AUNLE’s posterior suffices to motivate
the use of this model, another computational argument holds. Consider the non-tilted joint
model:
                                           qψ (x|θ)
                                      π(θ)          .
                                           Z(θ, ψ)
Expectations under this model can be computed by running a MCMC chain implementing a
Metropolis-Within-Gibbs sampling method as in Kelly & Grathwohl [2021], which uses:

      • any proposal distribution for qπ,ψ (x|θ) ∝ qψ (x|θ), such a MALA proposal
                                                                                        −Eψ (x,θ)
      • an approximate doubly-intractable MCMC kernel step for qπ,ψ (θ|x) ∝ π(θ) e Zπ (θ)
        which is doubly intractable.

However, running the approximate doubly intractable MCMC kernel step requires sampling
from qψ (x|θ), incurring an additional nested loop during training. Thus, naive MCMC-based
Maximum-Likelihood optimization of untilted joint EBM is prohibitive from a computational
point of view.

A.2   Training EBMs using Sequential Monte Carlo

The main technique to compute particle approximations of the EBM iterations (returned
by the generic make_particle_approx) when training an EBM using Algorithm 2 is to run
N MCMC chains in parallel targeting the EBM Song & Kingma [2021];      P aggregating the
final samples yi of each chain i yields a particle approximation q = N1 i δyi of the EBM
in question. In this appendix section, we describe an alternative make_ebm_approx which


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


efficiently constructs EBM particle approximations across iterations of Algorithm 2 through
a Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) algorithm [Chopin et al., 2020; Del Moral et al., 2006]. In
addition to its efficienty, this new routine does not suffer from the bias of incurred by the
use of finitely many steps in MCMC-based methods. We apply this routine within the EBM
training step of AUNLE’s, and show that the learned posteriors can be more accurate than
MCMC methods for a fixed compute power allocated to training.

A.2.1    Background: Sequential Monte Carlo Samplers
Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) Samplers [Chopin et al., 2020; Del Moral et al., 2006] are
a family of efficient Importance Sampling (IS)-based algorithms, that address the same
problem as the one of MCMC, namely computing a normalized particle approximation of a
target density q known up to a normalizing constant Z. The particle approximation qbSM C
computed by SMC samplers (consisting of N particles y i , like in MCMC methods, but
weighted non-uniformly by some weights wi ) is produced by defining a set of L intermediate
densities (νl )L
               l=0 bridging between the target   P density   νl =q and some initial density ν0 ,
for which a particle approximation ν0N :           i =  1N
                                                           =  w0i δy0i are readily available. The
intermediate densities are often chosen to be a geometric interpolation between ν0 and
                       l       l
νL , i.e. νl ∝ (ν0 )1− L (νl ) L , so that νl are also known up to some P normalizing       constant.
SMC samplers sequentially constructs an approximation νlN :=               wli δyli to the respective
density νl at time l, using previously computed approximations of νl−1 at time l − 1. At
each time step, the approximations are obtained by applying three successive operations:
Importance Sampling, Resampling and MCMC sampling. We provide a vanilla SMC sampler
implementation in Algorithm 5, and refer to this algorithm as make_smc_particle_approx

Algorithm 5 SMC(q, ν0 , ν0N )
 1: Hyper-parameters: Number of particles N , number of steps L, re-sampling threshold
    A ∈ [ N1 , 1).
 2: Input: Target density q, initial density ν0 , particle approximations ν0N and ν0
 3: Output: Particle approximations to q.
                                      L
 4: Construct geometric path (νl )l=1 from ν0 and q.
 5: for l = 1, . . . , L do
 6:   Compute IS weights wli and Wli
 7:   Draw N samples (Yeli )N  i=1 from (Yl−1 )i=1 according to weights (Wl )i=1 , then set Wl = N .
                                            i  N                           i N                i  1

 8:   Sample Yli ∼ Kl (Yeli , ·) using Markov kernel Kl .
 9: end for
                                               i N
10: Return approximation qSM       C := YL , WL i=1 .
                                N         i



Importantly, under mild assumptions, the particle approximation constructed by SMC
provides consistent estimates of expectations of any function f under the target q:

                                   N
                                                   P
                                   X
                                         wi f (y i ) −
                                                     → Ey∼q [f (y)].
                                   i=1

We briefly compare the role played by the number of steps and particles in both MCMC and
SMC algorithms:
Number of particles SMC samplers differ from MCMC samplers in their origin of their
bias: while the bias of MCMC methods comes from running the chain for a finite number of
steps only, the bias of SMC methods comes from the use of finitely many particles.
Number of steps While it is usually beneficial to use a high number of iterations within
MCMC samplers to decrease algorithm bias and ensure that the stationnary distribution is
reached, the number of steps (or intermediate distributions) in SMC is beneficial to ensure
a smooth transition from the proposal to the target distribution: however, the variance
of SMC samplers as a function of the number of steps is not guaranteed to be decreasing


                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


even if variance bounds that are uniform in the number of steps can be derived by making
assumptions on Kl Chopin et al. [2020]. When applying SMC within AUNLE’s training loop,
we find that using more SMC samplers steps usually increase the quality of the final posterior.
In the next paragraph, we describe how to use SMC routine efficiently to approximate EBM
expectations within Algorithm 2.

A.2.2    Efficient use of SMC during AUNLE training using OG-SMC

A naive approach which uses the SMC routine of Algorithm 5 within the EBM training loop
of Algorithm 2 would consist in calling the SMC at every training iteration using a fixed,
predefined proposal density ν0 and associated particle approximation and ν̂0 , such as one
from a standard gaussian distribution. However, as training goes, the EBM is likely to differ
significantly from the proposal density q0 , requiring the use of many SMC inner steps to
obtain a good particle approximation.
A more efficient approach, which we propose, is to use the readily available particle unnor-
malized EBM density qψk−1 and associated particle approximation q̂ k computed by SMC at
the iteration k-1 as the input to the call to SMC targeting the EBM qψk at iteration k.
Algorithm 6 implements this approach.

Algorithm 6 SMC-powered ML training of EBMs

Input: Training Data {x(i) }N      i=1 , Initial EBM parameters ψ0
Output: Density estimator qψ (x)
Initialize qψ0 (x) ∝ e−Eψ0 (x) , q−1 = ν0 , q̂−1 = ν̂0
for i = 0, . . . , max_iter − 1 do
   # qb := make_particle_approx(qψk , qb)
   qbk := SMC(qψk , qk−1 , q̂k−1 )
   qk := qψk
   Gb = − γ P ∇ψ Eψ (xi ) +Eqb∇ψ E(x)
           N             k

   ψk+1 = ADAM(ψk , G)   b
end for
Return qψK



In practice, we find that using 20 SMC intermediate densities (with 3 steps of Kt ) in each
call to SMC yields a similar performance as a 250-MCMC steps EBM training procedure. By
considering a more constrained budget, using only 5 SMC intermediates densities outperforms
a 30-steps MCMC EBM training procedure.


Figure 4: Performance of AUNLE, using either a MCMC-powered particle approximation
routine, or a SMC: using 30 MCMC steps or 5 SMC steps


                                                15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Performance of AUNLE, using either a MCMC-powered particle approximation
routine, or a SMC: using 200 MCMC steps or 20 SMC steps

B     Additional Experimental and Inferential Details

B.1   Posterior pairplots on benchmark Problems

We report the ground truth estimated posterior pairplots on benchmark problems. AUNLE
and SUNLE exhibit satisfying mode coverage, and are able to capture complex posterior
structures.

B.2   Manifestation of the short-run effect in UNLE

It was shown in Nijkamp et al. [2019] that EBMs trained by replacing the intractable
expectation under the EBM with an expectation under a particle approximation obtained
by running parallel runs of Langevin Dynamics initialized from random noised and updated
for a fixed (and small) amount of steps can yield an EBM whose density is not proportional
to the true density, but rather a generative model that can generate faithful images by
running few steps of Langevin Dynamics from random noise on it. Our design choices for
both training and inference purposefully avoid this effect from manifesting itself in UNLE.
During training, we estimate the intractable expectation using persistent MCMC or SMC
chains, e.g by initializing the MCMC (or SMC) algorithm of iteration k with the result of
the MCMC (or SMC) algorithm at iteration k − 1, yielding a different training method than
short-run EBMs. At inference, the posterior model is sampled from Markov Chains with a
significant burn-in period, contrasting with the sampling model of short-run EBMs. Figure 7
compares the density of UNLE’s posterior estimate for the two-moons model (a 2d posterior
which can be easily visualized) with the true posterior. As the Figure 7 shows, AUNLE and
SUNLE’s posterior density match the ground truh very closely, demonstrating that UNLE’s
EBM is not a short-run generative model, but a faithful density estimator.

B.3   Validating the (Z, θ) uniformization of AUNLE’s posterior in practice

Proposition 1 ensures that the normalizing constant Z(θ; ψ) present AUNLE’s posterior
is independent of θ provided that the problem is well-specified, and that ψ = ψ ⋆ , the
optimum of AUNLE’s population objective. In practice, these conditions will hold exactly,
and the uniformization of AUNLE’s posterior thus only holds approximately. To assess
the loss of precision associated with using a standard MCMC posterior in the context of
approximate uniformization, we compare the quality of AUNLE’s posterior samples obtained
using a standard MCMC sampler (which is valid only uniformization holds), and using a
doubly intractable MCMC sampler, which handles non-uniformized posteriors. We that
approximation error of doubly intractable samplers by using a large number of steps (1000)
when sampling from the likelihood using MCMC. As Figure 8 shows, there is no gain is using
a doubly intractable sampler for inference in AUNLE, suggesting that the uniformization
property of AUNLE holds well in practice.


                                            16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             SUNLE                     AUNLE                      Ground Truth


           SLCP


     Two Moons


  Lotka Volterra


Gauss. Lin. Unif.


Figure 6: Posterior marginal (empirical) pairplots for SUNLE’s posterior (first column),
AUNLE’s posterior (second column) and the ground truth posterior for the 4 studied
benchmark problems. Each row outlines a separate benchmark problem.


                                          17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Normalized density of AUNLE and SUNLE for the two moons model. Left:
manually normalized posterior density of both AUNLE and SUNLE using a discretization
of the posterior over a grid. Middle: kernel density estimation of the MCMC samples
obtained from AUNLE and SUNLE’s posterior. Right: Ground Truth posterior. AUNLE
and SUNLE’s posterior densities match closely the true density, showing that these method
indeed learn a density estimator, and a generative model [Nijkamp et al., 2019].


                              Two Moons          SLCP         Lotka Volterra Gaussian Linear Uniform
                        1.0               1.0           1.0                  1.0
     A-UNLE (S. MCMC) 0.8                 0.8           0.8                  0.8
     A-UNLE (D. MCMC)
                        0.6               0.6           0.6                  0.6


Figure 8: Quality of AUNLE’s posterior samples (measured in classifier accuracy) obtained
using a Standard MCMC sampler (S. MCMC) and a doubly intractable sampler (D. MCMC).
The results show no gain in using a doubly intractable sampler, justifying the use of standard
samplers for AUNLE.


                                                18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B.4   Computational Cost Analysis

Training unnormalized models using approximate likelihood is computationally intensive, as
it requires running a sampler during training at each gradient step, yielding a computational
cost of O(T1 T2 N ), where T1 is the number of gradient steps, T2 is the number of MCMC
steps, and N is the number of parallel chains used to estimate the gradient.
To maximize the efficiency of training, we implement all samplers using jax Frostig et al.
[2018], which provides a Just–In–Time compiler and an auto-vectorization primitive that
generates efficient, custom parallel sampling routines. For AUNLE, we the introduced a
warm-started SMC approximation procedure to estimate gradients, yielding a competitive
performance with as little as 5 intermediate probabilities per gradient computation. For
SUNLE, we warm-start the parameters of the EBM across training rounds, and warm-start
the chains of the Doubly Intractable sampler accross inference rounds, which significantly
reduces the need for burning steps and long training. Finally, all experiments are ran on
GPUs. Together, these techniques make AUNLE and SUNLE almost always the fastest
methods for amortized and sequential inference, with total per-problem runtimes of 2 for
AUNLE and 15 minutes for SUNLE on benchmark models (which is significantly faster than
NLE and SNLE on their canonical CPU setup Lueckmann et al. 2021) and less than 3 hours
for SUNLE on the pyloric network model (with half of this time spent simulating samples).
The latter is 10 times faster than SNVI (30 hours) on the same model. A breakdown of
training, simulation and inference time is provided in Figure 9. We note that (S)NLE was
ran on a CPU, which is the advertised computational setting [Lueckmann et al., 2021], since
(S)NLE deep and shallow networks that do not benefit much from GPU acceleration.
We note that the time spent performing inference is negligible for AUNLE, which uses
standard MCMC for inference thanks to the tilting trick employed in its model. On the other
hand, the runtime of SUNLE, which performs inference using a doubly intractable sampler is
dominated by its inference phase. This point demonstrates the computational benefits of the
AUNLE’s tilting trick. Note that SUNLE performs inference in a multi-round procedure, and
requires thus R training and inference phases (where R is the number of rounds), as opposed
to 1 for AUNLE. We alleviate this effect by leveraging efficient warm-starting strategies for
both training and inference, which allow to amortize these steps across rounds.

B.5   Experimental setup for SNLE and SMNLE

SNLE The results reported for SNLE are the one present in the SBI benchmark suite
[Lueckmann et al., 2021], which reports the performance of both NLE and SNLE on all
benchmark problems studied in this paper.

SMNLE The results reported for SMNLE were obtained by running the implementation
referenced by Pacchiardi & Dutta [2022]. SMNLE comes in two variants: the first variant
uses plain Score Matching [Hyvärinen & Dayan, 2005] to estimate its conditional EBM, while
the second variant uses Sliced Score Matching [Song et al., 2020], which yields significant
computational speedups during training. For both methods, we train the model using 500
epochs, and neural networks with 4 hidden layers and 50 hidden and outputs units. To
optimize the inference performance, we carry out inference using our own Doubly Intractable
Sampler, which automatically tunes the all parameters of the doubly intractable samplers
except for the number of burn-in steps, and initializes the chain at local posterior modes.
We carry out a grid search over the learning rates 0.01 and 0.001, and leave other training
parameters to their default. Figures in the main body only report the performance of the
Sliced Score Matching variant, which perform better in practice and runs order of magnitude
faster. Figure 10 reports the performance of both variants for completeness. We used GPU
both to train and inference using SMNLE, yielding similar or higher training compared to
AUNLE for the sliced variant, and much longer training times for the standard variant.
B.6 Neuroscience Model: Details
Pairwise Marginals We provide the full pairwise marginals obtained after computing
a kernel density estimation on the final posterior samples of SUNLE. We retrieve similar


                                             19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                Two Moons                             SLCP                            Lotka Volterra Gaussian Linear Uniform
                                                     2                                 2                               7.5                                    2


                                    Time (minutes)
     Training
     Inference                                       1                                 1
                                                                                                                       5.0
                                                                                                                                                              1
     Simulation                                                                                                        2.5
                                                     0                                 0                               0.0                                    0
                                                         10³         10         10         10³         10         10            10³         10         10         10³         10         10
                                                               Num. Simulations                  Num. Simulations                     Num. Simulations                  Num. Simulations
                                                                Two Moons                             SLCP                         Lotka Volterra Gaussian Linear Uniform
     Training                                                                         10
                                   Time (s)


     Inference                                 10                                                                       10                                  10
                                                                                       5
     Simulation
                                                     0                                 0                                    0                                0
                                                         10³      10        10             10³      10        10                10³      10        10             10³      10        10
                                                            Num. Simulations                  Num. Simulations                     Num. Simulations                  Num. Simulations
                                                           Two Moons                                SLCP                          Lotka Volterra Gaussian Linear Uniform
                                    20
                   Time (minutes)


                                                                                 40
     AUNLE                                                                                                             50                                   20
     NLE                            10                                           20                                                                         10
                                                                                                                        0
                                           10³                 10            10 0 10³             10         10             10³         10         10            10³          10         10
                                                         Num. Simulations                   Num. Simulations                      Num. Simulations                      Num. Simulations
                                                          Two Moons                                SLCP                          Lotka Volterra Gaussian Linear Uniform
                                                                                                                   100
                  Time (minutes)


                                   40                                            75                                                                         75
     SUNLE                                                                       50                                                                         50
     SNLE                          20
                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                                            25
                                         10³               10         10              10³         10         10             10³         10         10             10³         10         10
                                                     Num. Simulations                       Num. Simulations                      Num. Simulations                      Num. Simulations

                 Figure 9: Runtime of UNLE: Analysis and Comparisons.
First row: time (in minutes) spent training, inferring, and simulating for AUNLE. Second
row. Second row: time (in minutes) spent training, inferring, and simulating for SUNLE.
Third row: runtime comparison between ANLE and NLE (in log-scale). Forth row: runtime
comparison between SUNLE and SNLE.


                                                               Two Moons                             SLCP                          Lotka Volterra Gaussian Linear Uniform
     A-UNLE                          1.0                                         1.0                                   1.0                                  1.0
     (Ours)
     SMNLE(SSM)
                       C2ST


                                     0.8                                         0.8                                   0.8                                  0.8
     SMNLE(SM)
     NLE                             0.6                                         0.6                                   0.6                                  0.6
                                                10³             10         10          10³         10         10             10³         10         10            10³         10         10
                                                          Num. Simulations                   Num. Simulations                      Num. Simulations                     Num. Simulations

Figure 10: Comparison of AUNLE, SMNLE with Sliced Score Matching (SSM), SMNLE
with Score Matching (SM) and NLE on a set of benchmark problems.


                                                                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


patterns as the one displayed in the pairwise marginals of SNVI samples. We refer to Glöckler
et al. [2021] for more details on the specificities of this model.


Figure 11: Pairwise marginals of SUNLE’s posterior estimate on the C. borealis simulator
model.
Use of a Calibration Network Due to the presence of invalid observations, we proceed
as in Glöckler et al. [2021] and fit a calibration network that allows to remove the bias
induced by throwing away pairs of (parameters, observations) when the observations do not
have well defined summary statistics. We use a similar architecture as in Glöckler et al.
[2021].


                                             21
