Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ROPOSAL -C ONTRASTIVE P RETRAINING FOR O BJECT
D ETECTION FROM F EWER DATA
 Quentin Bouniot1,2 , Romaric Audigier1 , Angélique Loesch1 , Amaury Habrard2,3
 1
   Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, LIST, F-91120, Palaiseau, France
 2
   Université Jean Monnet Saint-Etienne, CNRS, Institut d Optique Graduate School,
   Laboratoire Hubert Curien UMR 5516, F-42023, Saint-Etienne, France
 3
   Institut Universitaire de France (IUF)
 firstname.lastname@{cea.fr, univ-st-etienne.fr}



                                              A BSTRACT

         The use of pretrained deep neural networks represents an attractive way to achieve
         strong results with few data available. When specialized in dense problems such
         as object detection, learning local rather than global information in images has
         proven to be more efficient. However, for unsupervised pretraining, the popular
         contrastive learning requires a large batch size and, therefore, a lot of resources.
         To address this problem, we are interested in transformer-based object detectors
         that have recently gained traction in the community with good performance and
         with the particularity of generating many diverse object proposals. In this work,
         we present Proposal Selection Contrast (ProSeCo), a novel unsupervised overall
         pretraining approach that leverages this property. ProSeCo uses the large number
         of object proposals generated by the detector for contrastive learning, which al-
         lows the use of a smaller batch size, combined with object-level features to learn
         local information in the images. To improve the effectiveness of the contrastive
         loss, we introduce the object location information in the selection of positive ex-
         amples to take into account multiple overlapping object proposals. When reusing
         pretrained backbone, we advocate for consistency in learning local information
         between the backbone and the detection head. We show that our method outper-
         forms state of the art in unsupervised pretraining for object detection on standard
         and novel benchmarks in learning with fewer data.


1    I NTRODUCTION

In recent years, we have seen a surge in research on unsupervised pretraining. For some popular
tasks such as Image Classification or Object detection, initializing with a pretrained backbone helps
train big architectures more efficiently (Chen et al., 2020b; Caron et al., 2020; He et al., 2020).
While gathering data is not difficult in most cases, its labeling is always time-consuming and costly.
Pretraining leverages huge amounts of unlabeled data and helps achieve better performance with
fewer data and fewer iterations, when finetuning the pretrained models afterwards.
The design of pretraining tasks for dense problems such as Object Detection has to take into account
the fine-grained information in the image. Furthermore, complex object detectors contain different
specific parts that can be either pretrained independently (Xiao et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2021a; Hénaff et al., 2021; Dai et al., 2021b; Bar et al., 2022) or jointly (Wei et al., 2021). The
different pretraining possibilities for Object Detection in the literature are illustrated in Figure 1. A
pretraining of the backbone tailored to dense tasks has been the subject of many recent efforts (Xiao
et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a; Hénaff et al., 2021) (Backbone Pretraining), but few
have been interested in incorporating the detection-specific components of the architectures during
pretraining (Dai et al., 2021b; Bar et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021) (Overall Pretraining). Among them,
SoCo (Wei et al., 2021) focuses on convolutional architectures and pretrains the whole detector,
i.e. the backbone along with the detection heads (approach e. in Figure 1), whereas UP-DETR (Dai
et al., 2021b) and DETReg (Bar et al., 2022) pretrain only the transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)
in transformer-based object detectors (Carion et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021) and keep the backbone


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Backbone Pretraining                      Overall Pretraining
       Global

                                                              Back       Detection
                                                                                     • Discrepancy
       Local                                            c.    bone        Heads        in features
                     Back       Detection                                            • Less costly
                a.   bone        Heads
                                                                                          (Ours)
                                                             Back        Detection   • Consistency
                                                        d.   bone         Heads        in features
                                                                                     • Less costly
                     Back       Detection
                b.   bone        Heads
                                                                                     • Consistency
                                                              Back       Detection
                                                        e.    bone        Heads
                                                                                       in features
                                                                                     • Costly to train


Figure 1: Illustration of the different pretraining possibilities for Object Detection. The pretraining
can be either limited to the backbone (left), or overall including the detection heads (right). The few
previous overall approaches either suffer from a discrepancy in the features between the backbone,
that is trained at the image-level (global), and the detection heads, trained to encode object-level
(local) information (c.), or from the cost of training lots of parameters with a large batch size (e.).


fixed (approach c. in Figure 1). Due to the numerous parameters that must be learned and the huge
number of iterations needed because of random initialization, pretraining the entire detection model
is expensive (Figure 1, e.). On the other hand, pretraining only the detection-specific parts with
a fixed backbone leads to fewer parameters and allows leveraging strong pretrained backbones al-
ready available. However, fully relying on aligning embeddings given by the fixed backbone during
pretraining and those given by the detection head, as done in DETReg or UP-DETR, introduces a
discrepancy in the information contained in the features (Figure 1, c.). Indeed, while the pretrained
backbone has been trained to learn image-level features, the object detector must understand object-
level information in the image. Aligning inconsistent features hinders the pretraining quality.
In this work, we propose Proposal Selection Contrast (ProSeCo), an unsupervised pretraining
method using transformer-based detectors with a fixed pretrained backbone. ProSeCo makes use of
two models. The first one aims to alleviate the discrepancy in the features by maintaining a copy of
the whole detection model. This model is referred to as a teacher in charge of the object proposals
embeddings, and is updated through an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) of another student net-
work making the object predictions and using a similar architecture. This latter network is trained by
a contrastive learning approach leveraging the high number of object proposals that can be obtained
from the detectors. This methodology, in addition to the absence of batch normalization in the archi-
tectures, reduces the need for a large batch size. We further adapt the contrastive loss commonly used
in pretraining to take into account the locations of the object proposals in the image, which is crucial
in object detection. In addition, the localization task is independently learned through region pro-
posals generated by Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013). Our contributions are summarized as:

       • We propose Proposal Selection Contrast (ProSeCo), a contrastive learning method tailored
         for pretraining transformer-based object detectors.
       • We introduce the information of the localization of object proposals for the selection of
         positive examples in the contrastive loss to improve its efficiency for pretraining.
       • We show that our proposed ProSeCo outperforms previous pretraining methods for
         transformer-based object detectors on standard benchmarks as well as novel benchmarks.


2   R ELATED W ORK
Supervised Object Detection with transformer-based architectures Object Detection is an im-
portant and extensively researched problem in computer vision (Girshick et al., 2014; Girshick,


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2015; Ren et al., 2015; Redmon et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2017; Tian et al., 2019). It es-
sentially combines object localization and classification tasks. Recently, a novel detector based on an
encoder-decoder architecture using transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) has been proposed in Carion
et al. (2020). The training complexity of this architecture was subsequently improved in Deformable
DETR (Def. DETR) (Zhu et al., 2021), by changing the attention operations into deformable atten-
tion, resulting in a faster convergence speed. Several other follow-up works (Dai et al., 2021a; Meng
et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021b; Liu et al., 2022a; Yang et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022) have also fo-
cused on increasing the training efficiency of DETR. Transformer-based architectures now represent
a strong alternative to traditional convolutional object detectors, reaching better performance for a
similar training cost. Furthermore, recent work have shown strong results of transformer-based de-
tectors in a data-scarce setting (Bar et al., 2022; Bouniot et al., 2023), compared to convolutional
architectures (Liu et al., 2020; 2022b), which we also observe and discuss in Appendix H.


Self-supervised and unsupervised pretraining backbone architectures Recent advances in
self-supervised pretraining (Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; 2021; Zheng
et al., 2021; Denize et al., 2023) have achieved strong results for obtaining general representations
that transfer well to image classification (He et al., 2020). Early works proposed pretext tasks
(Alexey et al., 2015; Noroozi & Favaro, 2016; Komodakis & Gidaris, 2018), which are now out-
performed by Contrastive Learning (Oord et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2018; He et al., 2020; Chen et al.,
2020a; Misra & Maaten, 2020; Grill et al., 2020; Caron et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2020b; 2021; Denize
et al., 2023). This paradigm relies on instance discrimination using a pair of positive views from the
same input contrasted with all other instances in the batch, called negatives. However, the InfoNCE
objective function (Oord et al., 2018) widely used for contrastive learning and its recent improved
version, SCE (Denize et al., 2023), both require a large amount of negative instances to be effec-
tive (Wang & Isola, 2020). The improvements observed using a general self-supervised pretraining
are less significant for more complex, dense downstream tasks (He et al., 2019; Reed et al., 2022).
To address this issue, recent approaches have started investigating pretraining approaches tailored
for these tasks by imposing local consistency, either at the pixel or region-level: they respectively
propose to match in the representation space the features corresponding to the same location in the
input space (O Pinheiro et al., 2020; Xie et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021a), or apply local consistency
between features from regions in the image (Roh et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021; Xiao et al., 2021).


Unsupervised Pretraining for the overall detection model Few approaches in the literature have
tackled the problem of pretraining the detection-specific parts of the architecture, along with the
backbone (Wei et al., 2021), or independently (Dai et al., 2021b; Bar et al., 2022). SoCo (Wei et al.,
2021) proposes a pretraining strategy for convolutional detectors inspired by BYOL (Grill et al.,
2020). Object locations are generated using Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013), and then object-
level features are extracted and contrasted with each other using a teacher-student strategy. The
small amount of object proposals and object features generated requires using a large batch size for
the contrastive loss to be effective. Pretraining the backbone along with the detection modules this
way makes the method difficult and costly to train due to the high amount of parameters to learn.
For transformer-based architectures, UP-DETR (Dai et al., 2021b) and DETReg (Bar et al., 2022)
use a fixed pretrained backbone to extract features respectively from random patch, or from object
locations given by Selective Search (Uijlings et al., 2013), then pretrain the detector by localizing and
reconstructing the features of the patch extracted from the input images. However, since the features
to reconstruct are obtained by a backbone which was trained to encode image-level information,
there is a discrepancy in the information between the features to match.
Our proposed ProSeCo is designed specifically for transformer-based detectors, and use a fixed
backbone pretrained for local information. In this work, we leverage the high amount of object
proposals generated by transformer-based detectors as instances for contrastive learning. Target
object-level features and localizations are provided by a teacher detection model updated through
EMA, inspired by recent advances in self-supervised and semi-supervised learning (Liu et al., 2020;
Grill et al., 2020; Denize et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2021). The student detection model is pretrained by
computing the contrastive loss between object proposals given by the student and teacher detectors.
The large number of proposals generated by transformer-based detectors alleviates the need for a
large batch size for the contrastive loss. The contrastive loss function used is further improved by
introducing the location of objects for selecting positive proposals.


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Strong view                                      Object                           𝐛𝑖𝑆𝑆
                        𝐱 𝑖′′ = 𝑡 2 𝑡 1 𝐱 𝑖                              Predictions                                   ℒ𝑐𝑜𝑜𝑟𝑑
                                                                                                    Box
      Selective               𝑡2 ∼ 𝒯2                Student            Box
                                                                                                   Matching
                                                                                                                         +
                                                                        MLP                                            ℒ𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑢
       Search                                                                                                መ𝑖
                                                                                                             𝐛
                                                                                Boxes     መ𝑖
                                                                                          𝐛
                                              Back        Transformer
                                              bone         Detector
                                                                                Features 𝐳ො 𝑖
                                                                                                                  መ𝑖
                                                                                                            𝐳ො𝑖 , 𝐛
                                                          EMA           Proj.                      Proposal
                                                                        MLP                                            ℒ𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑆𝐶𝐸
                                                                                                   Matching
                                                                                Features 𝐳𝑖                 𝐳𝑖 , 𝐛𝑖
                                              Back        Transformer
Unlabeled image                               bone         Detector             Boxes     𝐛𝑖
       𝐱𝑖                                                                                         Stop
                                                                        Box                     gradients
                           Weak view                                    MLP
                                                     Teacher               Object
                           𝐱 𝑖′ = t1 𝐱 𝑖
                              𝑡1 ∼ 𝒯 1                                    Proposals

Figure 2: Overview of our proposed ProSeCo for unsupervised pretraining. The method follows
a student-teacher architecture, with the teacher updated through an Exponential Moving Average
(EMA) of the student. For each input image, K random boxes are computed using the Selective
Search algorithm, and two different views are generated through an asymmetric set of weak aug-
mentations T 1 and strong augmentations T 2 . Then, object predictions are obtained from the stu-
dent model for the strongly augmented view, and object proposals from the teacher model with the
weakly augmented view. Finally, the boxes predicted by the student are matched with the boxes
sampled from Selective Search to compute the localization losses Lcoord and Lgiou , and the full pre-
dictions are matched with the object proposals to compute our novel contrastive loss LLocSCE .


3      OVERVIEW OF THE APPROACH

We present in this section our proposed unsupervised pretraining approach, illustrated in Figure 2,
beginning with the data processing pipeline. Then, we detail the contrastive loss used with the
localization-aware positive object proposal selection. The transformer-based detectors are built on
a general architecture that consists of a backbone encoder (e.g. a ResNet-50), followed by several
transformers encoder and decoder layers, and finally two prediction heads for the bounding boxes
coordinates and class logits (Carion et al., 2020; Zhu et al., 2021).

3.1     DATA PROCESSING PIPELINE

Throughout the section, we assume to have sampled a batch of unlabeled images x = {xi }N b
                                                                                       i=1 , with
        th
xi the i image and Nb the batch size.
For each input image xi , we compute two different views with two asymmetric distributions of
augmentations T 1 and T 2 : a weakly augmented view xi ′ = t1 (xi ), with t1 ∼ T 1 , and a strongly
augmented view obtained from the weakly augmented one xi ′′ = t2 (t1 (xi )), with t2 ∼ T 2 .
To guide the model into discovering localization of objects in unlabeled images and prevent collapse,
we use bounding boxes obtained from the Selective Search algorithm (Uijlings et al., 2013), similarly
to previous work (Wei et al., 2021; Bar et al., 2022). Since Selective Search is deterministic and the
generated boxes are not ordered, we compute the boxes for all images offline and, at training time,
randomly sample K boxes bSS   i  = {bSS           4 K
                                       (i,j) ∈ R }j=1 for each image in the batch. Then, the two
views and the corresponding boxes sampled are used as input for our method.

3.2     P RETRAINING METHOD

As shown in Figure 2, our approach is composed of a student-teacher architecture (Grill et al., 2020;
Denize et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2021). With ProSeCo, we extend the student-teacher pretraining for
transformer-based detectors to tackle the discrepancy in information-level when aligning features,
and introduce a dual unsupervised bipartite matching presented below.


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


First, the backbone and the detection heads are respectively initialized from pretrained weights and
randomly for both the student and teacher models. The teacher model is updated through an Expo-
nential Moving Average (EMA) of the student’s weights at every training iteration. For both mod-
els, the classification heads in the detectors are replaced by an MLP, called projector, for obtaining
latent representations of the objects.
From the weakly augmented view xi ′ , the teacher model provides object proposals yi =
{y(i,j) }N                        N
         j=1 = {(z(i,j) , b(i,j) }j=1 , with z(i,j) the latent embedding and b(i,j) the coordinates of the
j th object found. The student model infers predictions ŷi = {ŷ(i,j) }N                            N
                                                                          j=1 = {(ẑ(i,j) , b̂(i,j) }j=1 from
                                                     ′′
the corresponding strongly augmented view xi .
Then, we apply an unsupervised Hungarian algorithm for proposal matching to find from all the
permutations of N elements SN , the optimal bipartite matching σ̂iprop between the predictions ŷi of
the student and the object proposals yi of the teacher:

                                                   N
                                                   X
                             σ̂iprop = arg min           Lprop match (y(i,j) , ŷ(i,σ(j)) ).                       (1)
                                            σ∈SN
                                                   j=1


Therefore, for each image xi , the j th proposal y(i,j) found by the teacher is associated to the
σ̂iprop (j)th prediction of the student ŷ(i,σ̂iprop (j)) . Our matching cost Lprop match for the Hungarian al-
gorithm takes into account both features and bounding box predictions through a linear combination
                                                            ⟨z(i,j) ,ẑ(i,σ(j)) ⟩
of features similarity Lsim (z(i,j) , ẑ(i,σ(j)) ) = ∥z(i,j)    ∥2 ·∥ẑ(i,σ(j)) ∥2 , the ℓ1 loss of the box coordinates
Lcoord = ∥b(i,j) − b̂(i,σ̂i (j)) ∥1 , and the generalized IoU loss Lgiou from Rezatofighi et al. (2019):

                                       h
  Lprop match (y(i,j) , ŷ(i,σ(j)) ) = λsim Lsim z(i,j) , ẑ(i,σ(j))
                                                                                                           i (2)
                                     + λcoord Lcoord b(i,j) , b̂(i,σ(j)) + λgiou Lgiou b(i,j) , b̂(i,σ(j)) .

Similarly, we also use an unsupervised Hungarian algorithm for box matching, to find the optimal
bipartite matching σ̂ibox ∈ SN between the predicted boxes b̂i of the student and the sampled boxes
bSS
 i   from Selective Search, using the matching cost Lbox match :


                                                  N
                                                  X
                             σ̂ibox = arg min           Lbox match (y(i,j) , ŷ(i,σ(j)) ),                         (3)
                                           σ∈SN
                                                  j=1

  Lbox match (bSS                                    SS                                SS
               (i,j) , b̂(i,σ(j)) ) = λcoord Lcoord b(i,j) , b̂(i,σ(j)) + λgiou Lgiou b(i,j) , b̂(i,σ(j)) . (4)


Finally, the global unsupervised loss Lu used for training is a combination of a loss function between
the object latent embeddings of the teacher and student models, and between the object localization
of the student predictions and Selective Search boxes. More formally, it is computed as:
  Lu (x) = λcontrast LLocSCE (y, ŷ, σ̂ prop ) +
               Nb hX  K                                                K                                          i (5)
          1 X                                                        X
                         λcoord Lcoord bSS   (i,j) , b̂     box
                                                       (i,σ̂i (j))  +     λ giou L giou   bSS
                                                                                           (i,j) , b̂     box
                                                                                                     (i,σ̂i (j))   .
        Nb K i=1 j=1                                                  j=1


In the above equations, we define λsim , λcoord , λgiou , λcontrast ∈ R as the coefficients for the different
losses. For the consistency in the latent embeddings of the objects, we introduce the object locations
information in our contrastive loss LLocSCE . This loss is used to contrast the predictions ŷ = {ŷi }N    b
                                                                                                          i=1
                                                   Nb
of the student with object proposals y = {yi }i=1 found by the teacher, matched according to the
proposal matching σ̂ prop = {σ̂iprop }N b
                                      i=1 over the batch. We detail the computations behind this loss
in the next section.


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Strong view


                Weak view

Figure 3: Illustration of the effect of the localized contrastive loss used. Predictions of the student
and teacher models are contrasted with each other to leverage the large number of object proposals
obtained from transformer-based detectors. To introduce the object locations information, overlap-
ping proposals (in green) in each weak view, according to an IoU threshold δ, are also considered
as positive along with the matched proposal. Proposals that neither match nor overlap the matched
proposal, are considered as negative (in red) in the contrastive loss.


3.3   L OCALIZATION - AWARE CONTRASTIVE LOSS

Inspired by advances in self-supervised learning, we propose a contrastive objective function (Oord
et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2020a; He et al., 2020) between object proposals that also maintains relations
(Zheng et al., 2021; Denize et al., 2023) among these proposals. This objective function extends
the latest SCE (Denize et al., 2023) for instance discrimination between object proposals and is
illustrated in Figure 3. We compute the contrastive loss between all the object latent embeddings
from a batch of image. The positive pair of objects in an image xi is given by the proposal matching
σiprop . First, we define the distributions of similarity between objects embeddings :

                                     1i̸=n 1j̸=m exp(z(i,j) · z(n,m) /τt )
                      p′(in,jm) = PNb PN                                           ,                    (6)
                                   k=1   l=1 1i̸=k 1j̸=l exp(z(i,j) · z(k,l) /τt )
                                       exp(z(i,j) · ẑ(n,m) /τ )
                      p′′(in,jm) = PNb PN                               .                               (7)
                                    k=1   l=1 exp(z(i,j) · ẑ(k,l) /τ )

The distribution p′(in,jm) represents the relations between weakly augmented object embeddings
scaled by the temperature τt , and p′′(in,jm) the similarity between the strongly augmented embed-
dings and the weakly augmented ones, scaled by τ . Then, the target similarity distribution for the ob-
jective function is a weighted combination of one-hot label and the teacher’s embeddings relations:

                       w(in,jm) = λSCE · 1i=n 1j=m + (1 − λSCE ) · p′(in,jm) .                          (8)
To introduce the localization information in our objective, we compute the pairwise Intersection
over Union (IoU) between object proposals of the same image and consider overlapping objects as
other positives when computing the target similarity distribution:
                    Loc
                   w(in,jm) = λSCE · 1i=n 1IoUi (j,m)≥δ + (1 − λSCE ) · p′(in,jm) ,          (9)

where IoUi (j, m) corresponds to the IoU between teacher proposals y(i,j) and y(i,m) found in the
same image xi , and δ is the IoU threshold to consider the proposal as a positive example. Finally,
we use this tailored target similarity distribution in our Localized SCE (LocSCE) loss:

                                                  N
                                                  b X N
                                                      b X X   N   N
                                            1 X
           LLocSCE (y, ŷ, σ̂ prop ) = −                       wLoc     log(p′′(in,j σ̂nprop (m)) ).   (10)
                                           Nb N i=1 n=1 j=1 m=1 (in,jm)


                                                          6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Note that we do not match the proposals according to σ̂ prop in the target similarity, as we compare
proposals obtained by the teacher model. We also require the full proposal as input of the loss to
compute the pairwise IoU using the box coordinates. Furthermore, we recover the original formula-
tion of SCE when δ = 1. This formulation leads to an effective batch size of Nb · N .
This localization-aware contrastive loss function aims to pull together the objects embeddings that
overlap subsequently with each others, as they should correspond to the same object in the image.

4     E XPERIMENTS

In this section, we present a comparative study of the results of our proposed method on standard
and novel benchmarks for learning with fewer data, as well as an ablative study on the most relevant
parts. First, we introduce the datasets, evaluation and training settings.

4.1   I MPLEMENTATION DETAILS

Datasets and evaluation We use ImageNet ILSVRC 2012 (IN) (Russakovsky et al., 2015) for pre-
training, MS-COCO (COCO) (Lin et al., 2014) and Pascal VOC 2007 and 2012 (Everingham et al.,
2010) for finetuning. To evaluate the performance in learning with fewer data, following previous
work (Wei et al., 2021; Bar et al., 2022), we consider the Mini-COCO benchmarks, where we ran-
domly sample 1%, 5% or 10% of the training data. Similarly, we also introduce the novel Mini-VOC
benchmark, in which we randomly sample 5% or 10% of the training data. We also use the Few-
Shot Object Detection (FSOD) dataset (Fan et al., 2020) in the novel FSOD-test and FSOD-train
benchmarks. We separate the FSOD test set with 80% of the data randomly sampled for training
and the remaining 20% data for testing, by taking care of having at least 1 image for each class in
both subsets, and do the same for the FSOD train set. In all benchmarks, the image ids selected for
training and testing will be made available for reproducibility. More details in Appendix A.
Pretraining We initialize the backbone with the publicly available pretrained SCRL (Roh et al.,
2021) checkpoint and pretrain ProSeCo for 10 epochs on IN. The hyperparameters are set as follows:
the EMA keep rate parameter to 0.999, the IoU threshold δ = 0.5, a batch size of Nb = 64 images
over 8 A100 GPUs, and the coefficients in the different losses λsim = λcontrast = 2 which is the
same value used for the coefficient governing the class cross-entropy in the supervised loss. The
projector is defined as a 2-layer MLP with a hidden layer of 4096 and a last layer of 256, without
batch normalization. Following SCE (Denize et al., 2023), we set the temperatures τ = 0.1, τt =
0.07 and the coefficient λSCE = 0.5. We sample K = 30 random boxes from the outputs of
Selective Search for each image at every iteration. Other training and architecture hyperparameters
are defined as in Def. DETR (Zhu et al., 2021) with, specifically, the coefficients λcoord = 5 and
λgiou = 2, the number of object proposals (queries) N = 300, and the learning rate is set to lr =
2 · 10−4 . For weak augmentations T 1 , we use a random combination of flip, resize and crop, and for
strong augmentations T 2 , we use a random combination of color jittering, grayscale and Gaussian
blur. In T 1 , we resize images with the same range of scales as the supervised training protocol on
COCO (Large-scale). The exact parameters for the augmentations are detailed in Appendix B, and
a discussion about the pretraining cost can be found in Appendix C.
Finetuning protocols For finetuning the pretrained models, we follow the standard supervised
learning hyperparameters of Def. DETR (Zhu et al., 2021). In all experiments, we train the models
with a batch size of 32 images over 8 A100 GPUs until the validation performance stops increasing,
i.e. for Mini-COCO, up to 2000 epochs for 1%, 500 epochs for 5%, 400 epochs for 10%, for Mini-
VOC, up to 2000 epochs for both 5% and 10%, up to 100 epochs for both FSOD-test and PASCAL
VOC, and up to 50 epochs for FSOD-train. We always decay the learning rates by a factor of 0.1
after about 80% of training. Experiments with more annotated data are discussed in Appendix G. To
compare our method to DETReg (Bar et al., 2022) on our novel benchmarks, we use their publicly
available checkpoints from github.

4.2   F INETUNING AND TRANSFER LEARNING

We evaluate the transfer learning ability of our pretrained model on several datasets. Tables 1a and 1b
present the results obtained compared to previous methods in the literature when learning from fewer


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


labeled data. We can see that our method outperforms state-of-the-art results in unsupervised pre-
training on all benchmarks and datasets, and obtain even more strong results when training data is
scarce. The improvement is even more significant as the overall performance with few training data
is low. When using 5% of the COCO training data (i.e. Mini-COCO 5% in Table 1a), corresponding
to about 5.9k images, ProSeCo achieves 28.8 mAP, which represents an improvement of +5.2 per-
centage point (p.p.) over the supervised pretraining baseline and +2 p.p. over both state-of-the-art
overall pretraining methods. Results with all the evaluation metrics are presented in Appendix E.

Table 1: Performance (mAP in %) of our proposed pretraining approach after finetuning using
different percentage of training data (with the corresponding number of images reported). We show
that our ProSeCo outperforms previous pretraining methods in all benchmarks.


                                                  Pretrain.                 Mini-COCO
Method                            Detector
                                                  Dataset      1% (1.2k)    5% (5.9k)     10% (11.8k)
Supervised                        Def. DETR       IN              13.0        23.6           28.6
SwAV (Caron et al., 2020)         Def. DETR       IN              13.3        24.5           29.5
SCRL (Roh et al., 2021)           Def. DETR       IN              16.4        26.2           30.6
DETReg (Bar et al., 2022)         Def. DETR       COCO            15.8        26.7           30.7
DETReg (Bar et al., 2022)         Def. DETR       IN              15.9        26.1           30.9
Supervised (Wei et al., 2021)     Mask R-CNN      IN               –          19.4           24.7
SoCo∗ (Wei et al., 2021)          Mask R-CNN      IN               –          26.8           31.1
ProSeCo (Ours)                    Def. DETR       IN              18.0        28.8           32.8
                                                 (a)
                                FSOD-test     FSOD-train      PASCAL VOC             Mini-VOC
 Method
                                100% (11k)   100% (42k)        100% (16k)     5% (0.8k)    10% (1.6k)
 Supervised                        39.3          42.6             59.5          33.9          40.8
 DETReg (Bar et al., 2022)         43.2          43.3             63.5          43.1          48.2
 ProSeCo (Ours)                    46.6          47.2             65.1          46.1          51.3
                                                 (b)


4.3   A BLATION S TUDIES

In the following, we provide several ablation studies for our proposed approach. All experiments
and results are compared on the Mini-COCO 5% benchmark with the pretrained SwAV backbone
unless explicitly stated. Additional ablation on the number of queries can be found in Appendix F.
Pretraining dataset and backbone In Table 2a, we show the effect of changing the pretraining
dataset or the fixed backbone used. We can see that using a backbone more adapted to dense tasks
that learned local information (e.g. SCRL) helps the model by having consistent features (+1 p.p.),
compared to a backbone pretrained for global features (e.g. SwAV). Furthermore, even with a less
adapted backbone, our ProSeCo initialized with the SwAV backbone outperforms DETReg (+1.7
p.p.). Pretraining with DETReg improves when using a more adapted backbone, but ProSeCo still
reaches better performance. To compare with IN, we also pretrain ProSeCo on COCO for 120
epochs. We obtain better results when pretraining the model on IN than using COCO thanks to the
large number of different images in IN (about 10 times the number of images of COCO, leading to
+0.4 p.p.), which is consistent with previous findings (Wei et al., 2021).
Localization information in contrastive loss In Table 2b, we show the effect of the localization
information in the contrastive loss SCE. We can see that when introducing multiple positive exam-
ples for each image based on the IoU threshold δ (i.e. ∀δ < 1), we achieve better results than with
the original SCE loss (i.e. δ = 1). Notably, the best results are achieved with δ = 0.5 (+1.7 p.p.).
More experiments with the InfoNCE loss (Oord et al., 2018) can be found in Appendix D.
Hyperparameters Table 3 presents an ablation study on different important hyperparameters of our
approach. We experimented first with the same batch size applied in Bar et al. (2022) (Abl. Batch),


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


but found that using a smaller batch size (Base) leads to improved results (+0.2 p.p.). We evalu-
ated different image scales as a parameter of the weak data augmentations distribution in Abl. Scale.
Mid-scale corresponds to a resizing of the images such that the shortest edge is between 320 and
480 pixels, as used in previous work (Dai et al., 2021b; Bar et al., 2022), and Large-scale to a resize
between 480 and 800 pixels, used for supervised learning on COCO. Exact values for these parame-
ters can be found in Appendix B. We found that increasing the size of the images during pretraining
is important to have more meaningful information in the boxes, and a more precise localization of
the boxes (+0.7 p.p.). Following the best results from Denize et al. (2023), we evaluated the perfor-
mance for τt ∈ {0.05, 0.07}. We found that τt = 0.07 leads to the best performance (+0.3 p.p.). We
considered several EMA keep rate parameter values following previous work (He et al., 2020; Wei
et al., 2021; Denize et al., 2023), and found that 0.999 achieves the best results (+0.1 p.p.).

Table 2: (a) Comparison after finetuning when using different pretrained backbone and/or pretrain-
ing datasets. (b) Comparison of the effect of the localization information using different IoU thresh-
old δ. All performance (mAP in %) are measured on Mini-COCO 5%.


    Pretraining            Dataset    mAP                              Loss                  δ     mAP
    ProSeCo w/ SwAV        COCO        27.4                            SCE                 1.0     26.1
    ProSeCo w/ SwAV        IN          27.8                            LocSCE (Ours)       0.2     27.0
    DETReg w/ SCRL         IN          28.0                            LocSCE (Ours)       0.7     27.1
    ProSeCo w/ SCRL        IN          28.8                            LocSCE (Ours)       0.5     27.8
                     (a)                                                             (b)


Table 3: Ablation studies on different hyperparameters for the proposed method. The performance
(mAP in %) are measured on Mini-COCO 5%. Green and bold columns names indicate a positive
effect on the performance, and red columns a negative effect.


                     Batch size      Images scale         Temperature τt             EMA
 Ablative Variant                                                                                         mAP
                     192     64      Mid      Large       0.05    0.07        0.99   0.996       0.999
 Base                        ✓       ✓                     ✓                           ✓                  26.7
 Abl. Batch           ✓              ✓                     ✓                           ✓                  26.5
 Abl. Scale                  ✓                 ✓           ✓                           ✓                  27.4
 Abl. Temp.                  ✓       ✓                             ✓                   ✓                  27
                             ✓       ✓                     ✓                   ✓                          26.3
 Abl. EMA
                             ✓       ✓                     ✓                                      ✓       26.8
 Best                        ✓                 ✓                   ✓                              ✓       27.8


5    C ONCLUSION
In this work, we aim to use large unlabeled datasets for an unsupervised pretraining of the overall
detection model to improve performance when having access to fewer labeled data. In this end, we
propose Proposal Selection Contrast (ProSeCo), a novel pretraining approach for Object Detection.
Our method leverages the large number of object proposals generated by transformer-based detectors
for contrastive learning, reducing the necessity of a large batch size, and introducing the localization
information of the objects for the selection of positive examples to contrast. We show from various
experiments on standard and novel benchmarks in learning with few training data that ProSeCo
outperforms previous pretraining methods. Throughout this work, we advocate for consistency in
the level of information encoded in the features when pretraining. Indeed, learning object-level
features during pretraining is more important than image-level when applied to a dense downstream
task such as Object Detection. Future work could update the backbone during pretraining to further
improve the consistency between the backbone and the detection heads.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

Throughout this paper, we made sure that the experiments and results are fully reproducible. We
explicitly state the exact values of hyperparameters used in Section 4.1, and describe in details the
datasets and evaluation protocols in Appendix A. All image ids randomly selected when evaluating
with few training data (in Mini-COCO, Mini-VOC, FSOD-test, FSOD-train) will be made available.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work was made possible by the use of the Factory-AI supercomputer, financially supported by
the Ile-de-France Regional Council, and also performed using HPC resources from GENCI-IDRIS
(Grant 2022-AD011013478).

R EFERENCES
Dosovitskiy Alexey, Philipp Fischer, Jost Tobias, Martin Riedmiller Springenberg, and Thomas
  Brox. Discriminative unsupervised feature learning with exemplar convolutional neural networks.
  IEEE Trans. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2015.

Amir Bar, Xin Wang, Vadim Kantorov, Colorado J Reed, Roei Herzig, Gal Chechik, Anna Rohrbach,
 Trevor Darrell, and Amir Globerson. DETReg: Unsupervised pretraining with region priors for
 object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition, 2022.

Quentin Bouniot, Angélique Loesch, Romaric Audigier, and Amaury Habrard. Towards few-
  annotation learning for object detection: Are transformer-based models more efficient? In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV), pp.
  75–84, January 2023.

Tiffany Tianhui Cai, Jonathan Frankle, David J Schwab, and Ari S Morcos. Are all negatives created
  equal in contrastive instance discrimination? arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.06682, 2020.

Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
  Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European conference on
  computer vision. Springer, 2020.

Mathilde Caron, Ishan Misra, Julien Mairal, Priya Goyal, Piotr Bojanowski, and Armand Joulin.
 Unsupervised learning of visual features by contrasting cluster assignments. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In International conference on machine learning.
  PMLR, 2020a.

Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Kevin Swersky, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Big
  self-supervised models are strong semi-supervised learners. Advances in neural information pro-
  cessing systems, 2020b.

Xinlei Chen, Saining Xie, and Kaiming He. An empirical study of training self-supervised vision
  transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
  2021.

Xiyang Dai, Yinpeng Chen, Jianwei Yang, Pengchuan Zhang, Lu Yuan, and Lei Zhang. Dynamic
  DETR: End-to-end object detection with dynamic attention. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021a.

Zhigang Dai, Bolun Cai, Yugeng Lin, and Junying Chen. Up-DETR: Unsupervised pre-training
  for object detection with transformers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
  vision and pattern recognition, 2021b.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Julien Denize, Jaonary Rabarisoa, Astrid Orcesi, Romain Hérault, and Stéphane Canu. Similar-
  ity contrastive estimation for self-supervised soft contrastive learning. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 2706–2716, 2023.
Mark Everingham, Luc Van Gool, Christopher KI Williams, John Winn, and Andrew Zisserman.
 The pascal visual object classes (voc) challenge. International journal of computer vision, 2010.
Qi Fan, Wei Zhuo, Chi-Keung Tang, and Yu-Wing Tai. Few-shot object detection with attention-rpn
  and multi-relation detector. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition, pp. 4013–4022, 2020.
Ross Girshick. Fast r-cnn. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
  2015.
Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik. Rich feature hierarchies for accu-
  rate object detection and semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, 2014.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 2020.
Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Piotr Dollar. Rethinking imagenet pre-training. In Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020.
Olivier J Hénaff, Skanda Koppula, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Aaron Van den Oord, Oriol Vinyals,
  and João Carreira. Efficient visual pretraining with contrastive detection. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Nikos Komodakis and Spyros Gidaris. Unsupervised representation learning by predicting image
  rotations. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.
Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Shilong Liu, Jian Guo, Lionel M Ni, and Lei Zhang. Dn-DETR: Accelerate
  DETR training by introducing query denoising. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
  Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European
  conference on computer vision. Springer, 2014.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Piotr Dollár, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, Bharath Hariharan, and Serge Belongie.
  Feature pyramid networks for object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on com-
  puter vision and pattern recognition, 2017.
Shilong Liu, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Xiao Yang, Xianbiao Qi, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, and Lei Zhang.
  DAB-DETR: Dynamic anchor boxes are better queries for DETR. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2022a.
Wei Liu, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru Erhan, Christian Szegedy, Scott Reed, Cheng-Yang Fu, and
 Alexander C Berg. Ssd: Single shot multibox detector. In European conference on computer
 vision. Springer, 2016.
Yen-Cheng Liu, Chih-Yao Ma, Zijian He, Chia-Wen Kuo, Kan Chen, Peizhao Zhang, Bichen Wu,
  Zsolt Kira, and Peter Vajda. Unbiased teacher for semi-supervised object detection. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Yen-Cheng Liu, Chih-Yao Ma, and Zsolt Kira. Unbiased teacher v2: Semi-supervised object detec-
  tion for anchor-free and anchor-based detectors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9819–9828, June 2022b.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Depu Meng, Xiaokang Chen, Zejia Fan, Gang Zeng, Houqiang Li, Yuhui Yuan, Lei Sun, and Jing-
  dong Wang. Conditional DETR for fast training convergence. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021.
Ishan Misra and Laurens van der Maaten. Self-supervised learning of pretext-invariant representa-
   tions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
   2020.
Mehdi Noroozi and Paolo Favaro. Unsupervised learning of visual representations by solving jigsaw
 puzzles. In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 2016.
Pedro O O Pinheiro, Amjad Almahairi, Ryan Benmalek, Florian Golemo, and Aaron C Courville.
  Unsupervised learning of dense visual representations. Advances in Neural Information Process-
  ing Systems, 2020.
Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predic-
  tive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once: Unified,
  real-time object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, 2016.
Colorado J Reed, Xiangyu Yue, Ani Nrusimha, Sayna Ebrahimi, Vivek Vijaykumar, Richard Mao,
  Bo Li, Shanghang Zhang, Devin Guillory, Sean Metzger, et al. Self-supervised pretraining im-
  proves self-supervised pretraining. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Ap-
  plications of Computer Vision, 2022.
Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time object
  detection with region proposal networks. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  2015.
Hamid Rezatofighi, Nathan Tsoi, JunYoung Gwak, Amir Sadeghian, Ian Reid, and Silvio Savarese.
  Generalized intersection over union: A metric and a loss for bounding box regression. In Pro-
  ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019.
Byungseok Roh, Wuhyun Shin, Ildoo Kim, and Sungwoong Kim. Spatially consistent represen-
  tation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2021.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng
  Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, et al. Imagenet large scale visual
  recognition challenge. International journal of computer vision, 2015.
Zhi Tian, Chunhua Shen, Hao Chen, and Tong He. Fcos: Fully convolutional one-stage object
  detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
  October 2019.
Jasper RR Uijlings, Koen EA Van De Sande, Theo Gevers, and Arnold WM Smeulders. Selective
  search for object recognition. International journal of computer vision, 2013.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 2017.
Tongzhou Wang and Phillip Isola. Understanding contrastive representation learning through align-
  ment and uniformity on the hypersphere. In International Conference on Machine Learning.
  PMLR, 2020.
Xinlong Wang, Rufeng Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Tao Kong, and Lei Li. Dense contrastive learning
  for self-supervised visual pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021a.
Yingming Wang, Xiangyu Zhang, Tong Yang, and Jian Sun. Anchor DETR: Query design for
  transformer-based object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07107, 2021b.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Fangyun Wei, Yue Gao, Zhirong Wu, Han Hu, and Stephen Lin. Aligning pretraining for detection
  via object-level contrastive learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Zhirong Wu, Yuanjun Xiong, Stella X Yu, and Dahua Lin. Unsupervised feature learning via non-
  parametric instance discrimination. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition, 2018.
Tete Xiao, Colorado J Reed, Xiaolong Wang, Kurt Keutzer, and Trevor Darrell. Region similarity
  representation learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
  Vision, 2021.
Zhenda Xie, Yutong Lin, Zheng Zhang, Yue Cao, Stephen Lin, and Han Hu. Propagate yourself:
  Exploring pixel-level consistency for unsupervised visual representation learning. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Ceyuan Yang, Zhirong Wu, Bolei Zhou, and Stephen Lin. Instance localization for self-supervised
  detection pretraining. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, 2021.
Chenhongyi Yang, Zehao Huang, and Naiyan Wang. Querydet: Cascaded sparse query for accel-
  erating high-resolution small object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022.
Mingkai Zheng, Shan You, Fei Wang, Chen Qian, Changshui Zhang, Xiaogang Wang, and Chang
 Xu. Ressl: Relational self-supervised learning with weak augmentation. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Xizhou Zhu, Weijie Su, Lewei Lu, Bin Li, Xiaogang Wang, and Jifeng Dai. Deformable DETR: De-
  formable transformers for end-to-end object detection. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.


                                                13
