Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C OMPOSING E NSEMBLES OF P RE - TRAINED M ODELS
VIA I TERATIVE C ONSENSUS

 Shuang Li ∗ †                         Yilun Du†                          Joshua B. Tenenbaum
 †
  MIT CSAIL                            MIT CSAIL                          MIT CSAIL, BCS, CBMM
 lishuang@mit.edu                      yilundu@mit.edu                    jbt@mit.edu

 Antonio Torralba                                  Igor Mordatch
 MIT CSAIL                                         Google Brain
 torralba@mit.edu                                  imordatch@google.com



                                             A BSTRACT

          Large pre-trained models exhibit distinct and complementary capabilities depen-
          dent on the data they are trained on. Language models such as GPT-3 are capable
          of textual reasoning but cannot understand visual information, while vision models
          such as DALL-E can generate photorealistic photos but fail to understand com-
          plex language descriptions. In this work, we propose a unified framework for
          composing ensembles of different pre-trained models – combining the strengths
          of each individual model to solve various multimodal problems in a zero-shot
          manner. We use pre-trained models as “generators” or “scorers” and compose
          them via closed-loop iterative consensus optimization. The generator constructs
          proposals and the scorers iteratively provide feedback to refine the generated result.
          Such closed-loop communication enables models to correct errors caused by other
          models, significantly boosting performance on downstream tasks, e.g. improving
          accuracy on grade school math problems by 7.5%, without requiring any model
          finetuning. We demonstrate that consensus achieved by an ensemble of scorers
          outperforms the feedback of a single scorer, by leveraging the strengths of each
          expert model. Results show that the proposed method can be used as a general
          purpose framework for a wide range of zero-shot multimodal tasks, such as im-
          age generation, video question answering, mathematical reasoning, and robotic
          manipulation.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Large pre-trained models have shown remarkable zero-shot generalization abilities, ranging from
zero-shot image generation and natural language processing to machine reasoning and action planning.
Such models are trained on large datasets scoured from the internet, often consisting of billions of
datapoints. Individual pre-trained models capture different aspects of knowledge on the internet, with
language models (LMs) capturing textual information in news, articles, and Wikipedia pages, and
visual-language models (VLMs) modeling the alignments between visual and textual information.
While it is desirable to have a single sizable pre-trained model capturing all possible modalities of
data on the internet, such a comprehensive model is challenging to obtain and maintain, requiring
intensive memory, an enormous amount of energy, months of training time, and millions of dollars.
A more scalable alternative approach is to compose different pre-trained models together, leveraging
the knowledge from different expert models to solve complex multimodal tasks.
Building a unified framework for composing multiple models is challenging. Prior works (Alayrac
et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022) have explored composing pre-trained models in two main ways:
(jointly) finetuning models on large datasets, or using common interfaces such as language to combine
    ∗
    Correspondence to: Shuang Li <lishuang@mit.edu>.
    †
    indicates equal contribution. Shuang Li did all the experiments on image generation, video question
answering, and mathematical reasoning. Yilun Du did all the experiments on robot manipulation.


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Video Question Answering                                                                        Grade School Math
                                               G: Language models         G: Language models
                                               E: CLIP models             E: QA classifiers     Q: A robe takes 2 bolts of blue fiber and
                                                                                                half that much white fiber. How many
                                                                                                bolts in total does it take? A: 3
                                                                                                Q: Claire makes a 3 egg omelet every
                                                                                                morning for breakfast. How many dozens
Q: How to make the food step by step?                                                           of eggs will she eat in 4 weeks? A: 7
A: Put water in the pot, …, add sausage, add            Iterative Consensus
seasoning on top of the pizza …
Q: What food is being made? A: Make pizza       Generator(G)                  Scorers(E)
                                                                                                         Robot Manipulation
             Image Generation


                                               G: Diffusion models         G: World models
                                               E: CLIP models, …,          E: Image            Orange mug to the right of orange bowl; …;
  Hamster       A red car in     Grasshopper      Image classifiers        segmentation models     Orange mug on top of orange bowl
               front of a tree
Figure 1: The proposed framework that composes a “generator” and an ensemble of “scorers” through iterative
consensus enables zero-shot generalization across a variety of multimodal tasks.

different models. However, these works have several key limitations: First, simply combining models
does not fully utilize each pre-trained model as there is no closed-loop feedback between models.
Cascading models, such as Socratic models (Zeng et al., 2022), allows one-way communication
but prevents information processed by later models from propagating back to earlier models to
correct errors. Secondly, common interfaces are limited to particular types of models. Language is
used as the intermediate connection in Socratic models (Zeng et al., 2022), but a language interface
is insufficient to solve many real-world tasks, such as continuous robot control, which requires
continuous representations. In addition, Socratic models require pre-designed language templates
for the communication between models, which limits scalability. Thirdly, jointly finetuning multiple
models (Alayrac et al., 2022) requires careful optimization to ensure that the model behaviors remain
stable. Such models also require intensive memory and large datasets and can only be used for
solving specific tasks.
To resolve these difficulties, we propose a unified framework to compose models in a zero-shot
manner1 without any training/finetuning. Our framework employs a single model as a generator
and an ensemble of scorers. The generator iteratively generates proposals, and each scorer provides
a feedback score indicating their agreement. The generator refines its outputs until all the scorers
achieve a final consensus. This iterative closed-loop communication between the generator and scorers
enables models to correct the errors caused by other models, substantially boosting performance.
The ensemble of scorers is inspired by the idea of “wisdom of the crowds”. Each scorer provides
complementary feedback to the generator, compensating for the potential weaknesses of other scorers.
A Vision-Language scorer, for example, may correct the biases of a language model. We notice that
different pre-trained model instances from the same family have diversity of outputs, which leads to
more robust scorers. We demonstrate that guiding the generator with such an ensemble of scorers
significantly outperforms a generator guided by a single scorer.
To summarize, our work has three main contributions.
• First, we propose a unified framework for composing pre-trained models across a variety of
  tasks, such as image generation, video question answering, mathematical reasoning, and robot
  manipulation.
• Second, we illustrate how the proposed framework can effectively solve zero-shot multimodal
  tasks without any training/finetuning. The closed-loop communication between the generator and
  scorers allows the models to interact with each other to improve performance iteratively.
• Finally, we illustrate how our framework enables the use of ensembles of different pre-trained
  models as scorers, significantly improving the zero-shot results by leveraging the strengths of
  multiple expert models.
These observations point to the effectiveness of the proposed method as a general purpose framework
for composing pre-trained models for solving various zero-shot multimodal tasks.

   1
       By zero-shot, we mean the composed models are never trained together on the evaluation task.


                                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2     R ELATED W ORK
Large pre-trained models have shown great success across a variety of domains, such as language
generation/translation, image generation, and decision-making.
Language models. Large language models, such as ELMo (Peters et al., 2018), BERT (Devlin et al.,
2018), and GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), are able to achieve state-of-the-art performance on many
standard NLP benchmarks. More recent works, such as GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), PALM (Chowd-
hery et al., 2022), and Chinchilla (Hoffmann et al., 2022) further enable few-shot learning from
textual prompts. Vision-language models. Large pre-trained vision-language generative models,
such as DALL-E 2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), Parti (Yu et al., 2022), and Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022),
can generate high-resolution images given natural language descriptions. Large pre-trained vision-
language discriminative models, such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), convert images and languages
into the same feature space, achieving remarkable zero-shot generalization ability on downstream
tasks. Decision-making models. Large pre-trained models have been widely applied to solve
decision-making tasks, such as learning general purpose policies (Reed et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022;
Shridhar et al., 2022), making planners (Huang et al., 2022; Ahn et al., 2022), and learning world
models (Ebert et al., 2018). However, due to the large variability in decision-making tasks, no existing
pre-trained models can be readily applied across different tasks.
Composing pre-trained models. Composing large pre-trained models has been widely studied
recently. The predominant way to compose pre-trained models is to (joint) finetune them on new
tasks (Li et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021; Alayrac et al., 2022; Mokady et al., 2021), but such
approaches are computationally expensive. Alternative approaches compose models through a
common interface such as language(Tewel et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2022). Other works compose
pre-trained models by composing learned probability distributions of the data, such as energy-based
models (Liu et al., 2022; 2021; Du et al., 2020), which can be applied to generate images or to
refine structural prediction (Belanger et al., 2017). In this paper, we propose a general framework to
compose pre-trained models across a variety of domains without any training or finetuning.

3     M ETHOD
Given a set of large pre-trained models, we aim to utilize the expert knowledge from different models
to solve zero-shot multimodal tasks. We separate pre-trained models into two categories – generators
(G) such as GPT (Brown et al., 2020; Radford et al., 2019) and Diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020)
that can generate candidate solutions, and scorers (E) such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and
classifiers that output a scalar score to evaluate each generated solution. We propose PIC (composing
ensembles of Pre-trained models via Iterative Consensus), a framework which composes ensembles
of pre-trained models for multimodal tasks. The core idea of PIC is to generate solutions through
iterative optimization, where we leverage the knowledge from different models to jointly construct a
consensus solution. In PIC, a generator G iteratively and sequentially generate candidate solutions,
each of which is refined based on the feedback from a set of scorers. In particular, we seek to obtain
a solution x∗ such that                                 X
                                         x∗ = arg min      En (x),                                 (1)
                                              x∼G       n
where {En } is the set of scorers. At each iteration, we refine the solutions to have a lower score
than the previous iterations. This procedure, described in Equation (1), converges to a solution that
minimizes the energy across multiple pre-trained models, which maximizes the agreement between
the generator and scorers. In contrast to Socratic Models where different pre-trained models are called
sequentially, the closed-loop iterative refinement through which we obtain x∗ enables the generator
and scorers to communicate with each other to reach a consensus on the final solution.
Below, we illustrate how PIC can be broadly applied across tasks in image generation, video question
answering, grade school math, and robot manipulation. To optimize Equation (1), we consider two
different optimization procedures – either a continuous approach that leverages the gradients of each
scorer En (x) or a discrete approach that directly samples possible solutions.

3.1   A PPLICATIONS TO Z ERO - SHOT TASKS
Image generation. We first apply the proposed framework to image generation to generate im-
ages conditioned on a text description or a class label. We use the reverse diffusion process of


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: The proposed unified framework and examples on three representative tasks. (a) Overview of
the proposed unified framework. Dashed lines are omitted for certain tasks. (b) Image generation. A pre-trained
diffusion model is used as the generator, and multiple scorers, such as CLIP and image classifiers, are used to
provide feedback to the generator. (c) Video question answering. GPT-2 is used as the generator, and a set of
CLIP models are used as scorers. (d) Robot manipulation. MPC+World model is used as the generator, and a
pre-trained image segmentation model is used to compute the scores from multiple camera views to select the
best action. Orange lines represent the components used to refine the generated result.

GLIDE (Nichol et al., 2021), a text-guided diffusion model, as the generator to generate image
proposals. At each step of the diffusion process (corresponding to a step of the iterative refinement),
we use the gradient from an ensemble of scorers, such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), to guide and
update the generated proposals. We iteratively repeat this procedure until the final step.
As shown in Fig. 2 (b), the image xk generated at iteration k is first sent to the diffusion model to
generate an image proposal x̂k+1 . Each scorer outputs a score to evaluate whether the generated
image matches the given text input. For example, CLIP computes the cosine similarity between the
image and text features as the score. The scores generated by different scorers are summed, and their
gradient with respect to xk is used to compute the next reverse prediction xk+1 :
                                                      XN
                                 k+1      k+1

                               x     ← x̂     + λ∇xk       Eθn xk , c ,                           (2)
                                                           n=1
where N is the number of scorers and c is the text label. We denote the reverse process prediction as
xk+1 instead of xk−1 (used by most diffusion models) to keep the consistent notation across tasks.
Video question answering (VQA). Caption generation for a single video frame is shown in Fig. 2
(c). We use GPT-2 as the generator and multiple different CLIP models, trained with different
configurations, as the scorers. Given a video frame I, we generate a sequence of words to describe it.
To integrate feedback from scorers to the generator, similar to (Tewel et al., 2021), we define a context
cache Ct (a set of embedding functions in GPT-2) that stores the context information generated so
far, which is updated iteratively based on the feedback from scorers. The prediction of the next word
from the generator G is given by xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). To update Ct , we first use G to generate a
set of candidate words X̂t+1 = {x̂t+1 }, and then use the feature distance (after softmax) between
each sentence (the concatenation of previous words and each new word {x1 , x2 , · · · , x̂t+1 }, where
x̂t+1 ∈ X̂t+1 ) and the video frame as the probability of them matching. The CLIP score is the
cross-entropy loss LCLIP between this new probability distribution and the original distribution of the


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


next word obtained from the generator G. The gradient of the summed score (multiple CLIP models)
is then propagated to G to update Ct :
                                             N
                                             X
                     Ctk+1 ← Ctk + λ∇Ctk             LCLIP (Eθn (x1 , x2 , · · · , x̂t+1 , I)),         (3)
                                             n=1
where k is the step of iterative refinement. After several iterations, the updated Ct is used to generate
the next token xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate the entire caption. We
cascade the captions of multiple video frames and questions about this video to prompt GPT-3 for
video question answering (See Appendix B.2).
Grade school math. We further apply PIC to solve grade school math problems. We use GPT-2 as
the generator and treat the grade school math problem as a text generation problem. The scorer, a
pre-trained question-solution classifier, provides the generator feedback to guide the next token’s
generation xt+1 . We follow the approach used in VQA to iteratively optimize the generations based on
the feedback from scorers. Our generator G first generates a set of candidate words X̂t+1 = {x̂t+1 },
and then the classifier predicts the probability of each solution (the concatenation of previous words
and each new word {x1 , x2 , · · · , x̂t+1 }, where x̂t+1 ∈ X̂t+1 ) matching the given question. The
classifier score is the cross-entropy loss between this new probability distribution and the original
distribution of the next word obtained from the generator G. The gradient of the classifier score is
used to update Ct through iterative refinement, same as Eq. (3). The updated Ct is used to predict the
next word xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate the complete solution.
Robot manipulation. Finally, we illustrate how PIC can be applied to manipulate objects in the robot
environment to conform to a set of object relations such as “red bowl on top of blue mug” shown in
Fig. 2 (d). We use the combination of Model Predictive Control (MPC) (Williams et al., 2015) and
the World Model as the generator. At each time step, we first use MPC to sample a set of possible
actions and then render the state images (after executing an action) from multiple camera views using
the world model. For each action, the scorer computes a summed score across all camera views as
its final score, which is used to select the best action to execute. Thus, in this domain, the ensemble
consists of scorers based on different views of the scene.
For the generator, we assume that there is a pre-trained model, i.e. world model, that can accurately
render and simulate the dynamic changes in the robot world. Since such a large pre-trained model
does not directly exist, we approximate it using an environment simulator combined with MPC as the
generator. For the scorer, we use the pre-trained ViLD (Gu et al., 2021) to generate segmentation
maps for images captured by different camera views n, and the corresponding text label for each
segment, which are used to obtain object relations. We compare the generated object relations and
the relations specified by the text description to obtain the score, i.e. score equals 0 if they match;
otherwise, 1 (here the score means the distance) (see Appendix B.4 for details). To obtain a final world
state xT that satisfies the specified relations, and the action sequence {a1 , · · · , aT } that manipulates
the objects into the final state xT , the generator iteratively samples possible actions âkt+1 and gets
feedback from scorers. The best action is selected as:
                                                     XN
                                   at+1 = arg min         Eθn (xt , âkt+1 ).                            (4)
                                             âk
                                               t+1      n=1

Each scorer, Eθn , outputs a score for the resultant state obtained when a candidate action âkt+1 is
applied to the current world state xt . We execute at+1 in the environment and get a new state xt+1 .
We repeat this process until the task is accomplished or we are at the final step T .

4    E XPERIMENT S ETUP
We evaluate the proposed framework for composing pre-trained models on four representative tasks,
including image generation, video question answering, grade school math, and robot manipulation.
Image generation. We first show that composing the pre-trained image generator and scorer models
such as CLIP enables effective zero-shot image generation. We evaluate the image generation results
on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) with the image resolution of 64 × 64. The class labels are used
as the text input to guide image generation. Each method generates 50 images for each class. We
evaluate the image generation quality using Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016), Fréchet


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Image generation results on ImageNet. Our PIC can compose the pre-trained generator (G) and
scorers (E) through iterative optimization. Composing multiple scorers further boosts performance.
                 Method Name           Generator   Scorer                     IS ↑    FID ↓     KID ↓
                 PIC (G+E1)            GLIDE       CLIP                      25.017   30.462     6.174
                 PIC (G+E2)            GLIDE       CLS                       22.077   30.871     7.952
                 PIC (G+E3)            GLIDE       CLS-FREE                  25.926   29.219     5.325
                 PIC (G+E1+E2+E3)      GLIDE       CLIP + CLS + CLS-FREE     34.952   29.184     3.766

Table 2: Video question answering results on ActivityNet-QA. JustAsk (FT) is finetuned on ActivityNet-
QA, thus achieving the best results. For zero-shot VQA, our method (PIC) significantly outperforms JustAsk
(Pretrain), one of the best VQA methods. Using multiple scorers further improves the performance.
      Method Name          Zero-Shot   Generator    Scorer                                    Accuracy ↑   Vocab ↑
      JustAsk (FT)         No          -            -                                           64.667      160
      JustAsk (Pretrain)   Yes         -            -                                           50.671      210
      PIC (G+E1)           Yes         GPT-2        CLIP-32                                     58.389      267
      PIC (G+E1+E2+E3)     Yes         GPT-2        CLIP-32 + CLIP-14 + CLIP-multilingual       61.168      304


Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), and Kernel Inception Distance (KID) (Bińkowski
et al., 2018). IS measures the distribution of generated images. Higher values mean the models can
generate more distinct images. FID considers the distributions of both generated images and real
images. Lower scores represent that the generated images are closer to the real images. KID is similar
to FID, measuring the similarity between two data distributions, but is in the kernel space.
Video question answering. We evaluate methods for solving VQA tasks on ActivityNet-QA (Yu
et al., 2019). Our method generates free-form language answers instead of selecting an answer from
a pre-defined answer set (Yang et al., 2021; Lei et al., 2022). To evaluate such free-form VQA, we
ask workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk to measure whether the generated answer matches the
given question and video (See Appendix C for IRB approval and experimental details). For fair
comparisons, all the approaches answer the same 300 video questions, and each answer is evaluated
by three different workers. The accuracy rate and vocabulary size are reported. An answer is correct
if at least two workers believe it is correct. The accuracy rate is the percentage of correctly answered
questions over all the questions. To evaluate the diversity of generated answers, we also report the
vocabulary size (i.e. the number of words) of answers generated by each method.
Grade school math. GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) is a dataset for grade school math problems. Each
problem consists of a question, intermediate analyses, and a final solution. We evaluate approaches
to solving problems on the 1K test set. We use beam search to generate candidate solutions. The
accuracy of beam size 1 and beam size 5 are reported. For beam size of 1, we mark the result as
correct if it matches the final solution. For beam size of 5, we mark the result as correct if any of the
five generated results matches the solution.
Robot manipulation. We next evaluate how pre-trained models may be used to manipulate objects in
Ravens (Zeng et al., 2020). In Ravens, the action space of robot is to drop an object at a 2D location
on the table. The goal is to obtain a scene configuration that satisfies the object relations specified by
a textual description or a real-world image, such as “blue mug to the left of purple bowl”. The task is
successful if the object relations in the final state satisfy all the relations specified by the input text or
image. We report the success rate of tasks with two and three specified object relations.


5     E XPERIMENTS

We compare the proposed method with baselines on the above four zero-shot tasks.

5.1    I MAGE G ENERATION
We evaluate the zero-shot conditional image generation on ImageNet in Table 1. We first show
results of composing a single generator (G) and a single scorer (E). We compose GLIDE (Nichol
et al., 2021) with three different types of scorers, respectively. E1 is CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) that
computes the cosine similarity between the image and text features as the score, E2 is the image
classifier (CLS) (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021) that predicts the probability of the image matching the
text label as the score, and E3 is the classifier-free guidance (CLS-FREE) (Ho & Salimans, 2022)


                                                             6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      One video                                    JustAsk          PIC                 PIC             JustAsk (FT)
       frame                                      (Pretrain)       (G+E1)           (G+E1+E2+E3)       (not zero-shot)
                     Q: is the person in blue    A: no            A: woman            A: woman          A: yes
                     a man or a woman?
                                                                  A: the person
                     Q: what happened            A: audience                          A: the athlete    A: magnesia
                                                                  in the video is
                     before the pole vault?      cheered          stretching          is running        powder

                     Q: how many people are      A: no            A: 1               A: 4               A: 2
                     there in the video?
                     Q: what kind of trousers    A: tight         A: short            A: short          A: short
                     does the woman wearing      trousers
                     yellow clothes look like?
                     Q: what is the person       A: nursing       A: using a          A: cutting        A: weed
                     with hat doing?             bicycle          pickup              grass
                     Q: what happened to         A: someone
                     the person in the hat                        A: put on           A: turn on        A: speech
                                                 passed
                     before the engine?                           the helmet          the engine
                                                 through
Figure 3: Video question answering example results. Our approach successfully identifies gender and
clothing, but its failure to count objects is a reflection of GPT-2 and CLIP’s inability to count.

which can be treated as an implicit classifier that directly provides pixel-wise gradient feedback to the
generated image (Appendix B.1). We then compose the generator with all scorers, i.e. G+E1+E2+E3.
Composing the generator and a single scorer allows zero-shot image generation. Composing multiple
scorers significantly outperforms a single scorer. We note that the generator is not trained on
ImageNet; thus the results in Table 1 cannot be directly compared with methods trained on ImageNet.

5.2    V IDEO QUESTION ANSWERING
Quantitative results. We compare PIC with one of the state-of-the-art VQA approaches, i.e.
JustAsk (Yang et al., 2021), on ActivityNet-QA (Yu et al., 2019). In Table 2, JustAsk (FT) is
finetuned on ActivityNet-QA, thus achieving the best results. We then compare PIC with JustAsk
(Pretrain) for zero-shot VQA. The generator of our method, GPT-2 (medium size), is trained on
Webtext (Radford et al., 2019) using the Huggingface library (Wolf et al., 2019). Our scorers are
CLIP models (Radford et al., 2021; Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) trained on different datasets or
using different configurations. PIC (G+E1) outperforms JustAsk (Pretrain) by %7.72. Composing
more scorers further improves the accuracy by %2.78. In addition, the vocabulary size of answers
generated by our method is larger than other approaches, indicating that our method can answer
questions using richer language and more diverse phrasing. Note that our method solves a “more
challenging” problem than JustAsk (Pretrain) and JustAsk (FT). Our method generates open-language
answers while JustAsk (Pretrain) and JustAsk (FT) select an answer from a pre-defined answer set.
Generating free-form responses requires both semantic and grammatical correctness. PIC performs
well on both these dimensions while also using a richer vocabulary.
Qualitative results. In Fig. 3, we show answers generated by different approaches given a video
(only showing a single video frame) and questions. Our approach successfully identifies gender and
clothing, but none of the approaches know how to count numbers.

5.3    G RADE SCHOOL MATH
Quantitative results. In Table 3, we com- Table 3: Grade school math results on GSM8K. Our
pare PIC with two baselines, i.e. GPT- method (PIC) that composes GPT-2 and a pre-trained
Pretrain and GPT-FT, for solving math question-solution classifier significantly outperforms the base-
problems on GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021). lines, including GPT-FT that is finetuned on GSM8K.
GPT-Pretrain uses the pre-trained GPT-2          Method Name Generator           Scorer BS=1 ↑ BS=5 ↑
(medium size GPT-2 trained on Webtext            GPT-Pretrain   GPT-2 (Pretrain) -       1.744 12.206
using Huggingface) to generate numeric           GPT-FT         GPT-2 (FT)       -       3.487 18.271
strings. GPT-FT is based on GPT-Pretrain         PIC (G+E)      GPT-2 (Pretrain) CLS    16.831 20.773
and then finetuned on GSM8K. Our method
uses the same GPT-2 (Pretrain) as the generator and a question-solution classifier (CLS) as the scorer.
The classifier is trained on GSM8K to distinguish whether a solution is correct for a given question.
We surprisingly find that PIC achieves significantly better performance than GPT-FT (%13.344 higher
on beam size 1), even though the generator has never seen the math problems before. The classifier


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Input object relations        Final scene    Input object relations      Final scene     Input object relations    Final scene
    blue mug to the                           green bowl to the                           cyan bowl to the
    left of cyan mug                          right of cyan mug                           right of cyan mug
    blue bowl on top                          orange mug to the                           green bowl on top
    of cyan mug                               left of green bowl                          of cyan mug
    cyan bowl to the                          brown mug to the                            orange mug to the
    right of blue bowl                        right of orange mug                         right of green bowl


Figure 4: Robot manipulation example results. The robot manipulates objects to achieve certain object
relations that are specified by textual descriptions (first row) or real-world images (second row).


only provides feedback to the generator, but through iterative refinement, combining a generator and
a scorer without joint training is more effective than directly finetuning GPT-2 on GSM8K (we find
the overfitting problem when finetuning GPT-2 on GSM8K).

5.4       ROBOT MANIPULATION
Quantitative results. We evaluate the proposed                          Table 4: Robot manipulation results on Ravens.
method of manipulating objects to achieve object                        PIC can manipulate objects to achieve object relations
relations specified by the textual descriptions (Text)                  specified by textual descriptions (Text) or real-world
or real-world images (Image). In Table 4, we find                       images (Image). Using scorers of multiple camera
that using scorers of multiple camera views sub-                        views substantially improves the success rate.
stantially improves the accuracy on both settings.
                                                                         Method Name             2 Relations        3 Relations
Qualitative results. Figure 4 shows the example                           Text ↑ Image ↑ Text ↑ Image ↑
results of the proposed method manipulating ob- PIC (G+E1)                 35.0    27.5   50.0    45.0
jects to accomplish the given task. Our method PIC (G+ 5n=1 En ) 67.5 52.6                75.0    65.3
                                                               P

enables zero-shot robot manipulation on objects
with different sizes, colors, and shapes given either the language goal or image goal.


6       A NALYSIS

PIC exhibits effective zero-shot generalization ability on a variety of tasks. To further understand
the source of such generalization, we investigate two key components in PIC, i.e. the composition of
multiple scorers (consensus optimization) (Section 6.1) and the iterative refinement (Section 6.2).

6.1       E FFECT OF CONSENSUS OPTIMIZATION

We have shown that composing multiple scorers contributes to zero-shot generalization. We further
explore the influence of gradually adding each new scorer on the zeros-shot performance.
Image generation. In Table 5, we first show results of composing GLIDE and the CLIP scorer. We
then gradually add a new scorer, the image classifier or classifier-free guidance, each time. Finally, we
report the results of composing the generator and all scorers. The performance improves every time
we add a new scorer, indicating that composing multiple scorers improves zero-shot performance.

Table 5: Effect of composing multiple scorers. Image generation results on ImageNet. Gradually adding new
scorers keeps improving the performance.
                         Method Name        Generator    Scorer                         IS ↑    FID ↓     KID ↓
                         PIC (G+E1)         GLIDE        CLIP                  25.017 30.462               6.174
                         PIC (G+E1+E2)      GLIDE        CLIP + CLS            30.438 29.543               5.435
                         PIC (G+E1+E3)      GLIDE        CLIP + CLS-FREE       30.500 29.726               4.304
                         PIC (G+E1+E2+E3)   GLIDE        CLIP + CLS + CLS-FREE 34.952 29.184               3.766


                                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



Table 6: Effect of iterative refinement. Grade school math results on GSM8K. PIC with iterative refinement
outperforms baselines where the scorer only provides feedback to the generator at the end stage. BS is the beam
search size.
                Method Name       Generator                   Scorer     Interaction         BS=1 ↑
                GPT-Pretrain+E    GPT-2 (Medium) (Pretrain)   CLS           t=T               9.704
                GPT-FT+E          GPT-2 (Medium) (FT)         CLS           t=T              14.481
                PIC (G+E)         GPT-2 (Medium) (Pretrain)   CLS      t = {1, · · · , T }   17.210


Robot manipulation. In Table 7, we analyze the effect of composing multiple scores on robot
manipulation. The goal is specified by textual descriptions. Composing scores from multiple views,
       P3                        P5
PIC (G+ n=1 En ) and PIC (G+ n=1 En ), leads to higher accuracy.

6.2   E FFECT OF I TERATIVE R EFINEMENT
Next, we explore the influence of iterative refinement on zero-shot generalization, i.e. the feedback
loop between the generator and scorers. We compare PIC with baselines that compose the generator
and scorers, but with the scorers only providing feedback to the generator at the end.
Grade school math. In Table 6, the baselines, GPT-Pretrain+E and GPT-FT+E, generate five proposal
solutions of a given math problem. Then the scorer, i.e. the same question-solution classifier used in
PIC, selects the best solution based on its score. PIC iteratively refines the generated answer while
the baselines refine the entirely generated solutions in the end. PIC and GPT-Pretrain+E use the
same generator and scorer, but PIC outperforms GPT-Pretrain+E by %7.507. PIC still achieves better
performance than GPT-FT+E, which uses a stronger generator (finetuned on the GSM8K dataset).
Robot manipulation. In Table 7, the Table 7: Effect of composing multiple scorers and itera-
                        P5
baseline, No-IR (G+ n=1 En ), first tive refinement on robot manipulation. Both components are
samples 100 trajectories without using important for zero-shot generalization.
the feedback from scorers. Then the scor-
                                              Method Name           Interaction       2 Relations 3 Relations
ers select the best trajectories based on
the summed score. The generator and           PIC (G+E1)          t = {1, · · · , T }    35.0        50.0
                                              PIC (G+ 3n=1 En )                          57.5        63.3
                                                      P
scorers of this baseline are  the same   as                       t = {1, · · · , T }
                          P5                  PIC (G+ 5n=1 En )
                                                      P
                                                                  t = {1, · · · , T }    67.5        75.0
our method, i.e. PIC (G+ n=1 En ), but
our method outperforms the baseline by        No-IR (G+ n=1 En )
                                                        P5
                                                                       t=T               30.0        46.6
%37.5 on the “2 Relations” setting, indi-
cating the effectiveness of iterative refinement in the proposed framework.
Together, these results show that the composition of multiple scorers and iterative refinement are both
important for zero-shot generalization. These results point to the potential broader applicability of
the proposed method as a general purpose framework for zero-shot multimodal tasks.

7     C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we propose a unified framework for composing ensembles of pre-trained models through
iterative consensus without any training or finetuning. Our framework consists of a generator and an
ensemble of scorers. The scorers provide feedback to the generator to iteratively improve its generated
results. We show the proposed method allows effective zero-shot generalization on four representative
tasks, i.e. image generation, video question answering, grade school math, and robot manipulation,
and even outperforms methods that directly finetune models on certain tasks. We further analyze the
source of such zero-shot generalization by exploring the effect of the composition of multiple scorers
and the iterative refinement, and find that both are important for zero-shot generalization.
As our method does not need any training or finetuning, one drawback is that its performance
depends on the pre-trained models. Training large models are complementary to the framework and
methods we proposed and may be directly applied. We hope to explore these directions for zero-shot
generalization in future work. In addition, our framework enables the composition of separately
trained models and boosts performance by leveraging the knowledge from multiple expert models.
The scorers can be learned at different times on different data in an incremental-learning manner,
enabling the combination of incrementally learned knowledge. Our framework thus paves the way
for many potential applications in lifelong learning / continual learning settings.


                                                       9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, et al. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.14198, 2022.
David Belanger, Bishan Yang, and Andrew McCallum. End-to-end learning for structured prediction
  energy networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 429–439. PMLR, 2017.
Mikołaj Bińkowski, Danica J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton. Demystifying mmd
 gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.01401, 2018.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher
  Hesse, and John Schulman. Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet: A large-scale
   hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
   pp. 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances
  in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021.
Yilun Du, Shuang Li, and Igor Mordatch. Compositional visual generation with energy based models.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6637–6647, 2020.
Frederik Ebert, Chelsea Finn, Sudeep Dasari, Annie Xie, Alex Lee, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  foresight: Model-based deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic control. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1812.00568, 2018.
Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision
  and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13921, 2021.
Louay Hazami, Rayhane Mama, and Ragavan Thurairatnam. Efficient-vdvae: Less is more. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2203.13751, 2022.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. Classifier-free diffusion guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12598,
  2022.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851, 2020.
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai, Eliza
  Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan Clark, et al.
  Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556, 2022.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, et al. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning through
 planning with language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05608, 2022.
Jie Lei, Tamara L Berg, and Mohit Bansal. Revealing single frame bias for video-and-language
   learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03428, 2022.
Liunian Harold Li, Mark Yatskar, Da Yin, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Kai-Wei Chang. Visualbert: A simple
  and performant baseline for vision and language. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03557, 2019.
Shuang Li, Xavier Puig, Yilun Du, Clinton Wang, Ekin Akyurek, Antonio Torralba, Jacob Andreas,
  and Igor Mordatch. Pre-trained language models for interactive decision-making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.01771, 2022.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Josh Tenenbaum, and Antonio Torralba. Learning to compose visual
  relations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:23166–23178, 2021.
Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B Tenenbaum. Compositional visual
  generation with composable diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01714, 2022.
Ron Mokady, Amir Hertz, and Amit H Bermano. Clipcap: Clip prefix for image captioning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2111.09734, 2021.
Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin, Bob McGrew,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen. Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741, 2021.
Matthew E. Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and
 Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
 ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
 Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pp. 2227–2237. Association for Computational
 Linguistics, June 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 1(8):9, 2019.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-
  conditional image generation with clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125, 2022.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, et al. A generalist
  agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.06175, 2022.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using siamese bert-networks.
  In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
  Association for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.
  10084.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-
  resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models, 2021.
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed
  Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, et al.
  Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2205.11487, 2022.
Tim Salimans, Ian Goodfellow, Wojciech Zaremba, Vicki Cheung, Alec Radford, and Xi Chen.
  Improved techniques for training gans. Advances in neural information processing systems, 29,
  2016.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, pp. 894–906. PMLR, 2022.
Yoad Tewel, Yoav Shalev, Idan Schwartz, and Lior Wolf. Zero-shot image-to-text generation for
  visual-semantic arithmetic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.14447, 2021.
Zirui Wang, Jiahui Yu, Adams Wei Yu, Zihang Dai, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Yuan Cao. Simvlm: Simple
  visual language model pretraining with weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10904, 2021.
Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control
  using covariance variable importance sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.01149, 2015.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, et al. Huggingface’s transformers:
  State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771, 2019.
Antoine Yang, Antoine Miech, Josef Sivic, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Just ask: Learning to
  answer questions from millions of narrated videos. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
  Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1686–1697, 2021.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, et al. Scaling autoregressive models for content-
   rich text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10789, 2022.
Zhou Yu, Dejing Xu, Jun Yu, Ting Yu, Zhou Zhao, Yueting Zhuang, and Dacheng Tao. Activitynet-qa:
  A dataset for understanding complex web videos via question answering. In Proceedings of the
  AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp. 9127–9134, 2019.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian, Travis
  Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, et al. Transporter networks: Rearranging
  the visual world for robotic manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14406, 2020.
Andy Zeng, Adrian Wong, Stefan Welker, Krzysztof Choromanski, Federico Tombari, Aveek Puro-
  hit, Michael Ryoo, Vikas Sindhwani, Johnny Lee, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Socratic models:
  Composing zero-shot multimodal reasoning with language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.00598,
  2022.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Appendix
In this appendix, we first show additional results in Appendix A. We then show experimental details
of each task in Appendix B. The ethics statement of the Amazon Mechanical Turk experiment for
video question answering is in Appendix C.

A      A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
A.1     I MAGE G ENERATION RESULTS

We show more images generation results using different scorer models in Fig. A1. We find that most
of the time, the proposed framework, either using a single scorer model or composing multiple scorer
models, work well as shown in the first four examples in the left column of Fig. A1. In some hard
cases, some scorer models might fail (the rest examples in Fig. A1). However, there is no discernible
trend on which scorer is better on what tasks. The results of composing multiple scorer models are
significantly better than using a single one, as different scorer models capture different aspects of the
information. For example, in the fifth example in the left column of Fig. A1, PIC with classifier-free
guidance (CLS-FREE) and PIC with a pre-trained classifier (CLS) cannot generate an image with
“tench”, but PIC with the pre-trained CLIP (CLIP) can generate the correct result and the composed
model (CLS-FREE + CLS + CLIP) also works. This is why we consider composing multiple scorers:
to leverage the strength of each expert model and improve the worst case.
                                       CLS-FREE +                                             CLS-FREE +
            CLS-FREE   CLS      CLIP   CLS + CLIP                    CLS-FREE   CLS   CLIP    CLS + CLIP

Sulphur-
  crested                                                     Hen
cockatoo


Goldfish                                                 Parachute


Carousel                                            Diamondback



    Tiger
                                                           jacamar
    shark



  Tench                                                    Beaver



Figure A1: Qualitative results. Image generation results using different scorer models. Composing multiple
scorers (CLS-FREE + CLS + CLIP) achieves the best performances.


A.2     I MAGE GENERATION WITH DIFFERENT GENERATOR

Our framework can be applied to other generators as well. For example, we changed the generator,
GLIDE, to Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021). The results of composing Stable Diffusion and
classifier-free guidance (CLS-FREE) is shown in Table A1. Using a more powerful pre-trained model
can further boost the performance.

A.3     G RADE S CHOOL M ATH Q UALITATIVE R ESULTS

Example results of different methods are shown in Fig. A2. Our method can solve math problems
involving addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, even for solutions with three-digit
numbers. In contrast, GPT-FT often fails to understand math problems.


                                                    13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table A1: Our framework can be applied to other generators as well. In the image generation task, we use
a new generator, Stable-Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2021). Using a more powerful pre-trained model can further
boost the performance. Image generation results on ImageNet are reported.
                        Method Name Generator             Scorer         IS ↑    FID ↓    KID ↓
                        PIC (G+E)        GLIDE            CLS-FREE 25.926        29.219   5.325
                        PIC (G+E)        Stable-Diffusion CLS-FREE 31.689        29.546   6.562

Grade school                                                                             Ground GPT     GPT PIC
math questions                                                                           Truth Pretrain FT (G+E)
Q: In a dance class of 20 students, 20% enrolled in contemporary dance, 25% of
the remaining enrolled in jazz dance, and the rest enrolled in hip-hop dance.             60       A: 25%   A: 20   A: 60
What percentage of the entire students enrolled in hip-hop dance?
Q: Melanie is a door-to-door saleswoman. She sold a third of her vacuum cleaners
at the green house, 2 more to the red house, and half of what was left at the             18        A: 5    A: 15   A: 18
orange house. If Melanie has 5 vacuum cleaners left, how many did she start with?
Q: A fog bank rolls in from the ocean to cover a city. It takes 10 minutes to cover every
3 miles of the city. If the city is 42 miles across from the oceanfront to the opposite   140       A: 10   A: 10 A: 140
inland edge, how many minutes will it take for the fog bank to cover the whole city?


Figure A2: Grade school math example results. Our method can solve math problems involving addition,
subtraction, multiplication, and division.


A.4    C OMPOSING S CORER M ODELS

The key idea of our method is to compose ensembles of pre-trained models, and the way to combine
them can be variant. We add two additional experiments in this appendix: (1) using the best scorer
(scorer that provides the highest score) and (2) using the weighted scores and add them together. Our
method composes pre-trained models without training or finetuning, thus we did not learn separated
weights for different models. But instead we add an experiment that uses the scorers (after softmax)
of each scorer model as their weights and then composes the scorers using the weighted summed
score. We compare these two baselines with our method that uses the summation of all scores. As
shown in Table A2, using a summed score generates the best results.

Table A2: Different ways to compose scorer models. Composing scorers using their summed score generates
the best results. Image generation results on ImageNet are reported.
                    Method Name                  Generator Scorer            IS ↑    FID ↓      KID ↓
                    PIC (G+E1)                   GLIDE       CLIP          25.017   30.462      6.174
                    PIC (G+E2)                   GLIDE       CLS           22.077   30.871      7.952
                    PIC (G+E1+E2) Sum      GLIDE             CLIP + CLS 30.438 29.543           5.435
                    PIC (G+E1+E2) Max      GLIDE             CLIP + CLS 24.782 30.657           6.040
                    PIC (G+E1+E2) Weighted GLIDE             CLIP + CLS 24.728 30.669           6.420



A.5 A DDITIONAL BASELINE C OMPARISONS
Image Generation. In Table A3, we compare our approach with a generative model specifically
trained on ImageNet, Efficient-VDVAE (Hazami et al., 2022). Efficient-VDVAE is an unconditional
hierarchical VAE model. As illustrated in Table A3, despite Efficient-VDVAE is explicitly trained on
ImageNet, it is much worse than our approach.
Robot Manipulation. We compare our robot manipulation method with the robot manipulation
model, CLIPort (Shridhar et al., 2022), used in the Socratic Models paper (Zeng et al., 2022). In
Socratic models, the evaluation of robot manipulation consists of two steps: 1) a GPT model translates
a text goal into a set of subgoals and 2) a CLIPort model executes each subgoal. In contrast, in our
robot manipulation task, 1) a vision-language model is used to translate an image goal into a set
of subgoals and 2) an iterative MPC procedure is used to execute each given subgoal. Thus a fair
comparison is to compare the iterative MPC procedure used in our approach and the CLIPort model
used in Socratic models. We thus compare our method to the multilingual CLIPort model on the
performance of executing a single relation subgoal. CLIPort model obtains a success rate of 22.6% in
this setting, while our approach obtains a success rate of 76.3%.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table A3: Comparison of our method and additional baselines. Image generation results on ImageNet are
reported. Our method outperforms the baseline.
      Method Name                           Generator   Scorer                 IS ↑    FID ↓     KID ↓
      PIC (G+E1)                            GLIDE       CLIP                  25.017   30.462    6.174
      PIC (G+E1+E2)                         GLIDE       CLIP + CLS            30.438   29.543    5.435
      PIC (G+E1+E3)                         GLIDE       CLIP + CLS-FREE       30.500   29.726    4.304
      PIC (G+E1+E2+E3)                      GLIDE       CLIP + CLS + CLS-FREE 34.952   29.184    3.766
      Efficient-VDVAE (Hazami et al., 2022) -           -                      6.566   143.642   23.007



B     E XPERIMENTAL DETAILS

In this section, we provide more experimental details of each task. We use TITAN RTX 24GB GPUs
for all the experiments.

B.1   I MAGE GENERATION

We use the reverse diffusion process of GLIDE, a text-guided diffusion model, as the generator
to generate image proposals. At each step of the diffusion process (corresponding to a step of the
iterative refinement), we use the gradient from an ensemble of scorers to guide and update the
generated proposals. We iteratively repeat this procedure until the final step.
As shown in Fig. A3, the image xk generated at iteration k is first sent to the diffusion model to
generate an image proposal x̂k+1 . The scorers provide feedback to refine the generated result. The
CLIP model computes the cosine similarity between the image and text features as the score (we
used the pre-trained CLIP model from (Ho & Salimans, 2022).). The image classifier (Dhariwal &
Nichol, 2021) predicts the probability of the image matching the text label as the score. The scores
generated by different scorers are summed, and their gradient with respect to xk is used to compute
the next reverse prediction xk+1 . The classifier-free guidance (Ho & Salimans, 2022) can be treated
as an implicit classifier that directly provides pixel-wise gradient feedback to the generated image.
Our framework enables the use of ensembles of different pre-trained models as scorers, significantly
improving the zero-shot results by leveraging the strengths of multiple expert models.
Our implementation for image generation is modified based on the code of GLIDE (Nichol et al.,
2021) and the classifier guidance diffusion (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). We use DDIM to sample
images from GLIDE in 100 steps. The guidance scale is set to 3.

B.2   V IDEO QUESTION ANSWERING

In video question answering, we use the proposed method to generate captions for the video frames
and then use GPT-3 to summarize the captions to answer questions. We use GPT-2 as the generator and
a set of CLIP models as scorers to generate captions for each video frame. The CLIP models (Radford
et al., 2021; Reimers & Gurevych, 2019) are from the Huggingface library (Wolf et al., 2019):

• CLIP-32: https://huggingface.co/openai/clip-vit-base-patch32.
• CLIP-14: https://huggingface.co/openai/clip-vit-large-patch14.
• CLIP-multilingual: https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/clip-
  ViT-B-32-multilingual-v1.

Fig. A4 shows the framework for generating frame captions. Given a video frame I, we generate
a sequence of words to describe it. To integrate feedback from scorers to the generator, similar to
ZeroCap (Tewel et al., 2021), we define a context cache Ct (a set of embedding functions in GPT-2,
such as the embedding functions, K, Q, V , in the Transformer blocks.) that stores the context
information generated so far, which is updated iteratively based on the feedback from scorers. The
prediction of the next word from the generator G is given by xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ), where G is the
pre-trained language model. ZeroCap uses the following loss function to optimize Ct :

                   arg min LCLIP G (xt , Ct ) , I + λLCE G xt , Ct , x̂t+1 ,                  (A1)
                         Ct


                                                        15
                                    Published as a conference paper at ICLRFigure
                                                                             20232: The proposed unified framework and examples on three representative tasks. (a) Overview of
                                                                        the proposed unified framework. Dashed lines are omitted for certain tasks. (b) Image generation. A pre-trained
                                                                        diffusion model is used as the generator, and multiple scorers, such as CLIP and image classifiers, are used to
                                                                        provide feedback to the generator. (c) Video question answering. GPT-2 is used as the generator, and a set of
                                                                        CLIP models are used as scorers. (d) Robot manipulation. MPC+World model is used as the generator, and a
Figure 2: The proposed unified framework and examples on threepre-trainedrepresentative     tasks. (a) Overview
                                                                                     image segmentation              of to compute the scores from multiple camera views to select the
                                                                                                           model is used
                                                           Figure  2:  The
                                                                        bestproposed
the proposed unified framework. Dashed lines are omitted for certain tasks.  (b) Image
                                                                             action.    unified
                                                                                             linesframework
                                                                                         generation.
                                                                                      Orange                  theand
                                                                                                        A pre-trained
                                                                                                    represent        examplesused
                                                                                                                  components   on to
                                                                                                                                  three   representative
                                                                                                                                     refine                tasks. (a) Overview of
                                                                                                                                            the generated result.
                                                             Update
                                                            the
diffusion model is used as the generator, and multiple scorers,  such based
                                                                 proposed
                                                                      as CLIP  onand
                                                                           unified the  gradient
                                                                                    framework.
                                                                                       image      Dashed lines
                                                                                               classifiers,     are are
                                                                                                                    usedomitted
                                                                                                                           to for certain tasks. (b) Image generation. A pre-trained
                                                            diffusion model                                             +
provide feedback to the generator. (c) Video question answering.    GPT-2    isisused
                                                                        ofimage
                                                                            the   usedtext
                                                                                 summed
                                                                                  and   asthe
                                                                                       as  the generator,
                                                                                             score
                                                                                            features   as theand
                                                                                               generator,          multiple
                                                                                                                score.
                                                                                                               and  a setThe   scorers,generated
                                                                                                                           of scores    such as CLIP  and image
                                                                                                                                                 by different     classifiers,
                                                                                                                                                               scorers         are usedand
                                                                                                                                                                       are summed,       to their
                                                            provide feedback
CLIP models are used as scorers. (d) Robot manipulation. MPC+World       gradientto the
                                                                             model      generator.
                                                                                     with respect
                                                                                     is used        to(c)generator,
                                                                                               as the    xkVideo   question
                                                                                                             is used   to
                                                                                                                       and   a answering.
                                                                                                                          compute          GPT-2
                                                                                                                                     the next     is used
                                                                                                                                              reverse      as the generator,
                                                                                                                                                       prediction  xk+1 : and a set of
pre-trained image segmentation model is used to compute the CLIP   models
                                                                scores from aremultiple
                                                                                 used as scorers.
                                                                                          camera (d)views Robot   manipulation.
                                                                                                              to select   the       MPC+WorldN    model is used as the generator, and a
                                                                                                                                            X
                                                            pre-trained image segmentation model      Imageis used
                                                                                                                xk+1 to compute
                                                                                                                            x̂k+1 +the scores
                                                                                                                                        rxk from E✓nmultiple
                                                                                                                                                      xk , c ,camera views to select the (2)
best action. Orange lines represent the components used to refine the generated result.
                                                                                           best action. Orange lines represent the components used to refine the generated result.
                                                                                                                                                                                          n=1
image and text features as the score. The scores generated                  byanddifferent Generator:
                                                                                             scorers   are
                                                                      image          where   N is the
                                                                                     text features      the summed,
                                                                                                    asnumber score.  Theand
                                                                                                                of scorers     their
                                                                                                                              and
                                                                                                                            scores is the text label.
                                                                                                                                  cgenerated          We denote
                                                                                                                                               by different       the reverse
                                                                                                                                                             scorers          processand
                                                                                                                                                                      are summed,     prediction
                                                                                                                                                                                         their as
gradient with respect to xk is used to compute the nextgradient          reversewith         Diffusion
                                                                                     xk+1 instead
                                                                                    prediction      of xk 1 (used by most diffusion models) to keep consistent notation across tasks.
                                                                                                  to xk :is used to compute the next reverse prediction xk+1 :
                                                                                                    k+1
                                                                                         respect x
       Figure 2: The proposed unified framework and examplesX          on
                                                                       N three representative  Model
                                                                                                 tasks. answering
                                                                                                        (a) Overview (VQA).
                                                                                                                      of
                                                                                     Video question                             We first use
                                                                                                                                          XN PIC to generate video frame captions. We then use
       the proposed unified framework.k+1
                                        Dashed lines  are omitted for certain
                                                    k+1                       tasks.
                                                                          Imagen     (b)
                                                                                     k Imagetogeneration.
                                                                                     GPT-3      summarize  A pre-trained
                                                                                                              the  captionsk+1and(2)
                                     x           x̂      +     r x k
       diffusion model is used as the generator, and multiple scorers,
                                                                            E      x   , c ,                   Image
                                                                                                              k+1
                                                                        such as✓ CLIP and image classifiers,xare used tox̂      + answer
                                                                                                                                    rxk questions
                                                                                                                                               E✓n xkabout
                                                                                                                                                       , c , this video. Caption generation(2) for a
                                                                                                            single video frame is shown in Fig. 2 (c). We use GPT-2 as the generator and multiple different CLIP
       provide feedback to the generator. (c) Video question answering.
                                                                      n=1 GPT-2 is used as the generator, and a set of                     n=1
                                                                                     models,
                                                                                        Input    trained
                                                                                                  text:   with different
                                                                                                         Goldfinch           configurations, as the scorers. Given a video frame I, we generate
where NCLIP  models
         is the      are usedofasscorers
                  number          scorers. (d)
                                            andRobot
                                                  c ismanipulation. MPC+World
                                                       the text label.    We N
                                                                      where        model
                                                                                denote
                                                                                   isathe  isnumber
                                                                                         the  used as the
                                                                                                reverseof
                                                                                       sequence1 of views
                                                                                                          generator,
                                                                                                           process
                                                                                                          scorers
                                                                                                        wordstoto
                                                                                                                     and  a is
                                                                                                                      prediction
                                                                                                                    and   c
                                                                                                                   describe    the  as
                                                                                                                                   text label.  We denote the reverse process prediction as
       pre-trained image
                     k 1 segmentation model is used to compute thexscoresk+1 from multiple kcamera               select the it. To integrate feedback from scorers to the generator, similar to
xk+1 instead   of xOrange
       best action.       (used     by most
                           lines represent  the diffusion   models)
                                                components used         to
                                                                 to refine     instead
                                                                            keep
                                                                           the          ofresult.
                                                                                   consistent
                                                                                     (Tewel
                                                                               generated             (used
                                                                                                       2021),bywe
                                                                                                    notation
                                                                                              xet al.,           most
                                                                                                                across  diffusion
                                                                                                                   define tasks.    models)
                                                                                                                            a context cache Cto   keep consistent notation across tasks.
                                                                                                                                               t (a set of embedding functions in GPT-2) that stores
                                                                                      Video       question  the context information generated so far, which is updated iteratively based on the feedback from
                                                                                                                     answering              (VQA). We        We thenfirst use
Video question
        image and answering
                       text features as(VQA).
                                           the score.We   Thefirst    usegenerated
                                                                 scores     PIC to        generate
                                                                                         by   different      video
                                                                                                               scorersframe
                                                                                                           scorers.        The
                                                                                                                            are summed, captions.
                                                                                                                                   prediction      andoftheirthe next word   usePIC     to generate video frame captions. We then use
                                                                                                                                                                                     from the generator G is given by xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). To
GPT-3 to    summarize
        gradient                the captions
                     with respect    to xk is used  and    answer the
                                                        to compute       questions    GPT-3
                                                                              next reverse  about  to
                                                                                                    CLIPsummarize
                                                                                                         this
                                                                                                  prediction
                                                                                                                 score
                                                                                                                  video.
                                                                                                                     x  k+1 +the
                                                                                                                              :  Captioncaptions         and
                                                                                                                                             Classifier-free
                                                                                                                                                    generation    answer   for questions
                                                                                                                                                                                a            about this video. Caption generation for a
                                                                                      single      video    update
                                                                                                    Classifier frame    Cist , shown
                                                                                                                        score   we firstinuse     Fig. G2to(c).
                                                                                                                                                  guidance       generate
                                                                                                                                                                     We     use a GPT-2
                                                                                                                                                                                   set of candidate
                                                                                                                                                                                            as            words X̂
                                                                                                                                                                                                the generator         and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t+1multiple       }, and then
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                = {x̂t+1different   CLIPuse the
single video frame is shown in Fig. 2 (c). We use GPT-2                            XN     as   the     generator            and     multiple           different         CLIP
                                                                                                           feature distance (after softmax) between each sentence (the concatenation of previous words and each
models, trained with different configurations,                        + as rxthe      models,
                                                                                      scorers.     k trained with different configurations, as the scorers. Given a video frame I, we generate
                                                                                         E✓ x , Given                  a video      , xframe               we (2) generate
                                                  k+1           k+1                         n
                                                x            x̂                                        c new , word                                   I,            where x̂t+1                  ) and the     videotoframe       as the probability
                                                                                                                              {x          2 , · · · , it.
                                                                                                                                                      x̂t+1  To},similar               2 X̂t+1from                                            similarof tothem
                                                                                k

a sequence of words to describe it. To integrate feedback                             a sequence
                                                                                               frommatching. of words
                                                                                                            scorers            tothe
                                                                                                                            toThe
                                                                                                                                   1describe
                                                                                                                                          generator,               integrate   to feedback               scorers           the generator,
                                                                                   n=1
                                                                                      (Tewel       et   al.,    2021),       we        CLIP
                                                                                                                                    define       ascore
                                                                                                                                                    context  is  the   cross-entropy
                                                                                                                                                                   cache     C     (a  set loss
                                                                                                                                                                                           of     LCLIP between
                                                                                                                                                                                               embedding                 this new
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 functions       in   probability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GPT-2)   that distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   stores
(Tewel et  al., N
        where     2021),
                     is the we
                             numberdefine    a context
                                        of scorers    and ccache
                                                              is the text     (a setWe
                                                                       Ct label.        of denote
                                                                                             embedding    the
                                                                                                           andreverse
                                                                                                                   thefunctions            in
                                                                                                                             processdistribution
                                                                                                                          original              GPT-2)asthat
                                                                                                                                            prediction           of thestores   t
                                                                                                                                                                            next word obtained from the generator G. The gradient of the
                 instead of xk 1generated
                                      (used by most       diffusion     models)       the
                                                                                     to     context
                                                                                         keep     consistent information
                                                                                                                    notation          generated           so far, which is updated iteratively based on the feedback from
        xk+1information
the context                                          so far,      which      is updated           iteratively
                                                                                                           summed          scoreacross
                                                                                                                          based         on      tasks.
                                                                                                                                              the
                                                                                                                                       (multiple      feedback
                                                                                                                                                        CLIP models)      from   is then propagated to G to update C :
                                                                                      scorers. The prediction of the next word from theNgenerator G is given by xt+1 t = G(xt , Ct ). To
scorers.Video
          The question
                  prediction        of the (VQA).
                               answering      next word   We firstfromuse the
                                                                           PIC generator
                                                                                   to generate video  G is frame givencaptions.
                                                                                                                              by xt+1We=then           G(x   uset , Ct ). To X
                   to summarize the captions and answer questionsupdate                            Ct ,video.we first       use G         to generate
                                                                                                                                                Ctk+1for        aaCtset + ofthe
                                                                                                                                                                              rcandidate LCLIPwords
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (E✓n (xX̂1 ,t+1    · · ·{x̂
                                                                                                                                                                                                               x2 , =             }, and then use the (3)
                                                                                                                                                                     k
update CGPT-3                                                                           about     this                 Caption        generation                                                                          , x̂t+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               t+1 , I)),
           t , we first use G to generate a set of candidate                                 words                        = {x̂      t+1 }, and            then      use
                                                                                                             X̂t+1                                                               x
                                                                                      feature      distance
        single video frame is shown in Fig. 2 (c). We use GPT-2 as the generator and multiple different CLIP         (after     softmax)           between          each    sentencen=1  (the   concatenation          of previous words and each
feature distance      (afterFigure
        models, trained         softmax)
                               with       A3: between
                                      different    Overview  each of
                                                  configurations,     sentence
                                                                          image
                                                                         as           (the
                                                                             the scorers.     concatenation
                                                                                       generation.
                                                                                      new     word
                                                                                                 Given           We
                                                                                                                 , x2k,use
                                                                                                              a1video
                                                                                                          where
                                                                                                          {x                 of
                                                                                                                           ·frame
                                                                                                                          is ·the ,previous
                                                                                                                               · the    I,reverse
                                                                                                                                    x̂step   we
                                                                                                                                              of
                                                                                                                                                      words
                                                                                                                                                   where diffusion
                                                                                                                                                   generate
                                                                                                                                              }, iterative         and each process
                                                                                                                                                                x̂refinement.            of several
                                                                                                                                                                                      ) and
                                                                                                                                                                                     After   GLIDE
                                                                                                                                                                                              the video   (Nichol
                                                                                                                                                                                                              framethe
                                                                                                                                                                                                      iterations,        et updated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         as  al., probability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             the                of to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ct is used   them
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      generate
                                                                                                                                        t+1                        t+1 2 X̂t+1
new word                     · 2021),
              {x1 , x2of, ·words
        a sequence             · , x̂t+1 a},text-guided
                                              where
                                     to describe          x̂t+1
                                                     it. To    diffusion
                                                                    2 X̂t+1
                                                              integrate        model,
                                                                                  ) and
                                                                           feedback         as
                                                                                            thethe
                                                                                           from
                                                                                      matching.    video generator
                                                                                                    scorersthe frame
                                                                                                          The      to
                                                                                                                  next       to
                                                                                                                       thetoken
                                                                                                                    CLIP       as  generate
                                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                                              generator,
                                                                                                                               score   xt+1          image
                                                                                                                                           isprobability
                                                                                                                                                 similar
                                                                                                                                               the
                                                                                                                                                 =    G(x     tto
                                                                                                                                                                  proposals.
                                                                                                                                                      cross-entropy
                                                                                                                                                                ,C  tof
                                                                                                                                                                     ). them    lossAtLeach
                                                                                                                                                                          We repeat      CLIP
                                                                                                                                                                                                step ofuntil
                                                                                                                                                                                               between
                                                                                                                                                                                         this process        the
                                                                                                                                                                                                              thisdiffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   wenew     probability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          generate          distribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      the entire caption. We
matching.
        (TewelTheet CLIP       process
                               score
                      al., 2021),   we is (corresponding
                                        define     context cachetoCatloss
                                           the across-entropy               step
                                                                            (a  setLof
                                                                                     of
                                                                                      andthethe iterative
                                                                                              between
                                                                                         embedding
                                                                                      CLIP           original      refinement),
                                                                                                                  this
                                                                                                              functions    new                we
                                                                                                                                    probability
                                                                                                                              in GPT-2)
                                                                                                                      distribution                  use
                                                                                                                                               ofthat
                                                                                                                                                    thestoresthe    gradient
                                                                                                                                                              distribution
                                                                                                                                                            next     word obtained from anfrom ensemble         of scorers,
                                                                                                                                                                                                     the generator           G. The gradient of the
and the the   contextdistribution
                         information
                               such asgenerated
                                          CLIP          so far,
                                           of the(Radford          which   is 2021),
                                                                     et al.,   updated       iteratively
                                                                                            to   guide           based
                                                                                                               and          on the
                                                                                                                       update            feedback
                                                                                                                                       the    generated  from is   proposals.         The image          k
         original                                     next     word      obtained         from
                                                                                      summed          the
                                                                                                       score   generator
                                                                                                                   (multiple        G.CLIP  The       gradient
                                                                                                                                                  models)               of the
                                                                                                                                                                       then    propagated                    generated
                                                                                                                                                                                                to Gxto update          Ct : at
        scorers. The predictioniteration of  the  next    word
                                               is first sent       from   the   generator
                                                                  to thepropagated
                                                                            diffusion model     G    is  given
                                                                                                           to updateby
                                                                                                                generate  x         =
                                                                                                                            t+1an image   G(x     , C    ).
                                                                                                                                                 t proposal   To          k+1                4
                                                                                                                                                                                . The scorers provide feedback
summed score (multiple              CLIPkmodels)            is then                           to G to                          Ct :                    t
                                                                                                                                                                      X x̂
                                                                                                                                                                        N
        update Ct , we first        use G to
                               to refine     thegenerate
                                                  generated  a set result.
                                                                     of candidate The    words
                                                                                          CLIP          t+1 = {x̂
                                                                                                     X̂model              t+1 },
                                                                                                                     computes       andthe   thencosine
                                                                                                                                                    kuse thesimilarity between
        feature distance (after
                                                                  N
                                                                Xsentence (the concatenation of previous                     C   k+1
                                                                                                                                                C      +        r  x         L  CLIP  (E✓n (x1the , x2 ,image      and, I)),
                                                                                                                                                                                                         · · · , x̂t+1     text                        (3)
                                 k+1softmax)      between each                                                                          words and
                                                                                                                                 t                  t each
                             C features     as
                                             C kthe
                                                  +    score.
                                                         r         The L  image
                                                                          CLIP   (E    classifier
                                                                                       n
                                                                                          (x     , x     ,(Dhariwal
                                                                                                            · · ·  ,  x̂        &
                                                                                                                                , I)), Nichol,         2021)        predicts
                                                                                                                                                                      n=1 (3)      the   probability of the image
        new word {x1 , x2 , · · · , x̂t+1 }, where x̂t+1 2 X̂t+1 ) and the video frame as the probability of them
                                 t             t            x                         ✓       1       2                  t+1
                               matching the text label               as the score.    whereThekscores is this
                                                                                                           the new generated
                                                                                                                  step     of iterative  by different
                                                                                                                                                 refinement.     scorers
                                                                                                                                                                       Afterare      summed,
                                                                                                                                                                                 several            and their
                                                                                                                                                                                           iterations,             gradient
                                                                                                                                                                                                            the updated         Ct is used to generate
        matching. The CLIP score is the cross-entropy           n=1 loss LCLIP            between                         probability         distribution
                           of with    respect        xknext
                                               oftothe     is used     toobtained
                                                                           compute         the    next       reverse        prediction              k+1
where kand
         is thethe step
                    original    iterative
                                distribution refinement.          After
                                                                 word      several    the   next
                                                                                         iterations,
                                                                                       from     the   token    thext+1
                                                                                                       generator      updated
                                                                                                                         G.   =The G(x  gradient     ).ofWe
                                                                                                                                         Ctt ,isCxtused     .the
                                                                                                                                                               Classifier-free
                                                                                                                                                               torepeat
                                                                                                                                                                    generate           guidance
                                                                                                                                                                             this process       until(Ho we &     Salimans,
                                                                                                                                                                                                              generate        the entire caption. We
the nextsummed
          token x    score     2022) can
                            (multiple    CLIP bemodels)
                                                   treatedisasthen  an propagated
                                                                         implicit classifier
                                                                                          to G to update  that directly
                                                                                                                    Ct :           provides           pixel-wise
                                                                                                                                                           caption.gradient             feedback to the generated
                       t+1 = G(xt , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate                                                    the entire                             We
                               image. We iteratively X            repeat
                                                                   N         this procedure until the final step. Our framework enables the use of ensembles of
                               different
                                    Ctk+1 pre-trained
                                                 Ctk + rxmodels             as(E scorers,                                                                                          4 by leveraging the strengths
                                                                                    ✓ (x1 , xsignificantly                improving the zero-shot                          results
                                                                                    n
                                                                       LCLIP                    2 , · · · , x̂t+1 , I)),                                      (3)
                               of multiple expert models.         n=1
                                                                             4
            where k is the step of iterative refinement. After several iterations, the updated Ct is used to generate
            the next token xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate the entire caption. We
                                   where I is the feature of a video frame and x̂t+1 is the next word predicted by the original language
                                   model. The CLIP loss LCLIP 4   optimizes Ct to make the new generated sentence describe the video
                                   frame. The second loss LCE ensures the new generated sentence is close to the sentence generated by
                                   the original language model.
                                   Our implementation is based on the code of ZeroCap (Tewel et al., 2021). The context cache Ct is
                                   updated using:
                                                                                     ∇Ct p (xt+1 | Ct )
                                                                  Ct ←− Ct + α                          2,                        (A2)
                                                                                   ∥∇Ct p (xt+1 | Ct )∥
                                   where p(xt+1 |Ct ) is the probability of predicting word xt+1 given Ct . Optimizing Eq. (A1) can be
                                   achieved by conducting the gradient descent using Eq. (A2). In our experiments, we use 5 steps of
                                   gradient descent. The learning rate α is set to 0.3.
                                    In the video question answering tasks, we compose multiple CLIP scores and use their composed
                                    score to optimize Ct :

                                                      arg min LCLIP-32 G (xt , Ct ) , I +LCLIP-14 G (xt , Ct ) , I           (A3)
                                                           Ct

                                                      + LCLIP-multilingual G (xt , Ct ) , I +λLCE G xt , Ct , x̂t+1 .        (A4)

                                   After several iterations, the updated Ct is used to generate the next token xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). We
                                   repeat this process until we generate the entire caption.
                                   To answer the video questions, we cascade the generated captions of the video frames and the
                                   questions about this video to prompt GPT-3 to generate answers. For each video, we delete the first


                                                                                                                           16
summed up, and their gradient with respect to Video
                                                 xt is question    answering
                                                        used to obtain    xt+1 : (VQA). We first use the proposed framework to generate video frame
                 Generator (G):               captions.
                                              View 1:
                                               …        XNWe then     use GPT-3     to summarize
                                                                                 Generator (G):       the captions
                                                                                                  “rice”
                                                                                                            CLIP 1:
                                                                                                            …
                                                                                                                    and answer questions. As shown in Fig. 2
                                                                 “a bowl with”
                 e.g. World Model
                                              (c),
                              xt+1 = N (x̂t+1 View
                                              + K:rxour framework
                                                              n        combines
                                                            E✓ (xt , c) , ),   2  GPT-2
                                                                                   e.g. GPT2
                                                                                             and multiple  CLIP
                                                                                                            (2) 2: models, trained with different configurations,
                                                                                                            CLIP
                                                        for zero-shot video frame captioning. Given a video frame and a text prompt, such as “Image of”, we
       Published
        State
                 as a conference        paper    at ICLR
                                            generate
                                                      n=1
                           Original result Energy Scorers (E)
                                                              2023
                                                                 Text
                                                        a sequence of words
                                                                                        Original result Energy Scorers (E)
                                                                            to describe the frame. Similar to (Tewel et al., 2021), we define a context
where N is the
            Rednormal    distribution,
                            of Blue Mug N is the number of scorers and
                                                                       2
                                                                                                     is the variance.
                Bowl on Top
                                                             cache Ct (a set of embeddingInput video       functions in Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)) that store the context
                                                                                            frame
Video question answering (VQA). We firstinformation            use the proposed generated      so far. The
                                                                                         framework                prediction
                                                                                                           to generate       videoof the
                                                                                                                                     frame   next word can be written as xt+1 = LM (xt , Ct ),
captions. We then use GPT-3 to summarize where                the captions
                                                                         LM 3:
                                                                    Figure     isand
                                                                                   theanswer  2. questions.
                                                                                        language
                                                                                   Details              model As         shown The
                                                                                                                    (GPT-2).      in Fig.goal  2 is to update Ct iteratively based on the CLIP
(c), our framework combines GPT-2 and multiple               scoreCLIP        models,the
                                                                       to generate        trained
                                                                                              next with
                                                                                                      worddifferent
                                                                                                                such that  configurations,
                                                                                                                              the sentence is grammatically sound as well as accurately
for zero-shot video frame captioning. Given adescribes         video frame   the and
                                                                                  givena text   prompt,
                                                                                            video    frame.   such
                                                                                                                 To as do“Image
                                                                                                                           this, we of”,
                                                                                                                                      first weuse GPT-2 to generate a set of candidate words
generate a sequence of words to describe the frame.          {x̂it+1 }, Similar   to (Tewel
                                                                           andcompose
                                                                                 then  usethe   et feature
                                                                                              the  al., 2021),      we define
                                                                                                                distance          a context
                                                                                                                             between      each sentence     (the concatenation of previous words
        to  generate    image    proposals.          Our  method        can
cache Ct (a set of embedding functions in Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)) that  CLIP       1   +    …
                                                                                                  generator   +    CLIP
                                                                                                                   with       N
                                                                                                                        store the context scorers,
                                                                                                                           one   or  multiple
        such as
information        CLIP (Radford
                generated   so far. Theetprediction
                                                 al., 2021), and
                                                             of the eachnextnew
                                                                  text-image   wordword
                                                                                    classifiers
                                                                                      can be        (Dhariwal
                                                                                             {xwritten
                                                                                                1, x          · ,xx̂it+1
                                                                                                      2 , · ·as        &      and(xthe2021),
                                                                                                                          })Nichol,
                                                                                                                          =  LM        , C video
                                                                                                                                               ),   frame
                                                                                                                                                   and  theas the probability of them matching.
                                                                                                                   t+1               t       t
where classifier-free
         LM is the languageguidance model (Ho(GPT-2).        The
                                                   & Salimans,The CLIP2022).
                                                                     goal   isscore  is theCcross-entropy
                                                                               to update                              loss between this clip distribution and the original distribution of
                                                                                                t iteratively based on the CLIP
score to                                                     the   next    word     obtained  wordfrom     GPT-2.
                                                                                                       generated          Similar   to   image     generation, the gradient of summed scores
        Asgenerate
             shown in theFig.
                           next2word
                                   (right), suchthethat  the sentence
                                                         candidate
                                                      image     xt generated is grammatically
                                                                                a at    iteration tsoundis firstassentwelltoas  accurately
                                                                                                                             pasta
                                                                                                                               the  GLIDE diffusion
describes    the given   video   frame.      To     do this, (multiple
                                                             we    first    CLIP
                                                                          use  GPT-2 models)
                                                                                          to     is propagated
                                                                                              after
                                                                                              generate iterative
                                                                                                           a   set  of   to GPT-2
                                                                                                                        candidate    to update Ct . After several iterations, the updated Ct
                                                                                                                                     words
        model to generate an image proposal              word x̂t+1 . Each scorer outputs a score to evaluate whether the
{x̂it+1 }, and then use the feature distance between         is used to sentence
                                                                             generate(the  therefinement
                                                                                                next token xt+1                          t , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate the
                                                      given text each                           concatenation         of previous
                                                                                                                                 the words
                                                                                                                           = LM (x
        generated image matches the                                   input. For example,             CLIP computes                   cosine      distance
and each    new   word    {x
        of the image feature 1 , x  , · · ·
                                   2 and text, x̂ i
                                                  t+1 }) andentire
                                                     feature.   the     frameframe
                                                                 Thevideo
                                                                                 caption.the
                                                                         text-imageas
                                                                                              Weprobability
                                                                                         classifier
                                                                                                    cascade the
                                                                                                        predictsofa them
                                                                                                                        video frame
                                                                                                                                 matching.
                                                                                                                          probability
                                                                                                                                            captions and questions about this video to prompt
                                                                                                                                            of the image
The CLIP      score is the  cross-entropy          loss      GPT-3
                                                        between      thisfor  video
                                                                           clip        question
                                                                                 distribution     andanswering.
                                                                                                        the
        matching the text label. The classifier-free guidance can be treated as an implicit classifier that    original    distribution      of
the next word obtained from GPT-2. Similar to image generation, the gradient of summed scores
       provides pixel-wise gradient feedback to the generator directly. The energy scores generated by
(multiple CLIP models) is propagated to GPT-2 to update Ct . After several iterations, the updated Ct
       different scorers Context
                         are token
is used to generate the next
                              summed    up. We compute the gradient
                                   xinformation
                                                                        of summed
                                                                 Generator:          energy score with respect to
                                                                      this processGPT-2
                                                                                   until we generate4the
                                     t+1 = LM (xt , Ct ). We repeat
       the original
entire frame        image
             caption.      proposal
                      We cascade   thetovideo
                                         update  the generated
                                              frame             image:
                                                     captions and  questions about this video to prompt
GPT-3 for video question answering.                              N             X
                                                   xt+1 = xt              rx         E✓n (xt , c) ,                                       (4)
                              A         human            is 4         2        n=1          making
        where N is the number of scorers.
       Figure A4: Overview of video frame captioning for video question answering. We use GPT-2 as the
        Robot planning.
       generator     and a set of CLIP models as scorers to generate captions for each video frame. To integrate feedback
       from
       Videoscorers
                QuestiontoAnswering.
                              the generator,        similar
                                              We first        toproposed
                                                        use the  ZeroCapframework(Tewel et   to al.,  2021),
                                                                                                generate       weframe
                                                                                                            video   define   a context cache Ct (a set
                                                                                                                          captions.
       of
       Weembedding
             then use GPT-3  functions
                                 (Brown et  inal.,
                                                GPT-2)
                                                   2020) tothat  stores the
                                                             summarize            context and
                                                                            the captions       information      generated
                                                                                                   answer questions.          so far, which is updated
                                                                                                                         As shown
        in Fig. 3, our
       iteratively       framework
                      based    on the combines
                                        feedback GPT-2        (Medium
                                                      from scorers.     Tosize)
                                                                             updateand Cmultiple     CLIP
                                                                                          t , we first   usemodels,  trained with
                                                                                                              G to generate     a set of candidate words
        different   configurations, for zero-shot video frame captioning. The history tokens {x1 , · · · , xt }
       X̂ t+1 = {x̂t+1 }, and then use the feature distance (after softmax) between each sentence (the concatenation
        is first sent to the generator to predict the next token x̂t+1 . Then the scorers compute the feature
       of  previous
        distances       words
                    (scores)      and each
                              between           newsentence
                                          the new      word {x    1 , x2 , · · · , x̂
                                                               (concatenation      oft+1  }, where
                                                                                       history   tokensx̂and   ∈ new
                                                                                                          t+1the  X̂t+1   ) andand
                                                                                                                        token)   the video frame as the
       probability
        the given videoof them
                            frame.matching.         The CLIP
                                     Similar to image             scorethe
                                                           generation,      is gradient
                                                                                the cross-entropy
                                                                                           of summed loss  scoresLare    between this new probability
                                                                                                                   CLIPpropagated
       distribution
        to the generatorandtothe    original
                                update   the nextdistribution
                                                    token xt+1 .ofWe  thecascade
                                                                           next word       obtained
                                                                                    the video            from theand
                                                                                                  frame captions     generator
                                                                                                                         questionsG (see Equation 4 in
       (Tewel
        about thiset video
                     al., 2021)).    TheGPT-3.
                             to prompt       gradient    of summed
                                                     Results  show that  scores     (multiple
                                                                            utilizing              CLIPframework
                                                                                        the proposed       models) isand propagated
                                                                                                                            GPT-3 to G to update Ct
        enables
       (see       effective5video
              Equation               question
                              in (Tewel          answering.
                                              et al.,  2021)). After several iterations, the updated Ct is used to generate the next
       token
        Gradexschool
                  t+1 =math.
                           G(xtWe      t ). We
                                   , Ctreat   the repeat   this process
                                                   grade school              until we
                                                                  math problem            generate
                                                                                      as the           the entire
                                                                                              text generation       caption.
                                                                                                                problem.       We cascade the captions
                                                                                                                            Similar
       of  multiple
        to video       videoanswering,
                   question     frames and   the questions
                                                 generator isabout
                                                                a GPT-2thismodel
                                                                              video(Medium
                                                                                       to prompt      GPT-3
                                                                                                   size)       forscorers
                                                                                                         and the    videoprovide
                                                                                                                            question answering.
        feedback to the generator to guide the generation of next token xt+1 . The scorers can be text
        classifiers to evaluate the correctness of the output answer for the given math problem (See ??.)

                    # Q: how many people are there in the video
        4     E XPERIMENT
                 # A: 2   S ETUP
                 # Q: what is behind the person in white clothes
        We evaluate
                 # A: thetree
                           proposed framework for composing large models on four representative zero-
        shot tasks, including image generation, video question answering, grade school math, and robot
                 # Q: what is in front of the person with braid
        manipulation.
                 # A: chair
        Image Generation.
                 ...           We first show that composing the image generation model, i.e. GLIDE, and
        multiple scorer
                 # Q: models,
                         what isi.e.
                                  theCLIP, text-image
                                      person          classifier,
                                               in white  doing and classifier-free guidance, enables effective
        zero-shot#image   generation.
                     A: tie  hair      We evaluate the image generation results on ImageNet (Deng et al.,
                 # Q: what happened to the person in gray after he threw a goal
                 # A: clap with your teammates            4
                 # Summarize the following descriptions and answer the question as shown above:
                 a Video showing the new Hair tutorial; a video showing young blond hair clip attaching to
                 top pony tail of teens hair; …; a video on the head hair clip website showing blonde long
                 hair twisted in two knots.

                    # Q: is the person with a golden hair long hair

       Figure A5: Prompt given to GPT-3 for video question answering. Text in black contains the question-answer
       pairs randomly sampled from the ActivityNet-QA training dataset. Text in blue has the video frame captions
       generated by the proposed method. Text in orange is the question about this video that needs to be answered.


       10 frames and the last 10 frames to remove the beginning or ending advertisements. We then take 30
       video frames evenly from the rest frames and send them to GPT-3. To guide GPT-3 to generate proper
       answers, we randomly select 30 question-answer pairs from the training set of ActivityNet-QA (Yu
       et al., 2019) and use them as part of the prompt of GPT-3. As shown in Fig. A5, the prompt of
       GPT-3 consists of examples of question-answer pairs, the video frame captions generated by the
       proposed method, and the question about this video that needs to be answered. The text generated
       by GPT-3 is used as the answer to the question asked. We also used the profanity check tool
       (https://github.com/vzhou842/profanity-check) to remove the improper answers.


                                                                                         17
summed up, and their gradient with respect to Video
                                                 xt is question    answering
                                                        used to obtain     xt+1 : (VQA). We first use the proposed framework to generate video frame
                 Generator (G):               captions.
                                              View 1:
                                               …        XNWe   then    use   GPT-3     to summarize
                                                                                    Generator (G):       the captions
                                                                                                     “rice”
                                                                                                               CLIP 1:
                                                                                                               …
                                                                                                                       and answer questions. As shown in Fig. 2
                                                                 “a bowl with”
                              xt+1 = N (x̂t+1 (c),  our framework       combines     GPT-2      and multiple  CLIP
                                                                                                               (2) 2: models, trained with different configurations,
                 e.g. World Model                             n                2      e.g. GPT2
                                              +     r
                                              View K: x     E ✓ (x  t , c) ,     ),                            CLIP
                                             for zero-shot    videoText
                                                                    frame captioning. Given   a video frame and a text prompt, such as “Image of”, we
           Published as a conference
          State
                                             paper n=1  at(E)ICLR
                            Original result Energy Scorers
                                                                    2023                Original result Energy Scorers (E)
                                             generate a sequence of words to describe the frame. Similar to (Tewel et al., 2021), we define a context
where N is the
            Rednormal    distribution,
                            of Blue Mug N is the number of scorers and
                                                                                         2
                                                                                                   is the variance.
                Bowl on Top
                                                         cache Ct (a set of embedding Input video        functions in Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)) that store the context
                                                                                         frame
Video question answering (VQA). We firstinformation         use the proposed generated      so far. The
                                                                                      framework                 prediction
                                                                                                         to generate        videoof the
                                                                                                                                    frame next word can be written as xt+1 = LM (xt , Ct ),
captions. We then use GPT-3 to summarize where            the captions
                                                                    LM 3:
                                                               Figure       isand
                                                                                theanswer  2. questions.
                                                                                     language
                                                                                Details               model As         shown The
                                                                                                                  (GPT-2).       in Fig.
                                                                                                                                       goal2 is to update Ct iteratively based on the CLIP
(c), our framework combines GPT-2 and multiple           scoreCLIP         models,the
                                                                  to generate          trained
                                                                                           next withworddifferent
                                                                                                             such that   configurations,
                                                                                                                            the sentence is grammatically sound as well as accurately
for zero-shot video frame captioning. Given adescribes      video frame   the and
                                                                               givena text   prompt,
                                                                                         video     frame.   such
                                                                                                               To as do“Image
                                                                                                                          this, we of”,  weuse GPT-2 to generate a set of candidate words
                                                                                                                                     first
generate a sequence of words to describe the frame.      {x̂it+1 },Similar     to (Tewel
                                                                       andcompose
                                                                              then  usethe theetgenerator
                                                                                                 al., 2021),
                                                                                                 feature          we define
                                                                                                             distance            a context
                                                                                                                           between     each sentence    (the concatenation of previous words
        to  generate    image   proposals.       Our  method       can         Question-solution
cache Ct (a set of embedding functions in Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017)) that                                 classifier
                                                                                                                 with store the context scorers,
                                                                                                                          one   or  multiple
        such as
information        CLIP (Radford
                generated   so far. Theetprediction
                                              al., 2021),and    each
                                                                   nextnew
                                                              text-image
                                                         of the             wordword
                                                                                 classifiers
                                                                                   can be         (Dhariwal
                                                                                          {xwritten
                                                                                              1, x          · ,xx̂it+1
                                                                                                    2 , · ·as        &})    and the2021),
                                                                                                                          Nichol,       video and
                                                                                                                                                frame
                                                                                                                                                    theas the probability of them matching.
                                                                                                                 t+1 = LM (xt , Ct ),
where classifier-free
         LM is the languageguidance
                                  model (Ho(GPT-2).      The
                                               & Salimans,The CLIP
                                                                 2022).
                                                                goal     isscore  is theCcross-entropy
                                                                            to update                               loss between this clip distribution and the original distribution of
                                                                                              t iteratively based on the CLIP
score toAsgenerate
             shown in theFig.
                           next2word
                                 (right),suchthethat thethe    next word
                                                           sentence
                                                     candidate
                                                  image     xt generated
                                                                                 obtained
                                                                          is grammatically
                                                                             0
                                                                                           word from
                                                                                 at iteration tsound
                                                                                                         GPT-2.
                                                                                                     generated
                                                                                                      is firstassentwellSimilar
                                                                                                                           asthe   to image generation, the gradient of summed scores
                                                                                                                              5accurately
describes    the given   video frame.      To do   this, (multiple
                                                         we x̂first use  CLIP
                                                                            GPT-2 models)      is propagated
                                                                                           after
                                                                                       to generate   iterative
                                                                                                         a asetscore   totoGPT-2
                                                                                                                  of candidate
                                                                                                                                   GLIDE diffusion
                                                                                                                                    to update Ct . After several iterations, the updated Ct
                                                                                                                                    words
        model    to  generate    an   image      proposal
                                                     word             .  Each     scorer     outputs                     to  evaluate     whether the
{x̂it+1 }, and then use the feature distance between     is usedt+1
                                                                 eachto sentence
                                                                          generate(the  therefinement
                                                                                             next token xt+1
                                                                                             concatenation          of previous
                                                                                                                         = LM (x      t , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate the
                                                                                                                                    words
        generated image matches the               given    text
                                                         entire
                                                                 input.
                                                                   frame
                                                                              For  example,
                                                                              caption.     We
                                                                                                    CLIP
                                                                                                  cascade
                                                                                                               computes
                                                                                                                the   video
                                                                                                                                the
                                                                                                                               frame
                                                                                                                                     cosine     Q: and
                                                                                                                                                    John
                                                                                                                                               distance
                                                                                                                                         captions          buys 2about
                                                                                                                                                        questions   pairs
                                                                                                                                                                        this video to prompt
and each    newimage
        of the    word feature
                          {x1 , x2 ,and       i
                                    · · · ,text   }) and the
                                            x̂t+1feature.    Thevideo       frame as
                                                                    text-image            the probability
                                                                                      classifier      predictsofa them         matching.
                                                                                                                        probability      of theofimage
The CLIP      score is the  cross-entropy      loss      GPT-3
                                                    between     thisfor    video
                                                                        clip        question
                                                                              distribution      andanswering.
                                                                                                      the    original     distribution    of       shoes   for each  of
        matching the text label. The classifier-free guidance can be treated as an implicit classifier that
the next word obtained from GPT-2. Similar to image generation, the gradient of summed scores his 3 children. They
       provides pixel-wise gradient feedback to the generator directly. The energy scores generated by
(multiple CLIP models) is propagated to GPT-2 to update Ct . After several iterations, the updated Ct cost $60 each. How
       different scorers Context
                         are token
is used to generate the next
                              summed    up. We compute the gradient
                                   xinformation
                                                                        of summed
                                                                 Generator:          energy score with respect to
                                                                      this processGPT-2
                                                                                   until we generate4the
                                     t+1 = LM (xt , Ct ). We repeat
       the original
entire frame        image
             caption.      proposal
                      We cascade   thetovideo
                                         update  the generated
                                              frame             image:
                                                     captions and  questions about this video to prompt
                                                                                                         much did he pay?
GPT-3 for video question answering.                              N            X
                                                  xt+1 = xt              rx         E✓n (xt , c) ,                                     (4)
                              A             :           2 4          2        n=1               5
        where N is the number of scorers.
           Figure A6: Overview of solving grade school math problems. We use GPT-2 as the generator and treat the
        Robot
         gradeplanning.
                school math problem as a text generation problem. The scorer, a pre-trained question-solution classifier,
           provides
        Video          the Answering.
                 Question   generator feedback     to the
                                         We first use  guide  the next
                                                          proposed       token’stogeneration
                                                                     framework        generate video      . Wecaptions.
                                                                                                    xt+1frame     follow the approach used in VQA
        Wetothen  use GPT-3optimize
               iteratively     (Brown etthe
                                          al.,generations
                                              2020) to summarize
                                                             basedtheoncaptions   and answer
                                                                         the feedback        fromquestions.
                                                                                                      scorers.AsOur shown
                                                                                                                       generator G first generates a
        in Fig. 3, our framework combines GPT-2 (Medium size) and multiple CLIP models, trained with
           set  of candidate     words   X̂ t+1 = {x̂t+1 }, and then the classifier predicts the probability of each solution (the
        different configurations, for zero-shot video frame captioning. The history tokens {x1 , · · · , xt }
        is concatenation      of previous
           first sent to the generator        wordstheand
                                        to predict         each
                                                        next     new
                                                             token      word
                                                                    x̂t+1 . Then{xthe
                                                                                    1, x 2 , · · · compute
                                                                                        scorers                where
                                                                                                   , x̂t+1 }, the       x̂t+1 ∈ X̂t+1 ) matching the
                                                                                                                   feature
           given question.
        distances               The classifier
                   (scores) between              score is
                                      the new sentence      the cross-entropy
                                                         (concatenation   of historyloss  between
                                                                                      tokens    and thethis
                                                                                                         newnewtoken)probability
                                                                                                                       and        distribution and the
        theoriginal
             given video   frame. Similar
                      distribution  of thetonext
                                               image generation,
                                                   word   obtainedthefrom
                                                                       gradient
                                                                             theofgenerator
                                                                                     summed scoresG. The aregradient
                                                                                                             propagated of the classifier score is used
        to to
           theupdate
                generator
                        Cttothrough
                              update the  next token
                                       iterative      xt+1 . We (see
                                                  refinement    cascade    the video5 frame
                                                                       Equation        in (Tewelcaptions  and 2021)).
                                                                                                       et al.,  questionsThe updated Ct is used to
        about this video to prompt GPT-3. Results show that utilizing the proposed framework and GPT-3
           predict the next word xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate the complete solution.
        enables effective video question answering.
        Grade school math. We treat the grade school math problem as the text generation problem. Similar
        to video question answering, the generator is a GPT-2 model (Medium size) and the scorers provide
        feedback to the generator to guide the generation of next token xt+1 . The scorers can be text
           B.3 to
        classifiers Gevaluate
                     RADE SCHOOL          MATH
                              the correctness of the output answer for the given math problem (See ??.)


        4 We treat the grade
           E XPERIMENT       school math problem as a text generation problem. As shown in Fig. A6, we use
                          S ETUP
           GPT-2 as the generator and a pre-trained question-solution classifier as the scorer. The pre-trained
        Weclassifier   is proposed
            evaluate the  a binaryframework
                                    classifierfortrained  on the
                                                   composing  largetraining  setfour
                                                                     models on    of representative
                                                                                     GSM8K (Cobbe    zero- et al., 2021). Given a
          math
        shot     problem,
             tasks, including such
                              imageas “Nataliavideo
                                    generation,   soldquestion
                                                       clips toanswering,
                                                                 48 of hergrade
                                                                            friends   in math,
                                                                                 school  April,and
                                                                                                 and   then she sold half as many
                                                                                                    robot
        manipulation.
          clips in May. How many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?”, and an answer, such as
          “72”.Generation.
        Image     If the answer
                             We firstis correct
                                        show thatfor  the given
                                                  composing         problem,
                                                               the image          then model,
                                                                           generation   the label    is 1; otherwise,
                                                                                                i.e. GLIDE,   and      the label is 0.
        multiple scorer models, i.e. CLIP, text-image classifier, and classifier-free guidance, enables effective
          After training,
        zero-shot           the classifier
                  image generation.            is used
                                       We evaluate  the as  thegeneration
                                                        image     scorer toresults
                                                                              provide     feedback(Deng
                                                                                      on ImageNet     to theet generator
                                                                                                               al.,      to guide the next
           token’s generation xt+1 . Similar to VQA, the generator G first generates a set of candidate words
           X̂t+1 = {x̂t+1 }, and then the classifier
                                                  4 predicts the probability of each solution (the concatenation
           of previous words and each new word {x1 , x2 , · · · , x̂t+1 }, where x̂t+1 ∈ X̂t+1 ) matching the given
           question. The classifier score is the cross-entropy loss between this new probability distribution and
           the original distribution of the next word obtained from the generator G (the way to compute the
           classifier score is the same as computing the CLIP score in VQA). We also used the cross-entropy loss
           LCE in Equation 2 of ZeroCap (Tewel et al., 2021) to ensure the generated sentence is grammatically
           sound. The context cache Ct is updated in the same way as the video question answering task, but we
           use the classifier score when providing the feedback to Ct . The updated Ct is used to predict the next
           word xt+1 = G(xt , Ct ). We repeat this process until we generate the complete solution. Similarly to
           the video question task, we use 5 steps of gradient descent. The learning rate α is set to 0.3.


           B.4        ROBOT MANIPULATION

           In robot manipulation, we use the proposed method to manipulate objects in Ravens (Zeng et al.,
           2020) to conform to a set of object relations specified by text descriptions or real-world images. We
           use MPC+World Model as the generator and ViLD (Gu et al., 2021) as the scorer. As shown in
           Figure A7, given a real-world image, our model manipulates objects in the environment to achieve a
           state with objects having the same object relations as the given image. We first use ViLD to generate
           a 2D segmentation of the real-world image and the corresponding text label, such as “mug”, for each
           segment. We then use the relative pixel-wise offsets of segmentation masks and the text labels to
           infer a set of object relations (top panel of Figure A7).


                                                                                              18
                        the entire caption. We cascade the captions of multiple video frames and questions about this video to prompt
                        GPT-3 for video question answering.

                                    # Q: how many people are there in the video
cascade the captions of multiple
                              # A: 2 video frames and questions about this video to prompt GPT-3 for
video question answering. # Q: what is behind the person in white clothes                                                                                                                                                     cascade the captions of multiple video frames and questions about this video to prom
                                                                Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
Grade school math. We further
                              # A: tree
                              # Q: what  apply
                                             is inPIC    Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                    frontto
                                                          of solve
                                                             the persongrade withschool
                                                                                   braid math problems. We use GPT-2 as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              video question answering.
the generator and treat the#gradeA: chair school math problem as a text generation problem. The scorer, a
pre-trained question-solution ... classifier, provides the generator feedback to guide the next token’s                                                                                                                       Grade school math. We further apply PIC to solve grade school math problems. We u
generation xt+1 . We follow   # the
                                 Q: what     is the person
                                      approach        used in in white
                                                                  VQAdoing  to iteratively optimize the generations based                                                                                                     the generator and treat the grade school math problem as a text generation problem. T
                              # A: tie hair
on the feedback from scorers. # Q: Our
                                     whatgenerator
                                             happened to   Gthefirst  generates
                                                                   person    inthe    aafter
                                                                                         set he
                                                                                graycaptions  ofthrew
                                                                                                 candidate
                                                                                                         a goal words        {x̂it+1 }, and                                                                                   pre-trained question-solution classifier, provides the generator feedback to guide the
then the classifier predicts#the      probability               cascade                           of multiple      ofvideo       frames       and questions about this video to prompt GPT-3 for
                                 A: clap   with your of      each solution
                                                         teammates                  (the concatenation                  previous        words                                                                                 generation xt+1 . We follow the approach used in VQA to iteratively optimize the gener
and each new word {x1 , x#2 ,Summarize
                                  · · · , x̂it+1the    matching
                                                  }) following  video  thequestion
                                                                             given
                                                                  descriptions           answering.
                                                                                   andquestion.
                                                                                         answer  the The     classifier
                                                                                                      question     as shownscore above:is the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              on the feedback from scorers. Our generator G first generates a set of candidate words
cross-entropy loss betweena this Videonewshowing     the new Hair
                                              probability             tutorial; aand
                                                                distribution        videotheshowing   young
                                                                                               original         blond hair clip
                                                                                                           distribution              attaching
                                                                                                                                of the   tonext
                                                                                                                                                  to
                              top pony tail of teens hair;Grade              school
                                                                                 on themath.      We further
                                                                                                           website apply
                                                                                                                       showingPIC            solve
                                                                                                                                             long grade school math problems. We use GPT-2 as                                 then the classifier predicts the probability of each solution (the concatenation of pre
word obtained from the generator         G. The gradient…;         ofathevideo
                                                                             classifier   head hair
                                                                                            score isclip
                              hair twisted in two knots. the generator and treat the grade school
                                                                                                      used     to update        Ctblonde
                                                                                                                                     through
                                                                                                                                    math     problem     as a text generation problem. The scorer, a
iterative refinement. The updated Ct is used to predict                    the next      word xt+1 = G(x                    Object
                                                                                                                     t , Ct ). We
                                                                                                                                         relations
                                                                                                                                        repeat        specified         Scorer                                                and each new word {x1 , x2 , · · · , x̂it+1 }) matching the given question. The classifier
                                                                pre-trained         question-solution            classifier,       provides       the generator feedback to guide the next token’s
this process until we generate# Q:the     complete
                                     is the   person withsolution.
                                                             a generation
                                                                golden hair long      hair. We follow the approach          by a real-world image                                                                             cross-entropy loss between this new probability distribution and the original distributio
                                                                                   xt+1                                              used in VQA to iteratively optimize the generations            based
                                                                on
                                                                                                                                                                                             red
                                                                                                                                                                                               i bowl to the                  word obtained from the generator G. The gradient of the classifier score is used to updat
Robot manipulation.     Finally,
                   Figure           we illustrate
                            7: Prompt                   how PIC
                                           given to GPT-3        for the
                                                                      canfeedback
                                                                      video  be            from
                                                                                 appliedanswering.
                                                                               question           scorers.
                                                                                             to manipulateText inOur
                                                                                                                  objects
                                                                                                                    blackgenerator
                                                                                                                              in the robot
                                                                                                                             contains     the  first generates a set of candidate words {x̂
                                                                                                                                           G question-answer                                 right  of and
                                                                                                                                                                                               t+1 },  yellow bowl
environment to conform      to a setsampled
                   pairs randomly       of object fromrelations then suchtheasclassifier
                                                        the ActivityNet-QA        “red        predicts
                                                                                         bowlText
                                                                                    dataset.     onintop    the
                                                                                                           of
                                                                                                        blue       probability
                                                                                                                blue
                                                                                                              has   themug”        shown
                                                                                                                         video frame    ofcaptions
                                                                                                                                             each
                                                                                                                                              in solution
                                                                                                                                                     generated (the concatenation of previous       words                     iterative refinement. The updated Ct is used to predict the next word xt+1 = G(xt , Ct
                                                                                                                                                                                             pink mug in front                this process until we generate the complete solution.
Fig. 2 (d). We usebythe
                      thecombination
                           proposed method.  of theTextModel    and
                                                         in orange    iseach
                                                                   Predictive    new
                                                                          the question  word
                                                                                    Controlabout(MPC)
                                                                                                 this1 video
                                                                                                 {x          , ·that  , x̂it+1
                                                                                                                 · · needs
                                                                                                       , x2(Williams               bematching
                                                                                                                             etto})al., 2015) the given question. The classifier score
                                                                                                                                       answered.
                                                                                                                                                                                             of
                                                                                                                                                                                                    is the
                                                                                                                                                                                                 yellow bowl
and the World Model as the generator. At each time              cross-entropy
                                                                     step, we firstloss  use between
                                                                                              MPC to samplethis new         probability
                                                                                                                        a set   of possibledistribution                          Extract of the next
                                                                                                                                                       VILD and the original distribution
actions and then render   the  state   images      (after       word
                                                           executing      obtained
                                                                            an   action)fromfromthe  generator
                                                                                                   multiple       camera
                                                                                                                      G.    The
                                                                                                                              views gradient
                                                                                                                                         using    of the classifier score is used object
                                                                                                                                                                                  to update  blue mug in front
                                                                                                                                                                                             C    through                     Robot manipulation. Finally, we illustrate how PIC can be applied to manipulate object
                   A.4 ROBOT MANIPULATION                                                                                                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                                                                             of red bowl                      environment to conform to a set of object relations such as “red bowl on top of blue mu
the world model. For each action, the scorer computes           iterative      refinement.
                                                                          a summed        score The
                                                                                                  acrossupdated
                                                                                                            all camera  Ct isviewsusedas       predict the next word xt+1 =relations
                                                                                                                                           toits                                 G(xt , Ct ). We repeat
final score, which In
                   is used
                      robot to   select the best
                              manipulation,          weaction
                                                         use thethis   process method
                                                                   toproposed
                                                                       execute.     until wetogenerate
                                                                                                  manipulate     theobjects
                                                                                                                       complete         solution.
                                                                                                                                  in Ravens       (Zeng et al.,                                                               Fig. 2 (d). We use the combination of the Model Predictive Control (MPC) (Williams
                        2020) to conform to a set of object relations specified by text descriptions or real-world images. We                                                                                                 and the  World
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Goal  objectModel as the generator. At each time step, we first use MPC to sample a se
For the generator, use
                     we MPC+World
                          assume that there       is a pre-trained        model,
                                                              Robot manipulation.     i.e. worldFinally,
                                                                                                      model,
                                                                                                        et al.,we
                                                                                                                 thatillustrate
                                                                                                                         can    accurately
                                                                                                                                     how PIC    As can       inCamera
                                                                                                                                                         be applied        View 1
                                                                                                                                                                        to manipulate  objects in the robot
render and simulate     the dynamic
                                          model as the generator            and the ViLD (Gu                    2021)       as the scorer.          shown                                         red  bowl to in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              actions  and then render the state images (after executing an action) from multiple camera
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    relations
                    Figure   9, given achanges
                                          real-world  in image,
                                                         theenvironment
                                                               robot ourworld.
                                                                          model to   Since     such ato
                                                                                         conform
                                                                                     manipulates         large
                                                                                                           a setpre-trained
                                                                                                        objects    ofthe
                                                                                                                   in    object       model tosuch
                                                                                                                                    relations
                                                                                                                             environment                  as “red
                                                                                                                                                    achieve   a bowl on top of blue mug”            shown
                                                                                                                                                                                                  right of yellow bowl        the world model. For each action, the scorer computes a summed score across all camera
does not directly exist,   we  approximate      it using
                    state with objects having the same      an   environment
                                                              Fig.     2 (d).
                                                                  object              simulator
                                                                                 We use
                                                                            relations                combined
                                                                                              thegiven
                                                                                          as the    combination      with
                                                                                                           image. Weoffirst   MPC
                                                                                                                               theuse  as
                                                                                                                                     Model the
                                                                                                                                         ViLDPredictive
                                                                                                                                                  to generateControl (MPC) (Williams et al., 2015)
generator. For theascorer,     we use the
                      2D segmentation       of pre-trained
                                               the real-world andViLD      (Guandetthe
                                                                      the World
                                                                     image             al.,corresponding
                                                                                      Model  2021)     to generate
                                                                                                  as the   generator.
                                                                                                               text label,segmentation
                                                                                                                              Atsuch
                                                                                                                                  each as time
                                                                                                                                           “mug”, step,
                                                                                                                                                     for we
                                                                                                                                                          eachfirst use MPC to sampleVILDa set pink      mug in front
                                                                                                                                                                                                  of possible                 final
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Matchscore, which is used to select the best action to execute.
maps for images segment.
                    captured We  by different
                                      then use the camera
                                                       relative views,
                                                              actions      and then
                                                                           and
                                                                   pixel-wise     the    corresponding
                                                                                          render
                                                                                    offsets          the statetext
                                                                                               of segmentation    images label(after
                                                                                                                        masks     for
                                                                                                                                   andeach
                                                                                                                                         executing
                                                                                                                                         the             an action)
                                                                                                                                               text labels   to        from multiple              of yellow
                                                                                                                                                                                       camera views
                                                                                                                                                                                    Extract                    bowl
                                                                                                                                                                                                           using             Score 1=0
segment, which are     used   to of
                                  obtain
                                     objectobject   relations.       We of compare        the                                                                                                                                 For the generator, we assume that there is a pre-trained model, i.e. world model, that ca
                    infer  a set             relations    (topthepanel
                                                                    world     Figure
                                                                              model.9).     Forgenerated
                                                                                                  each action, objecttherelations        and
                                                                                                                             scorer computes          a summed score across all        camera views
                                                                                                                                                                                     object       blue mug as its
                                                                                                                                                                                                               in front
the relations specified by the text description to final       obtain     the scorer,
                                                                       score,    which i.e.  is   score equals 0the       if they
                                                                                                                              best match;                                                                                     render and simulate the dynamic changes in the robot world. Since such a large pre-tr
                    Given the current world state xt , we aim               to generate      anused
                                                                                                  actiontoaselect
                                                                                             Generator:
                                                                                                                                      action to execute.
                                                                                                             t+1 so that the new world state after                                 relations of red bowl
otherwise, 1 (hereexecuting
                     the scoreameans        the  distance).       To   obtain     a  final   world     state   x     that    satisfies
                                                                                                                                 Candidatethe                            …                                                       … not directly exist,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              does               Summedwe approximate it using an environment simulator combined with
                                   t+1 has object relations the same as object relations in the given image. To do this, we
                                                                                                                 T
specified relations,first
                      andusethethe
                                 action  sequence       {a1 ,For
                                                               · · · ,the
                                                                       aT generator,
                                                                           } that            weMPC
                                                                                  to manipulates
                                                                                                   assume      that
                                                                                                          +of objects
                                                                                                    a setthe
                                                                                                                       there     is a pre-trained
                                                                                                                            intoactions
                                                                                                                                   the  final           model, i.e. world model, that can accurately           …              generator. +For the score
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   scorer,
                                    generator    (MPC+World            model)         generate                 candidate         action             } and the Camera View N                                                                             0 we use the pre-trained ViLD (Gu et al., 2021) to generate s
                                                                                                                                               k
                                                                                                                                            {ât+1
state xT , the generator iteratively samples possible         render
                                                                  actions andâit+1
                                                                                 simulate
                                                                                       andWorld  thefeedback
                                                                                              gets    dynamic
                                                                                                        Model from   changes scorers.in the
                                                                                                                                         Therobot world. Since such a large pre-trained                 model
                                                                                                                                                                                                  red bowl to the             maps for images captured by different camera views, and the corresponding text la
best action is selected by:                                   does     not   directly      exist,   we   approximate           it using     an   environment       simulator  combined    with    MPC     as  the
                                                               X N
                                                              generator.        For the14 scorer, we use the pre-trained ViLD (Gu et al., 2021) to generate segmentation maps
                                                                                                                                                                                                  right of yellow bowl        segment, which are used to obtain object relations. We compare the generated object r
                                       at+1 = arg World min state      E✓n (xt , ât+1 ).                                                  (4)                                       VILD         pink mug in front           the  relations specified by the text description to obtain the scorer, i.e. score equals 0 if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Match
                                                     ât+1 for      images       captured by different camera views, and the corresponding text label for each                                       segment,
                                                                                                                                                                                                  of yellow bowl             Score N=0 1 (here the score means the distance). To obtain a final world state xT that
Each scorer, E✓n , outputs a score for the resultant
                                                               n=1
                                                             which  stateareobtained
                                                                               used to when obtainaobject       relations.
                                                                                                        candidate        actionWe       compare
                                                                                                                                    ât+1    is       the generated object relationsExtract
                                                                                                                                                                                          and the relations                   otherwise,
applied to the current world state xt . We executespecified      at+1 in the  by environment
                                                                                    the text descriptionand get atonew     obtain
                                                                                                                                statethext+1scorer,
                                                                                                                                               .       i.e. score equals 0 if they      match; blue
                                                                                                                                                                                     object             mug in front
                                                                                                                                                                                                   otherwise,                 specified relations, and the action sequence {a1 , · · · , aT } that manipulates the objects
                                                                                                                                                                                                  of red bowl
We repeat this process until the task is accomplished        1 (here       theare
                                                                       or we     scoreat themeans
                                                                                                final the
                                                                                                       stepdistance)
                                                                                                              T.              (see Appendix A.4 for details). To obtain            relations
                                                                                                                                                                                        a final world       state             state xT , the generator iteratively samples possible actions âit+1 and gets feedback from
                                                              xT that satisfies the specified relations,                      Actionand sampled
                                                                                                                                           the action   in sequence {a1 , · · · , aT } that manipulates                       best action is selected by: Action with the          N
                                                              the    objects     into    the    final   state   x    ,  the   generator        iteratively
                                                                                                                              different iterations            samples     possible  actions  â k
                                                                                                                                                                                                     and     gets                                          minimum summed         X
4 E XPERIMENT S ETUP                                                                                              T
                                                                                                                                                               Camera View 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                t+1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Goal object           score: at+1 = arg min        E✓n (xt , ât+1 ).
                                                              feedback from scorers. The best action is selected                         …X       by:
                                                                                                                                                 N                                                red bowl to the                   relations                              ât+1
We evaluate the proposed framework for composing pre-trained models on four representative tasks,                                                                                                                                                                                  n=1
including image generation, video question answering, grade school math, and robot
                                                                                                                   at+1 = arg min
                                                                                                                         manipulation.
                                                                                                                                                     E✓n (xt , âkt+1 ).                          right of yellow
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (4) bowl        Each scorer, E✓n , outputs a score for the resultant state obtained when a candidate ac
                                                                                                                                    âk
                                                                                                                                      t+1      n=1                                   VILD         pink mug in front           applied
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Not Matchto the current world state xt . We execute at+1 in the environment and get a ne
Image generation. We first show that composingEach                      scorer, E✓image
                                                                 the pre-trained        n
                                                                                          , outputs      a scoremodel
                                                                                                   generation          for the  andresultant
                                                                                                                                      scorer state obtained when a candidate        Extractaction of yellow    is
                                                                                                                                                                                                       âkt+1 bowl           Score 1=1 this process until the task is accomplished or we are at the final step T .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              We repeat
models such as CLIP enables effective zero-shot image         appliedgeneration.
                                                                            to the current         world state
                                                                                            We evaluate              xt . We
                                                                                                              the image            execute at+1 in the environment and object
                                                                                                                                generation                                           get a new bluestatemugxt+1 on. top of
results on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) with theWe               image
                                                                     repeat resolution
                                                                                this process of 64until
                                                                                                      ⇥ 64. theThetaskclass      labels are
                                                                                                                           is accomplished           or we are at the final step T .              red  bowl
                                                                                                                                                                                   relations
used as text input to guide image generation. Each method generates 50 images for each class.                                    CandidateWe                            …                                                     4 … E XPERIMENT S ETUP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Summed
evaluate the image generation quality using Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016),action                                     Fréchetk+2                                                                …                         +
                                                                                                                                            ât+1               Camera View N                                 (5)                                 score N
Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), and Kernel Inception Distance (KID) (Bińkowski                                                                                                   red bowl to the             We evaluate the proposed framework for composing pre-trained models on four represe
et al., 2018). IS measures the distribution of generated images. Higher values mean the models                                                                                                    right of yellow bowl        including image generation, video question answering, grade school math, and robot m
can generate more distinct images. FID considers              4 both   E XPERIMENT
                                                                         the distribution of        S ETUP
                                                                                                       generated images and the
                                                                                                                                                                                     VILD         pink mug in front          Not Match
distribution of real images. Lower scores represent the generated images are closer to the real images.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  of yellow bowl              Image generation. We first show that composing the pre-trained image generation mod
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Score N=1
KID is similar to FID, measuring the similarity between      We evaluate  two data thedistributions
                                                                                         proposed framework but in the for   kernel                                                 Extract
                                                                                                                                       space. pre-trained models on four representative tasks,
                                                                                                                                  composing
                                                                                                                                         models such as CLIP enables effective zero-shot image generation. We evaluate the imag
                                                              including        image      generation,                                                   grade school math, andobject              blue mug on top of
Video question answering. We evaluate methods                       for solving        VQA       tasks onvideo          question answering,
                                                                                                              ActivityNet-QA             (Yu                                          robot manipulation.
                                                                                                                                         results on ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009) with the image resolution of 64 ⇥ 64. The cla
                                                                                                                                                                                   relations red bowl
et al., 2019). Our method generates free-form language        Image answers
                                                                          generation.   insteadWeoffirstselecting
                                                                                                            show that  an answer
                                                                                                                              composing  used as text input to guide image generation. Each method generates 50 images for ea
                                                                                                                                        from the pre-trained image generation model and scorer
a pre-defined answer set (Yang et al., 2021; Lei models       et al., 2022).
                                                                           such as  ToCLIPevaluate     sucheffective
                                                                                                  enables      free-formzero-shotVQA, weimage generation. We evaluate the image generation
                                                                                                                                         evaluate the image generation quality using Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 20
ask workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk to measure            results on    whether
                                                                                ImageNet  the generated
                                                                                                  (Deng et answer
                                                                                                                al., 2009)   matches
                                                                                                                                  with thethe image resolution of 64 ⇥ 64. The class labels are
                                                                                                                                         Inception Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), and Kernel Inception Distance (KID)
given question and video (See Appendix B forused                IRB as  approval
                                                                           text input  andtoexperimental
                                                                                                 guide imagedetails).generation.    For Each
                                                                                                                                          fair method generates 50 images for each class. We
                                                         Figure A7: Overview of robot manipulation. We use MPC+World Model as            et al.,
                                                                                                                                             the2018).   IS measures
                                                                                                                                                   generator
                                                              evaluate the image generation quality using Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al., 2016), Fréchet and the  distribution
                                                                                                                                                                       ViLD     as theof generated images. Higher values mean
                                                                                                                                         can generate more distinct images. FID considers both the distribution of generated im
                                                         scorer to manipulate objects to conform to a set of object relations specified by
                                                              Inception
                                                                5                                                                            text descriptions
                                                                                                                                                      of real images. or
                                                                               Distance (FID) (Heusel et al., 2017), and Kernel Inception Distance (KID) (Bińkowski
                                                                                                                                         distribution
                                                              et al., 2018). IS measures the distribution of generated images. Higher values mean the models
                                                                                                                                                                         real-world
                                                                                                                                                                      Lower  scores represent the generated images are closer to the
                                                         images. Top: given a real-world image, we first use ViLD to generate a 2D segmentation
                                                                                                                                         KID is similarofto the
                                                                                                                                                            FID, real-world
                                                              can generate more distinct images. FID considers both the distribution of generated images and the                image between two data distributions but in the
                                                                                                                                                                 measuring the similarity
                                                              distribution of real images. Lower scores represent the generated images are closer to the real images.
                                                         and the corresponding text label, such as “mug”, for each segment. We then use
                                                              KID is similar to FID, measuring the similarity between two data distributions but in the kernel space.
                                                                                                                                                                          Videothe   relative
                                                                                                                                                                                   question     pixel-wise
                                                                                                                                                                                             answering.       offsets
                                                                                                                                                                                                        We evaluate  methods for solving VQA tasks on Activity
                                                                                                                                                                          et al., 2019). Our method generates free-form language answers instead of selecting an
                                                         of segmentation         masksWeand
                                                              Video question answering.           themethods
                                                                                            evaluate    text for
                                                                                                               labels
                                                                                                                  solvingto
                                                                                                                          VQAinfer
                                                                                                                                tasks a
                                                                                                                                      on set   of object
                                                                                                                                         ActivityNet-QA   (Yurelations. Bottom:        Given the current world
                                                                                                                                                                          a pre-defined answer set (Yang et al., 2021; Lei et al., 2022). To evaluate such free-for
                                                         stateet al., , we Our
                                                                 xt2019).  aimmethod
                                                                                to generate       an action
                                                                                     generates free-form           t+1 so
                                                                                                         languageaanswers     thatof the
                                                                                                                          instead          new
                                                                                                                                     selecting     world
                                                                                                                                               an answer    state after executing
                                                                                                                                                         from             ask workersafrom     has object
                                                                                                                                                                                         t+1 Amazon         relations
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mechanical Turk to measure whether the generated answer
                                                         closer to the object relations in the given image. To do this, we first use thegiven                                     question (MPC+World
                                                                                                                                                                           generator        and video (See Appendix
                                                                                                                                                                                                              model) B for IRB approval and experimental deta
                                                                                                            5
                                                         to generate a set of candidate actions                  {âkt+1 } and the corresponding world states {x̂kt+1 } after executing each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                         candidate action. For each new world state x̂kt+1 , we render N 2D images from N camera views. Each rendered
                                                         image is sent to VILD to get a segmentation map and text labels. We project the objects into 3D space based on
                                                         the segmentation map and the depth map of the image. We then obtain the object relations based on their 3D
                                                         positions and predicted text labels. We compare the object relations obtained from each rendered image and
                                                         the object relations obtained from the real-world image to compute the score. The score is 0 if the relations are
                                                         matching; otherwise, 1. We sum the scores from each rendered image to obtain the final score. We choose the
                                                         action at+1 that leads to a world state with the minimum summed score. We execute at+1 in the environment
                                                         and get a new state xt+1 . We repeat this process until the task is accomplished or we are at the final step T .


                                                         Given the current world state xt , we aim to generate an action at+1 so that the new world state after
                                                         executing at+1 has object relations closer to the object relations in the given image. To do this, we
                                                         first use the generator (MPC+World Model) to generate a set of candidate actions {âkt+1 } and the
                                                         corresponding world states {x̂kt+1 } after executing each candidate action. For each new world state
                                                         x̂kt+1 , we render N 2D images from N camera views. Each rendered image is sent to VILD to get a
                                                         segmentation map and text labels. We project the objects into 3D space based on the segmentation
                                                         map and the depth map of the image. We then obtain the object relations based on their 3D positions
                                                         and the predicted text labels. We compare the object relations obtained from each rendered image
                                                         and the object relations obtained from the real-world image to compute the score. The score is 0 if
                                                         the relations are matching; otherwise, 1. We sum the scores from each rendered image to obtain the
                                                         final score. We choose the action at+1 that leads to a world state with the minimum summed score.
                                                         We execute at+1 in the environment and get a new state xt+1 . We repeat this process until the task is
                                                         accomplished or we are at the final step T , where T equals to the number of relations extracted from
                                                         the real-world image.


                                                                                                                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure A8: Screenshot of the approval form from the Committee on the Use of Humans as Experimental
Subjects.


B.5    A UNIFIED FRAMEWORK FOR COMPOSING PRE - TRAINED MODELS

Our method shares some similar architecture with existing works, such as ZeroCap (Tewel et al.,
2021) and CLIP-guided diffusion models (Nichol et al., 2021). However, the focus of our paper is to
propose a general framework for composing different pre-trained models across a variety of tasks, and
these particular methods are concrete instantiations of our proposed framework. In addition, in this
work, we also illustrate how we may combine ensembles of different pre-trained models as scorers to
leverage the “wisdom of the crowds” where each scorer provides complementary feedback to the
generator, compensating for the potential weaknesses of other scorers. Through iterative optimization
and the composition of multiple scorers, our method shows effective zero-shot generalization ability
on various multimodal tasks.

C     E THICS S TATEMENT OF A MAZON M ECHANICAL T URK E XPERIMENTS
To evaluate approaches on solving the zero-shot video question answering tasks, we ask workers
from Amazon Mechanical Turk to evaluate the generated answer based on the video and the asked
question. Before showing the questions and answers to the workers, we used the profanity check tool
(https://github.com/vzhou842/profanity-check) to remove the improper questions
and answers. As shown in Fig. A8, this experiment was approved by the Committee on the Use of
Humans as Experimental Subjects. A screenshot of the task is shown in Fig. A9. The instructions
shown to participants are listed as follows:
            Instructions: By making judgments about these questions and answers, you are participat-
            ing in a study being performed by [XXX]. Your participation in this research is voluntary.
            You may decline further participation, at any time, without adverse consequences. Your
            anonymity is assured; the researchers who have requested your participation will not receive
            any personal information about you.
Given a video, a question, and a generated answer, the workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk
measure whether the answer is correct for the given question and video. Each video shows three
question-answer pairs (only one question-answer pair is shown in the screenshot). The answers are
generated by different methods. The workers are not told which method generates each answer. The
workers are asked to choose “yes” or “no”. If the worker thinks the answer matches the given video
and question, they should choose “yes”; otherwise, “no”.
To control the quality, each task is evaluated by three different workers. The workers are required to
have an approval rate greater than 98%. Our test shows that each task takes around 10 seconds, but
the workers are given up to one hour to complete each task. The workers are paid $0.05 for finishing
each task with an estimated hourly payment of $18, more than the United States federal minimum
wage. There are 33 workers in total who joined our experiment.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure A9: Screenshot of Amazon Mechanical Turk we used for the video question answering experiment.
Workers are shown a video, three questions, and the answer to each question. The answers are generated by
different methods. The workers are not told which method generates each answer. The workers are asked
to select “yes” or “no” based on their measurement of whether the answer is correct for the given video and
question.


                                                    21
