Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NSUPERVISED M ODEL S ELECTION FOR T IME - SERIES
A NOMALY D ETECTION
 Mononito Goswami & Cristian Challu∗                 Laurent Callot, Lenon Minorics & Andrey Kan
 Carnegie Mellon University                          Amazon Research
 {mgoswami,cchallu}@cs.cmu.edu                       {lcallot,avkan}@amazon.com,
                                                     minorics@amazon.de



                                                A BSTRACT

             Anomaly detection in time-series has a wide range of practical applications. While
             numerous anomaly detection methods have been proposed in the literature, a re-
             cent survey concluded that no single method is the most accurate across various
             datasets. To make matters worse, anomaly labels are scarce and rarely available in
             practice. The practical problem of selecting the most accurate model for a given
             dataset without labels has received little attention in the literature. This paper an-
             swers this question i.e. Given an unlabeled dataset and a set of candidate anomaly
             detectors, how can we select the most accurate model? To this end, we identify
             three classes of surrogate (unsupervised) metrics, namely, prediction error, model
             centrality, and performance on injected synthetic anomalies, and show that some
             metrics are highly correlated with standard supervised anomaly detection perfor-
             mance metrics such as the F1 score, but to varying degrees. We formulate metric
             combination with multiple imperfect surrogate metrics as a robust rank aggrega-
             tion problem. We then provide theoretical justification behind the proposed ap-
             proach. Large-scale experiments on multiple real-world datasets demonstrate that
             our proposed unsupervised approach is as effective as selecting the most accurate
             model based on partially labeled data.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Anomaly detection in time-series data has gained considerable attention from the academic and
industrial research communities due to the explosion in the amount of data produced and the number
of automated system requiring some form of monitoring. A large number of anomaly detection
methods have been developed to solve this task (Schmidl et al., 2022; Blázquez-Garcı́a et al., 2021),
ranging from simple algorithms (Keogh et al., 2005; Ramaswamy et al., 2000) to complex deep-
learning models (Xu et al., 2018; Challu et al., 2022). These models have significant variance in
performance across datasets (Schmidl et al., 2022; Paparrizos et al., 2022b), and evaluating their
actual performance on real-world anomaly detection tasks is non-trivial, even when labeled datasets
are available (Wu & Keogh, 2021).
Labels are seldom available for many, if not most, anomaly detection tasks. Labels are indications
of which time points in a time-series are anomalous. The definition of an anomaly varies with the
use case, but these definitions have in common that anomalies are rare events. Hence, accumulating
a sizable number of labeled anomalies typically requires reviewing a large portion of a dataset by
a domain expert. This is an expensive, time-consuming, subjective, and thereby error-prone task
which is a considerable hurdle for labeling even a subset of data. Unsurprisingly, a large number
of time-series anomaly detection methods are unsupervised or semi-supervised – i.e. they do not
require any anomaly labels during training and inference.
There is no single universally best method (Schmidl et al., 2022; Paparrizos et al., 2022b). Therefore
it is important to select the most accurate method for a given dataset without access to anomaly
labels. The problem of unsupervised anomaly detection model selection has been overlooked in the
literature, even though it is a key problem in practical applications. Thus, we offer an answer to the
    ∗
        Work carried out when the first two authors were interns at Amazon AWS AI Labs.


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       Metrics on Test TS

                                                                                               M3
                                                                                     MSE
                                                                                               M2
                                                                                               M1
                                                                                                            Best Model
                                                       Prediction Error
                              M1
                                                                                               M3               M3
                                                                                     Scale
                                                                                               M2     RRA       M2
                                                                                    Anomaly
                              M2                                                               M1               M1

                                               Synthetic Anomaly Injection
               Train TS                    0   0   0   0    1   1   1   0   0   0
                                                                                               M3
                              M3                                                    Dist. to
                                           0   0   0   1    1   1   1   0   0   0              M2
                                           1   0   0   0    0   1   1   1   0   0
                                                                                     NN
                                                                                               M1
                          Trained Models                   Model Centrality
                                                                                           Rankings


Figure 1: The Model Selection Workflow. We identify three classes of surrogate metrics of model
quality (Sec. 3), and propose a novel robust rank aggregation framework to combine multiple rank-
ings from metrics (Sec. 4).


question: Given an unlabeled dataset and a set of candidate models, how can we select the most
accurate model?
Our approach is based on computing “surrogate” metrics that correlate with model performance
yet do not require anomaly labels, followed by aggregating model ranks induced by these metrics
(Fig. 1). Empirical evaluation on 10 real-world datasets spanning diverse domains such as medicine,
sports, etc. shows that our approach can perform unsupervised model selection as efficiently as
selection based on labeling a subset of data.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:

       • To the best of our knowledge, we propose one of the first methods for unsupervised se-
         lection of anomaly detection models on time-series data. To this end, we identify intuitive
         and effective unsupervised metrics for model performance. Prior work has used a few of
         these unsupervised metrics for problems other than time-series anomaly detection model
         selection.
       • We propose a novel robust rank aggregation method for combining multiple surrogate met-
         rics into a single model selection criterion. We show that our approach performs on par
         with selection based on labeling a subset of data.
       • We conduct large-scale experiments on over 275 diverse time-series, spanning a gamut
         of domains such as medicine, entomology, etc. with 5 popular and widely-used anomaly
         detection models, each with 1 to 4 hyper-parameter combinations, resulting in over 5,000
         trained models. Upon acceptance, we will make our code publicly available.

In the next section, we formalize the model selection problem. We then describe the surrogate metric
classes in Sec. 3, and present our rank aggregation method in Sec. 4. Our empirical evaluation is
described in Sec. 5. Finally, we summarize related work in Sec. 6 and conclude in Sec. 7.

2   P RELIMINARIES & T HE M ODEL S ELECTION P ROBLEM
Let {xt , yt }Tt=1 denote a multivariate time-series (TS) with observations (x1 , . . . , xT ), xt ∈ Rd
and anomaly labels (y1 , . . . , yT ), yt ∈ {0, 1}, where yt = 1 indicates that the observation xt is an
anomaly. The labels are only used for evaluating our selection approaches, but not for the model
selection procedure itself.
Next, let M = {Ai }N
                   i=1 denote a set of N candidate anomaly detection models. Each model Ai is
a tuple (detector, hyper-parameters), i.e., a combination of an anomaly detection method
(e.g. LSTM-VAE (Park et al., 2018)) and a fully specified hyper-parameter configuration (e.g. for
LSTM-VAE, hidden layer size=128, num layers=2, · · · ).
Here, we only consider models that do not require anomaly labels for training. Some models still
                                                                                               ttest −1
require unlabeled time-series as training data. We therefore, consider a train/test split {xt }t=1      ,


                                                                            2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


{xt }Tt=ttest , where the former is used if a model requires training (without labels). In our notation,
Ai denotes a trained model.
We assume that a trained model Ai , when applied to observations {xt }Tt=ttest , produces anomaly
scores {sit }Tt=ttest , sit ∈ R≥0 . We assume that a higher anomaly score indicates that the observation is
more likely to be an anomaly. However, we do not assume that the scores correspond to likelihoods
of any particular statistical model or that the scores are comparable across models.
Model performance or, equivalently, quality of the scores can be measured using a supervised metric
Q({st }Tt=1 , {yt }Tt=1 ), such as the Area under Precision Recall curve or best F1 score, commonly
used in literature. We discuss the choice of the quality metric in the next section.
In general, rather than considering a single time-series, we will be performing model selection for a
set of L time-series with observations X = {{xjt }Tt=1 }L                                 T   L
                                                             j=1 and labels Y = {{yt }t=1 }j=1 , where j
indexes time-series. Let Xtrain , Xtest , and Ytest denote the train and test portions of observations, and
the test portion of labels, respectively. We are now ready to introduce the following problem.
Problem 1. Unsupervised Time-series Anomaly Detection Model Selection. Given observations
Xtest and a set of models M = {Ai }N i=1 trained using Xtrain , select a model that maximizes the
anomaly detection quality metric Q(Ai (Xtest ), Ytest ). The selection procedure cannot use labels.

2.1   M EASURING A NOMALY D ETECTION M ODEL P ERFORMANCE

Anomaly Detection can be viewed as a binary classification problem where each time point is classi-
fied as an anomaly or a normal observation. Hence, the performance of a model Ai can be measured
using standard precision and recall metrics. However, these metrics ignore the sequential nature
of time-series; thus, time-series anomaly detection is usually evaluated using adjusted versions of
precision and recall (Paparrizos et al., 2022a). We adopt widely used adjusted versions of precision
and recall (Xu et al., 2018; Challu et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2020; Su et al., 2019; Carmona et al.,
2021). These metrics treat time points as independent samples, except when an anomaly lasts for
several consecutive time points. In this case, detecting any of these points is treated as if all points
inside the anomalous segment were detected.
Adjusted precision and recall can be summarized in a metric called adjusted F1 score, which is
the harmonic mean of the two. The adjusted F1 score depends on the choice of a decision thresh-
old on anomaly scores. In line with several recent studies, we consider threshold selection as a
problem orthogonal to our problem (Schmidl et al., 2022; Laptev et al., 2015; Blázquez-Garcı́a
et al., 2021; Rebjock et al., 2021; Paparrizos et al., 2022a;b) and therefore, consider metrics that
summarize model performance across all possible thresholds. Common metrics include area under
the precision-recall curve and best F1 (maximum F1 over all possible thresholds). Like Xu et al.
(2018), we found a strong correlation between the two (App. A.11). We also found best F1 to have
statistically significant positive correlation with volume under the surface of ROC curve, a recently
proposed robust evaluation metric (App. A.10). Thus, in the remainder of the paper, we restrict our
analysis to identifying models with the highest adjusted best F1 score (i.e. Q is adjusted best F1 ).

3     S URROGATE M ETRICS OF M ODEL P ERFORMANCE

The problem of unsupervised model selection is often viewed as finding an unsupervised metric
which correlates well with supervised metrics of interest (Ma et al., 2021; Goix, 2016; Lin et al.,
2020; Duan et al., 2019). Each unsupervised metric serves as a noisy measure of “model good-
ness” and reduces the problem of picking the best performing model according to the metric. We
identified three classes of imperfect metrics that closely align with expert intuition in predicting the
performance of time-series anomaly detection models. Our metrics are unsupervised because they
do not require anomaly labels. However, some metrics such as F1 score on synthetic anomalies are
typically used for supervised evaluation. To avoid confusion we use term surrogate for our metrics.
Below we elaborate on each class of surrogate metrics, starting with an intuition behind each class.

Prediction Error If a model can forecast or reconstruct time-series well it must also be a good
anomaly detector. A large number of anomaly detection methods are based on forecasting or re-
construction (Schmidl et al., 2022), and for such models, we can compute forecasting or recon-


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


struction error without anomaly labels. We collectively call these prediction error metrics and con-
sider a common set of statistics, such as mean absolute error, mean squared error, mean absolute
percentage error, symmetric mean absolute percentage error, and the likelihood of observations.
For multivariate time-series, we average each metric across all the variables. For example, given
a series of observations {xt }Tt=1 and their predictions {x̂t }Tt=1 , mean squared error is defined as
            PT
MSE = T1 t=1 (xt − x̂t )2 . In the interest of space, we refer the reader to a textbook (e.g., Hynd-
man & Athanasopoulos (2018)) for definitions of other metrics. Prior work on time-series anomaly
detection (Saganowski & Andrysiak, 2020; Laptev et al., 2015; Kuang et al., 2022) used forecast-
ing error to select between some classes of models. Prediction metrics are not perfect for model
selection because the time-series can contain anomalies. Low prediction errors are desirable for all
points except anomalies, but we do not know where anomalies are without labels. While prediction
metrics can only be computed for anomaly detection methods based on time-series forecasting or
reconstruction, the next two classes of metrics apply to any anomaly detection method.

Synthetic Anomaly Injection A good anomaly
                                                               Spikes anomaly Contextual anomaly   Flip anomaly
detection model will perform well on data with syn-                 2.0
                                                                    1.5
                                                                    1.0
thetically injected anomalies. Some studies have                    0.5
                                                                    0.0
                                                                    0.5

previously explored using synthetic anomaly injec-            Speedup anomaly
                                                                    1.0

                                                                    2.0
                                                                                Noise anomaly     Cutoff anomaly
tion to train anomaly detection models (Carmona                     1.5
                                                                    1.0
                                                                    0.5


et al., 2021). Here, we extend this line of research by             0.0
                                                                    0.5

                                                               Scale anomaly   Wander anomaly    Average anomaly
                                                                    1.0


systematically evaluating model selection capability                2.0
                                                                    1.5
                                                                    1.0

after injecting different kinds of anomalies. Given                 0.5
                                                                    0.0
                                                                    0.5

an input time-series without anomaly labels, we ran-                1.0
                                                                          0   200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 0   200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 0   200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600


domly inject an anomaly of a particular type. The
location of the injected anomaly is then treated as Figure 2: Different kinds of synthetic anoma-
a (pseudo-)positive label, while the rest of the time lies. We inject 9 different types of syn-
points are treated as a (pseudo-)negative label. We thetic anomalies randomly, one at a time,
then select a model that achieves the best adjusted across multiple copies of the original time-
F1 score with respect to pseudo-labels. Instead of series. The - - is original time-series be-
relying on complex deep generative models (Wen fore anomalies are injected, – is the injected
et al., 2020) we devise simple and efficient yet ef- anomaly and the solid – is the time-series af-
fective procedures to inject anomalies of previously ter anomaly injection.
described types (Schmidl et al., 2022; Wu & Keogh, 2021) as shown in Fig. 2. We defer the details
of anomaly injection approaches to Appendix A.5. Model selection based on anomaly injection
might not be perfect because (i) real anomalies might be of a different type compared to injected
ones, and (ii) there may already be anomalies for which our pseudo-labels will be negative.

Model Centrality There is only one ground truth, thus models close to ground truth are close
to each other. Hence, the most “central” model is the best one. Centrality-based metrics have
seen recent success in unsupervised model selection for disentangled representation learning (Lin
et al., 2020; Duan et al., 2019) and anomaly detection (Ma et al., 2021). To adapt this approach
to time-series, we leverage the scores from the anomaly detection models to define a notion of
model proximity. Anomaly scores of different models are not directly comparable. However, since
anomaly detection is performed by thresholding the scores, we can consider ranking of time points
by their anomaly scores. Let σk (i) denote the rank of time point i according to the scores from
model k. We define the distance between models Ak and Al as the Kendall’s τ distance, which is
the number of pairwise disagreements:
                                         X
                       dτ (σk , σl ) =         I{(σk (i) − σk (j))(σl (i) − σl (j)) < 0}                                                                                                            (1)
                                         i<j


Next, we measure model centrality as the average distance to its K nearest neighbors, where K is
a parameter. This metric favors models which are close to their nearest neighbors. The centrality-
based approach is imperfect, because “bad” models might produce similar results and form a cluster.
Each metric, while imperfect, is predictive of anomaly detection performance but to a varying extent
as we show in Sec. 5. Access to multiple noisy metrics raises a natural question: How can we
combine multiple imperfect metrics to improve model selection performance?


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     ROBUST R ANK AGGREGATION
Many studies have explored the benefits of combining multiple sources of noisy information to
reduce error in different areas of machine learning such as crowd-sourcing (Dawid & Skene, 1979)
and programmatic weak supervision (Ratner et al., 2016; Goswami et al., 2021; Dey et al., 2022; Gao
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022a). Each of our surrogate metrics induces a (noisy) model ranking.
Thus two natural questions arise in the context of our work: (1) How do we reliably combine multiple
model rankings? (2) Does aggregating multiple rankings help in model selection?

4.1   A PPROACHING MODEL SELECTION AS A R ANK AGGREGATION P ROBLEM

Let [N ] = {1, 2, · · · , N } denote the universe of elements and SN be the set of permutations on [N ].
For σ ∈ SN , let σ(i) denote the rank of element i and σ −1 (j) denote the element at rank j. Then
the rank aggregation problem is as follows.
Problem 2. Rank Aggregation. Given a collection of M permutations σ1 , · · · , σM ∈ SN of
N items, find σ ∗ ∈ SN that best summarizes these permutations according to some objective
C(σ ∗ , σ1 , · · · , σM ).

In our context, the N items correspond to the N candidate anomaly detection models, M corre-
sponds to the number of surrogate metrics, σ ∗ is the best summary ranking of models, and σ ∗−1 (1)
is the predicted best model.1
The problem of rank aggregation has been extensively studied in social choice, bio-informatics and
machine learning literature. Here, we consider Kemeny rank aggregation which involves choosing
a distance on the set of rankings and finding a barycentric or median ranking (Korba et al., 2017).
Specifically, the rank aggregation problem is known as the Kemeny-Young problem if the aggrega-
                                  1
                                    PM          ∗
tion objective is defined as C = M     i=1 dτ (σ , σi ), where dτ is the Kendall’s τ distance (Eq. 1).
Kemeny aggregation has been shown to satisfy many desirable properties, but it is NP-hard even
with as few as 4 rankings (Dwork et al., 2001). To this end, we consider an efficient approximate
solution using the Borda method (Borda, 1784) in which each item (model) receives points from
each ranking (surrogate metric). For example, if a model is ranked r-th by a surrogate metric, it
receives (N − r) points from that metric. The models are then ranked in descending order of total
points received from all metrics.
Suppose that we have several surrogate metrics for ranking anomaly detection models. Why would
it be beneficial to aggregate the rankings induced by these metrics? The following theorem provides
an insight into the benefit of Borda rank aggregation.
Consider two arbitrary models i and j with (unknown) ground truth rankings σ ∗ (i) and σ ∗ (j).
Without the loss of generality, assume σ ∗ (i) < σ ∗ (j), i.e., model i is better. Next, let’s view each
surrogate metric k = 1, . . . , M as a random variable Ωk taking values in permutations SN , such
that Ωk (i) ∈ [N ] denotes the rank of item i. We apply Borda rank aggregation on realizations of
these random variables. Theorem 1 states that, under certain assumptions, the probability of Borda
ranking making a mistake (i.e., placing model i lower than j) is upper bounded in a way such that
increasing M decreases this bound. In appendix A.14, we empirically show that model selection
performance improves as we increase the number of surrogate metrics (rankings).
Theorem 1. Assume that Ωk ’s are pairwise independent, and that P(Ωk (i) < Ωk (j)) > 0.5 for any
arbitrary models i and j, i.e., each surrogate metric is better than random. Then the probability
                                                                                                     that
                                                                                           2
Borda aggregation makes a mistake in ranking items i and j is at most 2 exp − M2ϵ , for some
fixed ϵ.

The proof of the theorem is given in Appendix A.8. We do not assume that Ωk are identically
distributed, but only that Ωk ’s are pairwise independent. We emphasize that the notion of indepen-
dence of Ωk as random variables is different from rank correlation between realizations of these
variables (i.e., permutations). For example, two permutations drawn independently from a Mallow’s
distribution can have a high Kendall’s τ coefficient (rank correlation). Therefore, our assumption of
  1
    We use terms “ranking” and “permutation” as synonyms. The subtle difference is that in a ranking multiple
models can receive the same rank. Where necessary, we break ties uniformly at random.


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


independence, commonly adopted in theoretical analysis (Ratner et al., 2016), does not contradict
our observation of high rank correlation between surrogate metrics.
The Borda method weighs all surrogate metrics equally. However, our experience and theoretical
analysis suggest that focusing only on “good” metrics can improve performance after aggregation
(see Sec. 5 and Corollary 1). But how do we identify “good” ranks without access to anomaly labels?

4.2   E MPIRICAL I NFLUENCE AND ROBUST R ANK AGGREGATION

Since we do not have access to anomaly labels, we introduce an intuitive unsupervised way to iden-
tify “good” or “reliable” rankings based on the notion of empirical influence. Empirical influence
functions have been previously used to detect influential cases in regression (Cook & Weisberg,
1980). Given a collection of M rankings S = {σ1 , · · · , σM }, let Borda(S) denote the aggregate
ranking from the Borda method. Then for some σi ∈ S, empirical influence EI(σi , S) measures the
impact of σi on the Borda solution.
                                                                    |A|
                                                                 1 X
            EI(σi , S) = f (S) − f (S \ σi ),   where f (A) =           dτ (Borda(A), σi )         (2)
                                                                |A| i=1

Under the assumption that a majority of rankings are good, EI is likely to identify bad rankings as
ones with high positive EI. This is intuitive since removing a bad ranking results in larger decrease
in the objective f (S \ {σi }). In appendix A.9, we show that under idealized settings, empirical
influence can identify bad rankings.
We cluster all rankings based on their EI using a two-component single-linkage agglomerative clus-
tering (Murtagh & Contreras, 2012), discard all rankings from the “bad” cluster, and apply Borda
aggregation to the remaining ones. To further improve ranking performance of aggregated rank,
especially at the top, we only consider models at the top-k ranks, setting the positions of the rest of
the models to N (Fagin et al., 2003). See Appendix A.7.1 for details. We collectively refer to these
variations as Robust Borda rank aggregation.


5     E VALUATION R ESULTS

5.1   DATASETS

We carry out experiments on two popular and widely used real-world collections with diverse time-
series and anomalies:
UCR Anomaly Archive (UCR) (Wu & Keogh, 2021) Wu and Keogh recently found flaws in many
commonly used benchmarks for anomaly detection tasks. They introduced the UCR time-series
Anomaly Archive, a collection of 250 diverse univariate time-series of varying lengths spanning
domains such as medicine, sports, entomology, and space science, with natural as well as realistic
synthetic anomalies overcoming the pitfalls of previous benchmarks. Given the heterogeneity of
included time-series, we split UCR into 9 subsets by domain, (1) Acceleration, (2) Air Temperature,
(3) Arterial Blood Pressure, ABP, (4) Electrical Penetration Graph, EPG, (5) Electrocardiogram,
ECG, (6) Gait, (7) NASA, (8) Power Demand, and (9) Respiration, RESP. We will refer to each of
these subsets as a separate dataset.
Server Machine Dataset (SMD) (Su et al., 2019) SMD comprises of multivariate time-series with
38 features from 28 server machines collected from large internet company over a period of 5 weeks.
Each entity includes common metrics such as CPU load, memory and network usage etc. for a
server machine. Both train and test sets contain around 50,000 timestamps with 5% anomalous
cases. While there has been some criticism of this dataset (Wu & Keogh, 2021), we use SMD due
to its multivariate nature and the variety it brings to our evaluation along with UCR. We emphasize
that on visually inspecting the SMD, we found most of the anomaly labels to be accurate, much
like (Challu et al., 2022).
We refer to SMD as a single dataset, and thus in our evaluation consider 10 datasets (9 from UCR +
SMD).


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.2    M ODEL S ET

There are over a hundred unique time-series anomaly detection algorithms developed using a wide
variety of approaches. For our experiments, we implemented a representative subset of 5 popular
methods (Table 1), across two different learning types (unsupervised and semi-supervised) and three
different method families (forecasting, reconstruction and distance-based) (Schmidl et al., 2022).
We defer brief descriptions of models to Appendix A.6.
We created a pool of 3 k-NN (Ra-
maswamy et al., 2000), 4 moving average,                    Model                      Area      Learning Type Method Family
                                                                                     Statistics   Unsupervised    Forecasting
4 DGHL (Challu et al., 2022), 4 LSTM-                 Moving Average
                                                  k-NN (Ramaswamy et al., 2000)    Classical ML  Semi-supervised   Distance
VAE (Park et al., 2018) and 4 RNN (Chang Dilated          RNN (Chang et al., 2017) Deep Learning Semi-supervised
                                                    DGHL (Challu et al., 2022)
                                                                                                                  Forecasting
                                                                                   Deep Learning Semi-supervised Reconstruction
et al., 2017) models by varying hyper-             LSTM-VAE (Park et al., 2018)    Deep Learning Semi-supervised Reconstruction

parameters for each model, for a total 19
                                                Table 1: Models set and their properties. Detailed
combinations. Finally, to efficiently train our
                                                descriptions of model architectures and hyper-
models, we sub-sampled all time-series with
                                                parameters can be found in Appendix A.6.
T > 2560 by a factor of 10.

5.3    E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Evaluating model selection performance. We evaluate all model selection strategies based on the
adjusted best F1 (Section 2) of the top-1 selected model. While there exist other popular measures to
evaluate ranking algorithms such as Normalized Discounted Cumulative Gain (Wang et al., 2013),
Mean Reciprocal Rank, etc., our evaluation metric is grounded in practice, since in our setting only
one model will be selected and used.
Our approach can be used to select the best model for an individual time-series. Since anomalies
are rare, a single time-series may contain only a few anomalies (e.g., one point anomaly in the case
of some UCR time-series). This makes the evaluation of a selection strategy very noisy. To combat
this issue, we perform model selection at the dataset level, i.e., we select a single method for a given
dataset.

Baselines. As a baseline, we consider an approach in which we label a part of a dataset and select
the best method based on these labels. We call this baseline “supervised selection” or SS in short.
This represents current practice, where a subset of data is labeled, and the best performing model
is used in the rest of the dataset. Specifically, we randomly partition each dataset into selection
(20%) and evaluation (80%) sets. Each time-series in the dataset is assigned to one of these sets.
The baseline method selects a model based on anomaly labels in the selection set. Our surrogate
metrics do not use the selection set. Instead, the surrogate metrics are computed over the evaluation
set without using the labels. For reference, we also report the expected performance when selecting
a model from the model set at random (“random”) and the performance of the actual best model
(“oracle”).
Adjusted best F1 scores of the selected model (either by the baseline, surrogate metric or rank aggre-
gation) are then reported. The entire experiment is repeated 5 times with random selection/evaluation
splits.

Model selection strategies. We compare 17 individual surrogate metrics, including 5 prediction
error metrics, 9 synthetic anomaly injection metrics, 3 metrics of centrality (average distance to 1,
3 and 5 nearest neighbors) (Section3); and 4 proposed robust variations of Borda rank aggregation
(see Appendix A.7.2).
In the preliminary round of evaluations we found 5 of the anomaly injection metrics (scale, noise,
cutoff, contextual and speedup) to generally outperform other surrogate metrics across all datasets
(Appendix A.3). We apply rank aggregation only to these 5 metrics. While this subset of surrogate
metrics was identified using labels, it does not appear to depend on the dataset. Thus, given a new
dataset without labels, we still propose to use rank aggregation over the same 5 surrogate metrics.

Pairwise-statistical tests. We carry out one-sided paired Wilcoxon signed rank tests at a signifi-
cance level of α = 0.05 to identify significant performance differences between all pairs of model
selection strategies and baselines on each dataset.

                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         Pred. Error (MSE)           NASA            Gait            RESP                       Acceleration               Temperature
        Synthetic (Noise)
        Synthetic (Cutoff)
            Robust Borda
                     Borda
                       MIM
                        SS
                    Oracle
                  Random
         Pred. Error (MSE)           ABP             ECG             EPG                        Power                      SMD
        Synthetic (Noise)
        Synthetic (Cutoff)
            Robust Borda
                     Borda
                       MIM
                        SS
                    Oracle
                  Random
                             0.25 0.5 0.75   0.25 0.5 0.75   0.25 0.5 0.75            0.25 0.5 0.75             0.25 0.5 0.75


Figure 3: Performance of the top-1 selected model. Box plots of adjusted best F1 of the model
selected by each metric or baseline across 5 unique combinations of the selection and evaluation sets.
Orange (|) and blue (|) vertical lines represent the median and average performance of each metric
or baseline, and the minimum influence metric (MIM), respectively. Each box plot is organized into
3 sections: performance of individual metrics, Borda and its robust variations, and three baselines.


Experimentation environment. All models and model selection algorithms were trained and built
using scikit-learn 1.1.1 (Pedregosa et al., 2011), PyTorch 1.11.0 Paszke et al. (2019) along
with Python 3.9.13. All our experiments were carried out on an AWS g3.4xlarge EC2 instance
with with 16 Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPUs, 122 GiB RAM and a 8 GiB GPU.

5.4   R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

A subset of our results are shown in Figure 3 and Table 2. Here we provide results for model selec-
tion using some of the individual surrogate metrics, as well as three variations of rank aggregation:
Borda, robust Borda and a special case of robust Borda where we select only one metric, the one
that minimizes empirical influence, “minimum influence metric” or MIM (Section 4). The complete
set of results with all ranking metrics can be found in Appendix A.3.

No single best surrogate metric. Our results show
that there is no surrogate metric which consistently se-                    Ranking Methods/Baselines
                                                                                                        Significant Wins
                                                                                                        SS     Random
                                                                                                                              Significant Losses
                                                                                                                           Oracle SS Random
lects the best model on all datasets. For instance, as can                   Pred. Error (MSE)           1        3           8      4      4
                                                                                Syn. (Noise)             2        5           6      0      0
be seen in Figure 3, model selection based on predic-                          Syn. (Cutoff)             1        8           8      0      0
                                                                                Syn. (Scale)             1        8           7      0      0
tion error (MSE) performs almost on par with the ora-                        Syn. (Contextual)           1        5           7      0      0
                                                                              Syn. (Average)             0        6           7      1      0
cle on NASA, respiration (RESP) and server machine                              Robust Borda             0        4           6      2      0
dataset (SMD), but worse than random model selection                                Borda
                                                                                     MIM
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                              9
                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                                            0
on the electrocardiogram (ECG), Arterial Blood Pres-                                  SS                n/a       4           7      n/a    0
                                                                                    Oracle               7       10          n/a      0     0
sure (ABP) and acceleration datasets.                                               Random               0       n/a         10       4    n/a



Minimum Influence Metric perform on par with Su-                        Table 2: Results of pairwise-statistical
pervised Selection. MIM is never significantly worse                    tests. On a total of n = 10 datasets, min-
than SS and is in fact better on the air temperature                    imum influence metric (MIM) and robust
(Temperature) dataset. Robust Borda on the other                        Borda have the fewest significant losses
hand, is on par with SS on 8 datasets and significantly                 to oracle, and are considerably better than
worse only on Temperature and SMD.                                      random model selection and Borda.

Robust variations of Borda outperform Borda. Aggregating via robust Borda and MIM are sig-
nificantly better than Borda aggregation on 4 and 3 datasets, respectively. While MIM is never
significantly worse than Borda, Robust Borda is inferior to Borda on SMD.

Robust variations of Borda minimizes losses to Oracle. From Table 2 it is evident that MIM and
Robust borda have fewer significant losses to the oracle in comparison to the 5 surrogate metrics
used as their input, and compared to SS. Thus, in general, robust aggregation is better than any
randomly chosen individual surrogate metric. In terms of significant improvements over supervised
and random selection, we found MIM to be a better alternative than Robust Borda.

                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Synthetic anomaly injection metrics outperform other classes of metrics. We found synthetic
anomaly injection to perform better than prediction error and centrality metrics (Appendix A.3).
Among the three surrogate classes, centrality metrics performed the worst, most likely due to highly
correlated bad rankings.

Prior knowledge of anomalies might help identify good anomaly injection metrics. For in-
stance, synthetic metrics such as speedup and cutoff perform well on respiration data since these
datasets are likely to have such anomalies. The slowing down of respiration rate is a common
anomaly and indicative of sleep apnea2 . Similarly, synthetic noise performs well on air temperature
dataset, likely because time-series have noise anomalies to simulate the sudden failure of temper-
ature sensors. We also hypothesize that the superior performance of synthetic noise might be due
to the intrinsic noise and distortion added to 100 of the 250 UCR datasets (Wu & Keogh, 2021),
thereby allowing the metric to choose models which are better suited to handle the noise. In prac-
tice, domain experts are aware of the type of anomalies that might exist in the data and using our
anomaly injection methods; this prior knowledge can be effectively leveraged for model selection.

6    R ELATED W ORK

Time-series Anomaly Detection. The field has a long and rich history with well over a hundred pro-
posed algorithms, differing in scope (e.g., multivariate vs univariate, unsupervised vs supervised),
detection approach (e.g., forecasting, reconstruction, tree-based, etc.), etc. However, recent surveys
have found that there is no single universally best method and the choice of the best method depends
on the dataset (Schmidl et al., 2022; Blázquez-Garcı́a et al., 2021).
Meta Learning and Model Selection. These approaches aim to identify the best model for a given
dataset based on its characteristics such as the number of classes, attributes, instances etc. Recently,
Zhao et al. (2021) explored the use of meta-learning to identify the best outlier detection algorithm
on tabular datasets. For time-series datasets, both Ying et al. (2020) and Zhang et al. (2021) also ap-
proached model selection as meta-learning problem. All these studies rely on historical performance
of models on a subset of “meta-train” datasets to essentially learn a mapping from the characteristics
of a dataset (“meta-features”) to model performance. These methods fail if anomaly labels are un-
available for meta-train datasets, or if the meta-train datasets are not representative of test datasets.
Both these assumptions are frequently violated in practice, thus limiting the utility of such methods.
In our approach, we do not assume access to similar datasets with anomaly labels.
Weak Supervision and Rank Aggregation. Our work draws on intuition from a large body of
work on learning from weak or noisy labels since predictions of each surrogate metric have inherent
noise and biases. We refer the reader to recent surveys on programmatic weak supervision, e.g.
(Zhang et al., 2022a). Since we are interested in ranking anomaly detection methods rather than
inferring their exact performance numbers, rank aggregation is a much more relevant paradigm for
our problem setting.
An extended version of Related Work is provided in Appendix A.1.

7    C ONCLUSION

We consider the problem of unsupervised model selection for anomaly detection in time-series. Our
model selection approach is based on surrogate metrics which correlate with model performance to
varying degrees but do not require anomaly labels. We identify three classes of surrogate metrics
namely, prediction error, synthetic anomaly injection, and model centrality. We devise effective
procedures to inject different kinds of synthetic anomalies and extend the idea of model centrality
to time-series. Next, we propose to combine rankings from different metrics using a robust rank
aggregation approach and provide theoretical justification for rank aggregation. Our evaluation using
over 5000 trained models and 17 surrogate metrics shows that our proposed approach performs on
par with selection based on partial data labeling. Future work might focus on other definitions of
model centrality and include more synthetic anomalies types.
    2
      Sleep apnea is a common and potentially serious health condition in which breathing repeatedly stops and
starts (https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/sleep-apnea).


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We provide an open-source implementations of our model selection method and anomaly detection
models at https://github.com/mononitogoswami/tsad-model-selection.
All datasets used in this work are available in the public domain. Directions to download the Server
Machine Dataset are available at https://github.com/NetManAIOps/OmniAnomaly,
whereas the UCR Anomaly Archive can be downloaded from https://www.cs.ucr.edu/
˜eamonn/time_series_data_2018/.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Abishek Sankararaman, Anoop Deoras, Bariş Kurt, Christos Faloutsos,
Kelvin Kan, and Peihong Jiang for valuable discussions about the problem statement and methods.
We thank the anonymous reviewers and area chairs for helpful suggestions. The first author would
also like to thank AWS for travel grant to attend the conference.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We propose an unsupervised method for model selection of time-series anomaly detection models.
In this paper, we restrict ourselves to finding accurate anomaly detection models. The fairness of
models chosen via unsupervised model selection is an open problem. While prevailing wisdom
suggests a tension between the accuracy and fairness of models, recent work suggests otherwise. In
fact, Wick et al. (2019) argue that under reasonable assumptions and certain definitions of fairness,
accuracy and fairness are no longer in tension when selection and label bias are accounted for. We
believe that an interesting direction of future work is extending our model selection problem and
method to account for possibly competing objectives such as accuracy, fairness, inference time etc.

R EFERENCES
Nicholas S Abend, Alexis A Topjian, and Sankey Williams. How much does it cost to identify
  a critically ill child experiencing electrographic seizures? Journal of clinical neurophysiology:
  official publication of the American Electroencephalographic Society, 32(3):257, 2015.
Nir Ailon. Aggregation of partial rankings, p-ratings and top-m lists. Algorithmica, 57(2):284–300,
  2010.
Kalousis Alexandros and Hilario Melanie. Model selection via meta-learning: a comparative study.
  International Journal on Artificial Intelligence Tools, 10(04):525–554, 2001.
Alnur Ali and Marina Meilă. Experiments with kemeny ranking: What works when? Mathematical
  Social Sciences, 64(1):28–40, 2012.
Ane Blázquez-Garcı́a, Angel Conde, Usue Mori, and Jose A Lozano. A review on outlier/anomaly
  detection in time series data. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 54(3):1–33, 2021.
JC de Borda. Mémoire sur les élections au scrutin. Histoire de l’Academie Royale des Sciences pour
  1781 (Paris, 1784), 1784.
Chris U Carmona, François-Xavier Aubet, Valentin Flunkert, and Jan Gasthaus. Neural contextual
  anomaly detection for time series. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07702, 2021.
Cristian I Challu, Peihong Jiang, Ying Nian Wu, and Laurent Callot. Deep generative model with
  hierarchical latent factors for time series anomaly detection. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1643–1654. PMLR, 2022.
Shiyu Chang, Yang Zhang, Wei Han, Mo Yu, Xiaoxiao Guo, Wei Tan, Xiaodong Cui, Michael
  Witbrock, Mark A Hasegawa-Johnson, and Thomas S Huang. Dilated recurrent neural networks.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Fabien Collas and Ekhine Irurozki. Concentric mixtures of mallows models for top-k rankings:
  sampling and identifiability. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2079–2088.
  PMLR, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vincent Conitzer, Andrew Davenport, and Jayant Kalagnanam. Improved bounds for computing
  kemeny rankings. In AAAI, volume 6, pp. 620–626, 2006.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Characterizations of an empirical influence function for
  detecting influential cases in regression. Technometrics, 22(4):495–508, 1980.
Alexander Philip Dawid and Allan M Skene. Maximum likelihood estimation of observer error-rates
  using the em algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 28
  (1):20–28, 1979.
Arnab Dey, Mononito Goswami, Joo Heung Yoon, Gilles Clermont, Michael Pinsky, Marilyn Hrav-
  nak, and Artur Dubrawski. Weakly supervised classification of vital sign alerts as real or artifact.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.09074, 2022.
Sunny Duan, Loic Matthey, Andre Saraiva, Nicholas Watters, Christopher P Burgess, Alexander
  Lerchner, and Irina Higgins. Unsupervised model selection for variational disentangled represen-
  tation learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.12614, 2019.
Cynthia Dwork, Ravi Kumar, Moni Naor, and Dandapani Sivakumar. Rank aggregation methods for
  the web. In Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web, pp. 613–622,
  2001.
Ronald Fagin, Ravi Kumar, and Dakshinamurthi Sivakumar. Comparing top k lists. SIAM Journal
  on discrete mathematics, 17(1):134–160, 2003.
Matthias Feurer, Aaron Klein, Katharina Eggensperger, Jost Springenberg, Manuel Blum, and Frank
 Hutter. Efficient and robust automated machine learning. Advances in neural information pro-
 cessing systems, 28, 2015.
Michael A Fligner and Joseph S Verducci. Distance based ranking models. Journal of the Royal
 Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 48(3):359–369, 1986.
Michael A Fligner and Joseph S Verducci. Multistage ranking models. Journal of the American
 Statistical association, 83(403):892–901, 1988.
Chufan Gao, Mononito Goswami, Jieshi Chen, and Artur Dubrawski. Classifying unstructured
  clinical notes via automatic weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.12088, 2022.
Pieter Gijsbers, Erin LeDell, Janek Thomas, Sébastien Poirier, Bernd Bischl, and Joaquin Van-
  schoren. An open source automl benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.00909, 2019.
Pieter Gijsbers, Marcos LP Bueno, Stefan Coors, Erin LeDell, Sébastien Poirier, Janek Thomas,
  Bernd Bischl, and Joaquin Vanschoren. Amlb: an automl benchmark. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.12560, 2022.
Nicolas Goix. How to evaluate the quality of unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1607.01152, 2016.
Mononito Goswami, Benedikt Boecking, and Artur Dubrawski. Weak supervision for affordable
 modeling of electrocardiogram data. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, volume 2021, pp.
 536. American Medical Informatics Association, 2021.
Sudipto Guha, Nina Mishra, Gourav Roy, and Okke Schrijvers. Robust random cut forest based
  anomaly detection on streams. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 2712–2721.
  PMLR, 2016.
Rob J Hyndman and George Athanasopoulos. Forecasting: principles and practice. OTexts, 2018.
Eamonn Keogh, Jessica Lin, and Ada Fu. Hot sax: Efficiently finding the most unusual time series
  subsequence. In Fifth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM’05), pp. 8–pp. Ieee,
  2005.
Anna Korba, Stephan Clémençon, and Eric Sibony. A learning theory of ranking aggregation. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1001–1010. PMLR, 2017.

                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Miloš Kotlar, Marija Punt, Zaharije Radivojević, Miloš Cvetanović, and Veljko Milutinović. Novel
 meta-features for automated machine learning model selection in anomaly detection. IEEE Ac-
 cess, 9:89675–89687, 2021.

Ye Kuang, Dandan Li, Xiaohong Huang, and Mo Zhou. On the modeling of rtt time series for
  network anomaly detection. Security and Communication Networks, 2022, 2022.

Nikolay Laptev, Saeed Amizadeh, and Ian Flint. Generic and scalable framework for automated
  time-series anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD international confer-
  ence on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1939–1947, 2015.

Zinan Lin, Kiran Thekumparampil, Giulia Fanti, and Sewoong Oh. Infogan-cr and modelcentrality:
  Self-supervised model training and selection for disentangling gans. In international conference
  on machine learning, pp. 6127–6139. PMLR, 2020.

Martin Q Ma, Yue Zhao, Xiaorong Zhang, and Leman Akoglu. A large-scale study on unsupervised
 outlier model selection: Do internal strategies suffice? arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.01422, 2021.

Pankaj Malhotra, Lovekesh Vig, Gautam Shroff, Puneet Agarwal, et al. Long short term memory
  networks for anomaly detection in time series. In Proceedings, volume 89, pp. 89–94, 2015.

Fionn Murtagh and Pedro Contreras. Algorithms for hierarchical clustering: an overview. Wiley
  Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 2(1):86–97, 2012.

Aldo Pacchiano, My Phan, Yasin Abbasi Yadkori, Anup Rao, Julian Zimmert, Tor Lattimore, and
  Csaba Szepesvari. Model selection in contextual stochastic bandit problems. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:10328–10337, 2020.

John Paparrizos, Paul Boniol, Themis Palpanas, Ruey S Tsay, Aaron Elmore, and Michael J
  Franklin. Volume under the surface: a new accuracy evaluation measure for time-series anomaly
  detection. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(11):2774–2787, 2022a.

John Paparrizos, Yuhao Kang, Paul Boniol, Ruey S Tsay, Themis Palpanas, and Michael J Franklin.
  Tsb-uad: an end-to-end benchmark suite for univariate time-series anomaly detection. Proceed-
  ings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(8):1697–1711, 2022b.

Daehyung Park, Yuuna Hoshi, and Charles C Kemp. A multimodal anomaly detector for robot-
  assisted feeding using an lstm-based variational autoencoder. IEEE Robotics and Automation
  Letters, 3(3):1544–1551, 2018.

Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.

Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier
  Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn:
  Machine learning in python. the Journal of machine Learning research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.

Sridhar Ramaswamy, Rajeev Rastogi, and Kyuseok Shim. Efficient algorithms for mining outliers
  from large data sets. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD international conference on
  Management of data, pp. 427–438, 2000.

Alexander J Ratner, Christopher M De Sa, Sen Wu, Daniel Selsam, and Christopher Ré. Data
  programming: Creating large training sets, quickly. Advances in neural information processing
  systems, 29, 2016.

Quentin Rebjock, Baris Kurt, Tim Januschowski, and Laurent Callot. Online false discovery rate
  control for anomaly detection in time series. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:26487–26498, 2021.

Łukasz Saganowski and Tomasz Andrysiak. Time series forecasting with model selection applied
  to anomaly detection in network traffic. Logic Journal of the IGPL, 28(4):531–545, 2020.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sebastian Schmidl, Phillip Wenig, and Thorsten Papenbrock. Anomaly detection in time series: a
  comprehensive evaluation. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(9):1779–1797, 2022.
Lifeng Shen, Zhuocong Li, and James Kwok. Timeseries anomaly detection using temporal hierar-
  chical one-class network. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:13016–13026,
  2020.
Ya Su, Youjian Zhao, Chenhao Niu, Rong Liu, Wei Sun, and Dan Pei. Robust anomaly detec-
  tion for multivariate time series through stochastic recurrent neural network. In Proceedings
  of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining,
  KDD ’19, pp. 2828–2837, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machin-
  ery. ISBN 9781450362016. doi: 10.1145/3292500.3330672. URL https://doi.org/10.
  1145/3292500.3330672.
Yining Wang, Liwei Wang, Yuanzhi Li, Di He, and Tie-Yan Liu. A theoretical analysis of ndcg type
  ranking measures. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 25–54. PMLR, 2013.
Qingsong Wen, Liang Sun, Fan Yang, Xiaomin Song, Jingkun Gao, Xue Wang, and Huan Xu. Time
  series data augmentation for deep learning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.12478, 2020.
Michael Wick, Jean-Baptiste Tristan, et al. Unlocking fairness: a trade-off revisited. Advances in
 neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Renjie Wu and Eamonn Keogh. Current time series anomaly detection benchmarks are flawed and
  are creating the illusion of progress. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
  2021.
Haowen Xu, Wenxiao Chen, Nengwen Zhao, Zeyan Li, Jiahao Bu, Zhihan Li, Ying Liu, Youjian
  Zhao, Dan Pei, Yang Feng, et al. Unsupervised anomaly detection via variational auto-encoder
  for seasonal kpis in web applications. In Proceedings of the 2018 world wide web conference, pp.
  187–196, 2018.
Yuanxiang Ying, Juanyong Duan, Chunlei Wang, Yujing Wang, Congrui Huang, and Bixiong Xu.
  Automated model selection for time-series anomaly detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.04395,
  2020.
Jieyu Zhang, Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Yue Yu, Chao Zhang, and Alexander Ratner. A survey on program-
   matic weak supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05433, 2022a.
Jiuqi Elise Zhang, Di Wu, and Benoit Boulet. Time series anomaly detection via reinforcement
   learning-based model selection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09884, 2022b.
Peiyi Zhang, Xiaodong Jiang, Ginger M Holt, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Caner Komurlu, Peng Gao,
  and Yang Yu. Self-supervised learning for fast and scalable time series hyper-parameter tuning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.05740, 2021.
Yue Zhao, Ryan Rossi, and Leman Akoglu. Automatic unsupervised outlier model selection. Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4489–4502, 2021.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   R ELATED WORK

Time-series Anomaly Detection. This field has a long and rich history with well over a hundred
proposed algorithms (Schmidl et al. (2022); Blázquez-Garcı́a et al. (2021)). The methods vary
in their scope (e.g., multivariate vs univariate, unsupervised vs supervised), and in the anomaly
detection approach (e.g., forecasting, reconstruction, tree-based, etc.). At a high level many of these
methods learn a model for the “normal” time-series regime, and identify points unlikely under the
given model as anomalies. For example, progression of a time-series can be described using a
forecasting model, and points deviating from the forecast can be flagged as outliers (Malhotra et al.
(2015)). In another example, for tree-based methods, a data model is an ensemble of decision trees
that recursively partition the points (sub-sequences of the time-series), until each sample is isolated.
Abnormal points are easier to separate from the rest of the data, and therefore these will tend to
have shorter distances from the root (Guha et al. (2016)). For a comprehensive overview of the field,
we refer the reader to one of the recent surveys on anomaly detection methods and their evaluation
(Schmidl et al. (2022); Blázquez-Garcı́a et al. (2021); Wu & Keogh (2021)). Importantly, there is
no universally best method, and the choice of the best method depends on the data at hand (Schmidl
et al. (2022)).

Meta Learning and Model Selection. These approaches aim to identify the best model for the
given dataset. The use of meta learning for model selection is a long-standing idea. For instance,
Kalousis and Hilario used boosted decision trees to predict (propose) classifiers for a new dataset
given data characteristics “meta-features”) such as the number of classes, attributes, instances etc
(Alexandros & Melanie, 2001)). More recently, Zhao et al. (2021) explored the use of meta-learning
for outlier detection algorithms. Their algorithm relies on a collection of historical outlier detection
datasets with ground-truth (anomaly) labels and historical performance of models on these meta-
train datasets. The authors leverage meta-features of datasets to build a model that “recommends”
an anomaly detection method for a dataset. Concurrently, Kotlar et al. (2021) developed a meta-
learning algorithm with novel meta-features to select anomaly detection algorithms using labeled
data in the training phase.
Ying et al. (2020) focused on model selection at the level of time-series. They characterize each
time-series based on a fixed set of features, and use anomaly-labeled time-series from a knowledge
base to train a classifier for model selection and a regressor for hyper-parameter estimation. A
similar approach is taken by Zhang et al. (2021) who extracted time-series features, identified best
performed models via exhaustive hyper-parameter tuning, and trained a classifier (or regressor) using
the extracted time-series features and information about model performance as labels.
In contrast to methods mentioned in this sub-section, we are interested in unsupervised model se-
lection. In particular, given an unlabeled dataset, we do not assume access to a similar dataset with
anomaly labels.

Weak Supervision and Rank Aggregation. We consider a number of unsupervised metrics, and
these can be viewed as weak labels or noisy human labelers. The question is then which metric
to use or how to aggregate the metrics. There has been a substantial body of work on reconciling
weak labels, mostly in the context of classification, and to a lesser extend for regression. Many such
methods build a joint generative model of unlabeled data and weak labels to infer latent true labels.
We refer the interested reader to a recent survey by Zhang et al. (2022a).
Since we are interested in ranking anomaly detection methods rather than inferring their exact per-
formance numbers, rank aggregation is a more relevant paradigm for our project. Rank aggregation
concerns with producing a consensus ranking given a number of potentially inconsistent rankings
(permutations). One of the dominant approaches in the field involves defining a (pseudo-)distance
in the space of permutations and then finding a barycentric ranking, i.e., the one that minimizes
distance to other rankings (Korba et al. (2017)). The distance distribution can then be modeled, e.g.,
using the Mallows model, and rank aggregation reliability can be added by assuming a mixture from
Mallows distributions with different dispersion parameters (Collas & Irurozki (2021)). In our work,
we draw on the ideas from this research.

                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Automatic Machine Learning (AutoML). The success machine learning across a gamut of appli-
cations has led to an ever-increasing demand of predictive systems that can be used by non-experts.
However, current AutoML systems are either limited to classification with labeled data (e.g., see
AutoML and Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter Optimization (CASH) problems
in (Feurer et al., 2015)), or self-supervised regression or forecasting problems (Feurer et al., 2015;
Gijsbers et al., 2022; 2019).

Using Forecasting Error to Select Good Forecasting Models. Some prior work on anomaly
detection time-series anomaly detection use the idea of selecting models with low forecasting error
to pick the best model for forecasting-based anomaly detection (Saganowski & Andrysiak, 2020;
Laptev et al., 2015; Kuang et al., 2022).

Semi-supervised anomaly detection model selection. Recently, Zhang et al. (2022b) leveraged
reinforcement learning to select the best base anomaly detection model given a dataset. They too
use the idea of model centrality (referred to as Prediction-Consensus Confidence). However, their
method is semi-supervised since it relies on actual anomaly labels to evaluate the reward function.
Moreover, the base models do not include any recent deep learning-based anomaly detection models.
Finally, they evaluate their method on only one dataset (SWaT).

Limitations of Prior Work in the Context of Unsupervised Time-series Anomaly Detection
Model Selection. In this section we briefly summarize the limitations of prior work considering
the model selection problem in different settings.

       • Limited, predefined model set M: Many studies experiment with a small number of
         models for experiments (|M| ≤ 5). Most of these models are not state-of-the-art for
         time-series anomaly detection (e.g. Saganowski & Andrysiak (2020) use Holt-winters and
         ARFIMA), unrepresentative (only forecasting-based non-deep learning models), and spe-
         cialised to certain domains (e.g. network anomaly detection (Saganowski & Andrysiak,
         2020; Kuang et al., 2022)). In contrast, our experiments are conducted with 19 models of
         5 different types (distance, forecasting and reconstruction-based), which have been shown
         to perform well for general time-series anomaly detection problems (Schmidl et al., 2022;
         Paparrizos et al., 2022b). Moreover, our model selection methodology is agnostic to the
         model set. Note that neither the model centrality and synthetic anomaly injection metrics,
         nor robust rank aggregation relies on the nature or hypothesis space of the models.
       • Limited, specialised datasets or old benchmarks with known issues: Most studies
         (Saganowski & Andrysiak, 2020; Kuang et al., 2022; Laptev et al., 2015) are evaluated
         on a limited number of real-world datasets (N <= 2), of specific domains (e.g. net-
         work anomaly detection (Saganowski & Andrysiak, 2020; Kuang et al., 2022)). Most
         papers are either not evaluated on common anomaly detection benchmarks (Saganowski
         & Andrysiak, 2020; Kuang et al., 2022), or evaluated on old benchmarking datasets (e.g.
         Numenta Anomaly Benchmark) with known issues (Wu & Keogh, 2021). On the other
         hand, our methods are evaluated on 275 diverse time-series of different domains such as
         electrocardiography, air temperature etc.
       • Supervised model selection: Some prior work, e.g. (Kuang et al., 2022) used super-
         vised model selection methods such as Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). However, in
         our setting methods such as BIC cannot be used because we do not have anomaly labels
         and measuring model complexity of different model types (deep neural networks, non-
         parametric models etc.) in our case is non-trivial.
       • No publicly available code: Finally, most papers do not have publicly available imple-
         mentations.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2   L IMITATIONS AND F UTURE W ORK

Computational Complexity. Our methods are computationally expensive since they rely on pre-
dictions from all models in the model set. However, our main baseline is supervised selection which
requires manually labeled data. Our premise is that manual labeling is much more expensive than
compute time. For example, Amazon Web Services compute time in the order of cents/hour, where
human time cost approximately $10/hour. In fact, recall that some of our benchmarks involve med-
ical datasets where gold standard expert annotations can cost anywhere between $50-200 per hour
(Abend et al., 2015).

Assumption: A majority of rankings can identify accurate models better than random. Em-
pirical influence and robust borda methods provably identify good models only if a majority of the
rankings can identify good models better than random (see appendices A.8, A.9). An interesting
direction of future work is to relax this assumption, or make an orthogonal assumption. For exam-
ple, there has been work on provably-optimal model selection of bandit algorithms which assume a
specific structure of the problem (e.g., linear contextual bandits), and that at least one base model
satisfies a regret guarantee with high probability (Pacchiano et al., 2020).

Assumption: Partial orderings rather than total ordering. We assume that all metrics impart
a total ordering of all the models. However, this may not always be true. In our experience, some
models may have the same performance as measured by a metric. To this end, future work may
focus on aggregation techniques of partial rankings (Ailon, 2010).

Online model selection. We rely on predictions of models on the test data, however, in practice
test data may be unavailable during model selection.


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3       A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

The complete set of results are shown in Fig. 4 and Tab. 3.
We compare 17 individual surrogate metrics, including 5 prediction error metrics, 9 synthetic
anomaly injection metrics, 3 metrics of centrality (average distance to 1, 3 and 5 nearest neigh-
bors) (Section3); and 4 proposed robust variations of Borda rank aggregation, namely Partial Borda,
Trimmed Borda, Minimum Influence Metric and Robust Borda (see Appendix A.7.2). We also com-
pare Borda and its variations with exact Kemeny aggregation Appendix A.7.3).
        Centrality (1 N)           NASA            Gait                 RESP            Acceleration           Temperature
        Centrality (3 N)
        Centrality (5 N)
   Synthetic (Wander)
     Synthetic (Spikes)
  Synthetic (Speedup)
      Synthetic (Scale)
        Synthetic (Flip)
Synthetic (Contextual)
   Synthetic (Average)
      Synthetic (Noise)
     Synthetic (Cutoff)
   Pred. Error (SMAPE)
    Pred. Error (MAPE)
      Pred. Error (MAE)
Pred. Error (Likelihood)
      Pred. Error (MSE)
                Kemeny
           Partial Borda
        Trimmed Borda
          Robust Borda
                   Borda
                    MIM
                      SS
                  Oracle
                Random
        Centrality (1 N)           ABP             ECG                  EPG             Power                  SMD
        Centrality (3 N)
        Centrality (5 N)
   Synthetic (Wander)
     Synthetic (Spikes)
  Synthetic (Speedup)
      Synthetic (Scale)
        Synthetic (Flip)
Synthetic (Contextual)
   Synthetic (Average)
      Synthetic (Noise)
     Synthetic (Cutoff)
   Pred. Error (SMAPE)
    Pred. Error (MAPE)
      Pred. Error (MAE)
Pred. Error (Likelihood)
      Pred. Error (MSE)
                Kemeny
           Partial Borda
        Trimmed Borda
          Robust Borda
                   Borda
                    MIM
                      SS
                  Oracle
                Random
                           0.25 0.5 0.75   0.25 0.5 0.75        0.25 0.5 0.75   0.25 0.5 0.75          0.25 0.5 0.75

Figure 4: Performance of the top-1 selected model. Box plots of adjusted best F1 of the model
selected by each metric or baseline across 5 unique combinations of the selection and evaluation sets.
Orange (|) and blue (|) vertical lines represent the median and average performance of each metric
or baseline, and the minimum influence metric (MIM), respectively. Each box plot is organized
into three sections: performance of individual metrics, Borda and its robust variations, and three
baselines.


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                Significant Wins      Significant Losses
                   Ranking Methods/Baselines    SS     Random      Oracle SS Random
                           Random                0        0          10      4      0
                           Oracle                7       10           0      0      0
                             SS                  0        4           7      0      0
                             MIM                 1        7           6      0      0
                            Borda                0        3           9      3      0
                        Robust Borda             0        4           6      2      1
                       Trimmed Borda             0        1           8      0      0
                       Partial Borda             0        4           8      3      1
                           Kemeny                0        4           9      1      0
                     Pred. Error (MSE)           1        3           8      4      4
                Pred. Error (Likelihood)         0        3           9      3      2
                     Pred. Error (MAE)           1        3           8      4      4
                    Pred. Error (MAPE)           1        3           9      4      3
                   Pred. Error (SMAPE)           1        3           8      4      4
                    Synthetic (Cutoff)           1        8           8      0      0
                    Synthetic (Noise)            2        5           6      0      0
                   Synthetic (Average)           0        6           7      1      0
                 Synthetic (Contextual)          1        5           7      0      0
                     Synthetic (Flip)            0        5           8      0      0
                    Synthetic (Scale)            1        8           7      0      0
                   Synthetic (Speedup)           1        6           9      1      0
                    Synthetic (Spikes)           0        3           8      1      1
                    Synthetic (Wander)           1        4           6      1      1
                     Centrality (5 N)            0        3          10      4      3
                     Centrality (3 N)            0        0          10      6      7
                     Centrality (1 N)            0        0          10      7      7

Table 3: Results of pairwise-statistical tests.. On a total of n = 10 datasets, minimum influence
metric (MIM) and robust Borda have the fewest significant losses to oracle, and are much better than
random model selection and Borda.


A.4   S YNTHETIC DATA E XPERIMENTS

The Mallows’s model (Fligner & Verducci, 1986) is a popular distance-based distribution to model
rank data. The probability mass function of a Mallows’s model with central permutation σ0 and
dispersion parameter θ is given by:
                                               exp(−θd(σ, σ0 ))
                                      p(σ) =
                                                     ψ
where d is the Kendall’s τ distance. With increase in θ, there is stronger consensus, thereby making
Kemeny aggregation easier.
We aim to empirically answer two research questions:

      1. What is the impact of noisy permutations on the median rank?
      2. Can empirical influence identify outlying permutations?

To this end, we draw k permutations from the Mallow’s distribution σ1 , · · · σk ∼ M(σ0 , θ) and
N − k permutations at uniformly at random from Sn . We compute the median rank σ̂ using the
Borda method. We experiment with n ∈ {50, 100}, θ ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.2} and N = 50 based on the
experimental setup used by Ali & Meilă (2012).


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Impact of Noisy Permutations. With increase in noise, the distance of the median permu-
tation (σ̂) from the central permutation (σ0 ) increase i.e. noise hurts rank aggregation.


Figure 6: Empirical Influence can Identify Outlying Permutations. Influence of a permutation is
directly proportional to its distance from the central permutation (σ0 ). Under the Mallow’s model,
outlying (or low probability) permutations have a higher distance (σ0 ).


A.5   G ENERATING S YNTHETIC A NOMALIES

Natural anomalies do not occur randomly, but are determined by the periodic nature of time-series.
Therefore, before injecting anomalies we determine periodicity of time-series by finding the its
auto-correlation, and only inject anomalies (barring spikes which are point-outliers) at beginning of
a cycle. We only inject a single anomaly in each time-series in a repetition, and its length is chosen
uniformly at random from [1, max length], the latter being a user defined parameter (Fig. 7).

Spike Anomaly. To introduce a spike, we first draw m ∼ Bernoulli(p), and if m = 1 we
inject a spike whose magnitude is governed by a normal distribution s ∼ N (0, σ 2 ).

Flip Anomaly. We reverse the time-series:
                  ts a[i, start:end] = ts[i, start:end][::-1]

Speedup Anomaly. We increase or decrease the frequency of a time-series using interpolation,
where the factor of change in frequency ( 12 or 2) is a user-defined parameter.

Noise Anomaly. We inject noise drawn from a normal distribution N (0, σ 2 ), where σ is a user-
defined parameter.

                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      2.0
                  Spikes anomaly                        Contextual anomaly                          Flip anomaly
      1.5
      1.0
      0.5
      0.0
      0.5

                Speedup anomaly                           Noise anomaly                           Cutoff anomaly
      1.0

      2.0
      1.5
      1.0
      0.5
      0.0
      0.5

                   Scale anomaly                         Wander anomaly                         Average anomaly
      1.0

      2.0
      1.5
      1.0
      0.5
      0.0
      0.5
      1.0
            0   200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 0   200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 0   200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600


Figure 7: Different kinds of synthetic anomalies. We inject 9 different types of synthetic anomalies
randomly, one at a time, across multiple copies of the original time-series. The - - is original time-
series before anomalies are injected, – is the injected anomaly and the solid – is the time-series after
anomaly injection.


Cutoff Anomaly Here, we set the time-series to either N (0, σ 2 ) or N (1, σ 2 ), where both the
choice of location parameter and σ is user-defined.

Average Anomaly. We run a moving average where the length of the window (len window) is
determined by the user:
 ts a[i, start:end] = moving average(ts[i, start:end], len window)

Scale Anomaly.           We scale the time-series by a user-defined factor (factor):
                       ts a[i, start:end] = factor*ts[i, start:end]

Wander Anomaly. We add a linear trend with the increase in baseline (baseline) defined by
users:
ts a[i, start:end] = np.linspace(0, baseline, end-start) + ts[i, start:end]

Contextual Anomaly. We convolve a the time-series subsequence linear function aY + b, where
a ∼ N (1, σa2 ) and b ∼ N (0, σb2 )


                                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6    D ESCRIPTION OF M ODELS

There are over a hundred unique time-series anomaly detection algorithms developed using a wide
variety of approaches. For our experiments, we implemented a representative subset of 5 popular
methods (Table 1), across two different learning types (unsupervised and semi-supervised) and three
different method families (forecasting, reconstruction and distance-based) (Schmidl et al., 2022).
In the context of time-series anomaly detection, “semi-supervised” means requiring a part of time-
series known to be anomaly-free. Each time-series in the UCR and SMD collections comprises of a
train part with no anomalies and a test part with one (UCR) or more anomalies (SMD). We used the
train part for training semi-supervised models.
We emphasize that our surrogate metrics do not rely on availability of the “clean” train part (and we
didn’t use the train part for evaluation). Moreover, while semi-supervised models are supposed to be
trained on anomaly-free part, in practice they can still work (perhaps sub-optimally) after training
on time-series that potentially contained anomalies.
The models we implemented can also be categorized as forecasting, reconstruction and distance
methods. Forecasting methods learn to forecast the next few time steps based on the current context
window, whereas reconstruction methods encode observed sub-sequences into a low dimensional
latent space and reconstruct them from the latent space. In both cases, the predictions (forecasts or
reconstruction) of the models are compared with the observed values. Finally, distance based models
used distance metrics (e.g. Euclidean distance) to compare sub-sequences, and expect anomalous
sub-sequences to have large distances to sub-sequences they are most similar to.
We created a pool of 3 k-NN (Ramaswamy et al., 2000), and 4 moving average, 4 DGHL (Challu
et al., 2022), 4 LSTM-VAE (Park et al., 2018) and 4 RNN (Chang et al., 2017) by varying important
hyper-parameters, for a total 19 models. Finally, to efficiently train our models, we sub-sampled all
time-series with T > 2560 by a factor of 10.

                           Model                     Area        Learning Type     Method Family
                   Moving Average                  Statistics     Unsupervised      Forecasting
               k-NN (Ramaswamy et al., 2000)     Classical ML    Semi-supervised     Distance
              Dilated RNN (Chang et al., 2017)   Deep Learning   Semi-supervised    Forecasting
                 DGHL (Challu et al., 2022)      Deep Learning   Semi-supervised   Reconstruction
                LSTM-VAE (Park et al., 2018)     Deep Learning   Semi-supervised   Reconstruction

                        Table 4: Models in the model set and their properties.

Below is brief description of each model.

Moving Average. These models compare observations with the “moving” average of recent obser-
vations in a sliding window of predefined size. These methods assume that if the current observation
differs significantly from moving average, then it must be an anomaly. Specifically, if xt denotes
the current observation, h represents the window size and let τ be an anomaly threshold, then xt is
flagged as an anomaly if:
                                                    t−1          2
                                             1      X
                                        xt −                xi       > τ,
                                             h
                                                 i=t−h−1         2

Moving average is one of the simplest, efficient yet practical anomaly detection models, frequently
used by industry practitioners. Moreover, moving average is unsupervised since it does not require
any normal training data.

k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) (Ramaswamy et al., 2000). These distance-based anomaly detec-
tion models compare a window of observations to their k nearest neighbour windows in the training
data. If the current window is significantly far its k closest windows on the training set, then it must
be an outlier. In our implementation, the distance between time-series windows is measured using
standard Euclidean distance. Specifically, let wt = {xt−h , · · · , xt } denote the current window of
size h, w1 , · · · , wk be the k nearest windows in the train set to wt , || · ||2 represent the euclidean


                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


norm, and τ be an anomaly threshold. Then the current window is flagged as an anomaly if:
                                          k
                                       1X
                                             ||wi − wt ||22 > τ
                                       k i=1

Dilated RNN (Chang et al., 2017). Dilated Recurrent neural network (RNN) is a recently pro-
posed improvement over vanilla RNNs, characterized by multi-resolution dilated recurrent skip
connections. These skip connections alleviate problems arising from memorizing long term de-
pendencies without forgetting short term dependencies, vanishing and exploding gradients, and the
sequential nature of forward and back-propagation in vanilla RNNs. Given a historical window of
time-series, we use a dilated RNN to forecast Tla time steps ahead. Let wt = {xt , xTla } denote
the current window of observations, ŵt = {x̂t , · · · , x̂Tla } be the forecasts from the dilated RNN
model, and τ be an anomaly threshold. Then xt is flagged as an anomaly if:
                                         ||ŵt − wt ||22 > τ

DGHL (Challu et al., 2022). This model is a recent state-of-the-art Generative model for time-
series anomaly detection. It uses a Top-Down Convolution Network (CNN) to map a novel hier-
archical latent representation to a multivariate time-series windows. The key difference with other
generative models as GANs and VAEs is that is trained with the Alternating Back-Propagation al-
gorithm. The architecture does not include an encoder, instead, latent vectors are directly sampled
from the posterior distribution. Let xt be the observation and x̂t the reconstruction at timestamp t,
and τ be an anomaly threshold. Then xt is flagged as an anomaly if:
                                          ||x̂t − xt ||22 > τ

LSTM-VAE (Park et al., 2018). The LSTM-VAE is a reconstruction based model that uses a
Variational Autoencoder with LSTM components to model the probability of observing the target
time-series. The model also uses the latent representation to dynamically adapt the threshold to
flag anomalies based on the normal variability of the data. The anomaly scores corresponds to the
negative log-likelihood of an observation, xt , based on the output distribution of the model, and it
is flagged as an anomaly if the score is larger than a threshold τ :

                                          − log p(xt ) > τ


                                                  22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.7     B ORDA R ANK AGGREGATION

Borda is a positional ranking system and is an unbiased estimator of the Kemeny ranking of a sample
distributed according to the Mallows Model (Fligner & Verducci, 1988). Consider N models and
a collection of M surrogate metrics S = {σ1 , · · · , σM }. We use σk to both refer to the surrogate
metric and the ranking it induces. Then under the Borda scheme, for any given metric σk , the
                                                                                    PM
ith model receives N − σk (i) points. Thus, the ith model accrues a total of k=1 (N − σk (i))
points. Finally, all the models are ranked in decreasing order of their total points and ties are broken
uniformly at random. Borda can be computed in quasi-linear (O(M + N log N )) time.

A.7.1    I MPROVING R ANKING P ERFORMANCE AT THE T OP
In model selection, we only care about top-ranked models. Thus, to improve model selection perfor-
mance at the top-ranks, we only consider models at the top-k ranks, setting the positions of the rest
of the models to N (Fagin et al., 2003). Here, k is a user-specified hyper-parameter. Specifically,
                                                                PM
under the top-k Borda scheme, the ith model accrues a total of m=1 I[σm (i) ≤ k](N − σm (i))
points. Intuitively, this increases the probability of models which have top-k ranks consistently
across surrogate metrics, to have top ranks upon aggregation.

A.7.2    ROBUST VARIATIONS OF B ORDA
We consider multiple variations of Borda, namely Partial Borda, Trimmed Borda, Minimum Influ-
ence Metric (MIM) and Robust Borda. We collectively refer to these as robust variations of Borda
rank aggregation.
Partial Borda improves model selection performance, especially at the top ranks by only consider-
ing models at the top-k ranks, as described in Appendix A.7.1.
Trimmed Borda is another robust variation of Borda, which only aggregates reliable (“good”) per-
mutations. Trimmed Borda identifies outlying or “bad” permutations as ones having high positive
empirical influence.
Minimum Influence Metric (MIM) for a dataset is the surrogate metric with minimum influence.
Recall that while high positive influence is indicative of “bad” permutations, low values of influence
are indicative of “good” permutations.
Robust Borda performs rank aggregation only based on the top-k ranks while truncating permuta-
tions with high positive influence. Hence, Partial Borda, Trimmed Borda and Minimum Influence
Metric can be viewed as special cases of Robust Borda.

A.7.3    E XACT K EMENY R ANK AGGREGATION
The Kemeny rank aggregation problem can be viewed as a minimization problem on a weighted
directed graph (Conitzer et al., 2006). Let G = (V, E) denote a weighted directed graph with the
models as vertices. For every pair of models, we define an edge (i → j) ∈ E and set its weight
           PN             PN
as wij = | k=1 Ii≽k j − k=1 Ij≽k i |. Here the indicator Ii≽k j = 1 denotes that metric k prefers
model i over model j, and hence wij denotes the number of metrics which prefer model i over j.
Then we can formulate the rank aggregation problem as a binary linear program:
                   X
        minimize        w e xe
                      e∈E
         subject to ∀i ̸= j ∈ V, xij + xji = 1 (Anti-symmetry and totality constraints)
                    ∀i ̸= j ̸= k ∈ V, xij + xjk + xki ≥ 1 (Transitivity constraints)
                    ∀i ̸= j, xij ∈ {0, 1} (Binary constraint)

Intuitively, we incur a cost for every metric’s pairwise comparison that we do not honor.


                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.8   T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION FOR B ORDA R ANK AGGREGATION

Suppose that we have several surrogate metrics for ranking our anomaly detection models. Also
suppose that each of these metrics is better than random ranking. Why would it be beneficial to
aggregate the rankings induced by these metrics? Theorem 1 provides an insight into the benefit of
Borda rank aggregation.
Suppose that we have N anomaly detection models to rank. Consider two arbitrary models i and
j with (unknown) ground truth rankings σ ∗ (i) and σ ∗ (j). Without the loss of generality, assume
σ ∗ (i) < σ ∗ (j), i.e., model i is better.
Next, let’s view each surrogate metric k = 1, . . . , M as a random variable Ωk taking values in
permutations SN (a set of possible permutations over N items), such that Ωk (i) ∈ [N ] denotes the
rank of item i. We are interested in properties of Borda rank aggregation applied on realizations of
these random variables. Theorem 1 states that, under certain assumptions, the probability of Borda
ranking making a mistake (i.e., placing model i lower than j) is upper bounded in a way such that
increasing M decreases this bound.
Theorem. Assume that Ωk ’s are pairwise independent, and that P(Ωk (i) < Ωk (j)) > 0.5 for any
arbitrary models i and j, i.e., each surrogate metric is better than random. Then  the probability
                                                                                                   that
                                                                                      M ϵ2
Borda aggregation makes a mistake in ranking models i and j is at most 2 exp − 2 , for some
fixed ϵ.

Proof. We begin by defining random variables Xk = 2I[Ωk (i) < Ωk (j)] − 1. Thus Xk = 1 if
Ωk (i) < Ωk (j) and Xk = −1, otherwise. Denote the expectation of these random variables as
Ek ≜ E[Xk ]. We assume that Ek > ϵ, ∀k ∈ [M ] for some small ϵ > 0, i.e., that each surrogate
metric k is better than random.
                     PM            PM
Next, define SM ≜ k=1 Xk , EM = k=1 Ek . Note that if SM > 0 then Borda aggregation will
correctly rank i higher than j.
If Ωk are pairwise independent, then Xk are pairwise independent, and we can apply Hoeffding’s
inequality for all t > 0:
                                              2t2
                   P(|SM − EM | ≥ t) ≤ 2 exp(−     )
                                              4M
                                                 2
                                               t
                     P(EM − SM ≥ t) ≤ 2 exp(−      )
                                              2M
                                              (EM )2
                          P(SM ≤ 0) ≤ 2 exp(−         ), setting t = EM
                                                2M
                                              M ϵ2
                          P(SM ≤ 0) ≤ 2 exp(−       ), because ϵ < Ek , ∀k
                                                2
Recall, that SM < 0 results in an incorrect ranking (ranking j higher than i), and SM = 0 results in
a tie (that we break uniformly at random). Therefore, the probability that Borda aggregation makes
a mistake in ranking items i and j is upper bounded as per the above statement.



We do not assume that Ωk are identically distributed, but we assume that Ωk ’s are pairwise inde-
pendent. We emphasize that the notion of independence of Ωk as random variables is different from
rank correlation between realizations of these variables (i.e., permutations). For example, two per-
mutations drawn independently from a Mallow’s distribution can have a high Kendall’s τ coefficient
(rank correlation). Therefore, our assumption of independence, commonly adopted in theoretical
analysis (Ratner et al., 2016), does not contradict our observation of high rank correlation between
surrogate metrics.
Corollary 1. Under the same assumptions as Theorem 1, if Borda aggregation makes q
                                                                                 a mistake in
                                                                                            log δ2 1
ranking models i and j with probability at most δ > 0, then min P(Ωk (i) < Ωk (j)) >         2M + 2 ,
                                                               k
where k ∈ [M ] and i, j ∈ [N ] are any two arbitrary models.


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. The proof follows from upper bounding the probability that Borda makes a mistake in rank-
ing models i and j by δ:
                                                                  s
                                           M ϵ2                     2 log 2δ
                     P(SM ≤ 0) ≤ 2 exp(−        ) ≤ δ =⇒ ϵ ≥                                 (3)
                                            2                          M
Consider the following relationship between ϵ and min P(Ωk (i) < Ωk (j))) for k ∈ [M ]:
                                                        k

          ϵ ≤ min Ek = min 2P(Ωk (i) < Ωk (j)) − 1 = 2(min P(Ωk (i) < Ωk (j))) − 1               (4)
                k           k                                       k

From Equations 3 and 4, we can conclude that:
                                                              s
                                                                  log 2δ   1
                                min P(Ωk (i) < Ωk (j)) ≥                 +
                                 k                                 2M      2



To reduce chances of error, it follows from Corollary 1 that we can either increase the number
of surrogate metrics, or collect a smaller number of highly accurate metrics. As an example, set
δ = 0.05 and consider M = 20 metrics. Then for the Borda to err at most 5% of times, each
surrogate metric must prefer Ai over Aj with probability at least 0.7. This also highlights the
importance of empirical influence in identifying and removing bad permutations from the Borda
aggregation.

A.9    T HEORETICAL J USTIFICATION FOR E MPIRICAL I NFLUENCE

In this section we provide two arguments in support of Empirical Influence (EI). First, we note that
in an idealized case, where all but one metrics are perfect, EI helps identify the imperfect metric.
Lemma 2. Consider a set of M surrogate metrics that consists of (M − 1) perfect metrics and
one imperfect metric. The perfect metrics induce permutations σ1 = · · · = σM −1 = σ ∗ , where σ ∗
is the ground truth permutation, while the imperfect metric induces permutation σM ̸= σ ∗ . Then
EI(σM ) ≥ EI(σi ) for any 1 ≥ i ≥ M − 1.

                                            1
                                                 P|A|
Proof. Let S = {σ1 , · · · , σM }, f (A) = |A|    i=1 dτ (Borda(A), σi ), and 1 ≥ i ≥ M − 1.

Then
                    EI(σM ) − EI(σi ) = f (S) − f (S \ σM ) − f (S) + f (S \ σi )
                                      = f (S \ σi ) − f (S \ σM )

Since, σ1 = · · · = σM −1 = σ ∗ , we have Borda(S \ σM ) = σ ∗ and f (S \ σM ) = 0.
Kendall tau distance dτ is non-negative, hence f (S \ σi ) ≥ 0.
We have that EI(σM ) ≥ EI(σi ).

Next, recall that Borda(A) is an unbiased estimator of the central permutation in the Kemeny-Young
problem. Given a set of permutations A, the central permutation is defined as

                                                            |A|
                                                  1 X
                                  c(A) = arg min      dτ (χ, σ),                                 (5)
                                                 |A|
                                                         σ∈A
where the minimization is over all possible permutations χ of N items.
We now consider a modified notion of Empirical Influence that uses the central permutation instead
of Borda approximation.

                                     EI′ (σ) = f ′ (S) − f ′ (S \ σ),                            (6)


                                                   25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                       P|A|
where f ′ (A) = |A|
                 1
                            i=1 dτ (c(A), σi ).

Using this modified definition, we show how EI is capable of distinguishing between permutations
close and far from the central permutation. Recall that good permutations are those that are close to
the central permutation.
Lemma 3. Consider a set of permutations S = {σ1 , . . . , σM −2 , σok , σbad }, where σok and σbad
represent good and bad permutations, respectively.
Let σ ∗ be the unknown ground truth permutation.
Next, for some r > 0, assume that dτ (σ ∗ , σok ) < r and dτ (σ ∗ , σbad ) > 3r.
We also assume that overall, our set S is of reasonable quality in the sense that
dτ (c(S \ σ), σ ∗ ) < r for any σ ∈ S.
Then, we have that EI′ (σbad ) > EI′ (σok ).

Proof. Consider the difference


                  EI′ (σbad ) − EI′ (σok ) = f ′ (S) − f ′ (S \ σbad ) − f ′ (S) + f ′ (S \ σok )
                                              = f ′ (S \ σok ) − f ′ (S \ σbad )
                                                   X                        X
                                              ∝          dτ (cbad , σ) −               dτ (cok , σ)
                                                σ∈S\σok                     σ∈S\σbad

Here, cok = c(S \ σbad ) and cbad = c(S \ σok ).
We have that
                                                             X                           X
                                                                     dτ (cbad , σ) −              dτ (cok , σ)
                                                           σ∈S\σok                     σ∈S\σbad
                   X                            X
             =              dτ (cbad , σ) −              dτ (cok , σ) + dτ (cbad , σbad ) − dτ (cbad , σok )
                 σ∈S\σbad                     σ∈S\σbad

Under our assumptions, dτ (cbad , σ ∗ ) < r, dτ (σbad , σ ∗ ) > 3r and dτ (σok , σ ∗ ) < r.
Therefore EI′ (σbad ) > EI′ (σok ).



A.10    C ORRELATION BETWEEN ADJUSTED BEST F1 AND VUS-ROC

Motivation. Paparrizos et al. (2022a) in a recent study found the volume under the surface of the
ROC curve (VUS-ROC) to be more robust than other compared evaluation metrics. Their study
did not compare VUS-ROC against adjusted best F1 , used in this paper. The VUS-ROC metric is
defined for univariate time-series, whereas one of the datasets we use, the Server Machine dataset
(SMD), has multivariate time-series. Hence, our main results are still with respect to adjusted best
F1 . However, we carry out an experiment to evaluate the correlation between VUS-ROC correlates
with adjusted best F1 .

Experimental setup. For every time-series, we computed the spearman-r and kendall-τ correla-
tion between the performance of models as measured by VUS-ROC and adjusted best F1 . We carried
out this experiment on 250 time-series from the UCR anomaly archive (Wu & Keogh, 2021). We
measured the dispersion of an evaluation measure (VUS-ROC or adjusted best F1 ) on a time-series
as the interquartile range of performance values of all models in that time-series. The sliding window
parameter that VUS-ROC relies on, was automatically set to the auto-correlation of time-series.

Results. Out of 250 time-series, only 23 time-series did not have statistically significant positive
kendall-τ and spearman-r correlation. All these time-series had low dispersion of the evaluation
measures i.e. the difference in performance of most models trained on the time-series, measured in
terms of VUS-ROC or adjusted best F1 , was less than 10%.


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.11    C ORRELATION BETWEEN ADJUSTED BEST F1 AND ADJUSTED PR-AUC

On our datasets, performance of models measured using PR-AUC and adjusted best F1 had statisti-
cally significant highly positive correlation (see Figure 8.

                                                1.0     rS = 0.94 (0.0), = 0.81 (0.0)

                                                0.8


                              Adjusted PR-AUC
                                                0.6

                                                0.4

                                                0.2

                                                0.0
                                                  0.0     0.2      0.4 0.6 0.8          1.0
                                                                Adjusted best F1

Figure 8: Correlation between adjusted best F1 and adjusted PR-AUC. rS and τ denote the spear-
man and kendall correlation, respectively. p-values of two-sided tests are reported in parenthesis.


A.12    D OES EMPIRICAL INFLUENCE IDENTIFY BAD METRICS ?

To measure the correlation between empirical influence and quality of a metric, we provide (1)
experiments on real-world datasets, and (2) an analysis on synthetic data in Appendix A.4, where
we see that empirical influence can almost perfectly identify bad metrics.

Experimental setup. We define the quality of a metric σ using two quantities: (Q1) adjusted
best F1 of top-5 models ranked by a metric σ, (Q2) difference in the adjusted best F1 of top-5 and
bottom-5 models ranked by a metric σ. This quality metric is inspired by the separation analysis in
Paparrizos et al. (2022a).

Results. 6 out of 9 datasets had negative kendall-τ correlation between the quality of a metric
and its empirical influence, when quality is measured using Q1. Of these 6 datasets, 4 datasets had
statistically significant negative correlation. Recall that bad metrics have high positive empirical
influence (Section 4.2). Even when quality is measured using Q2, 6 out of 9 datasets had negative
kendall-τ correlation between the quality of a metric and its empirical influence. Of these 6 datasets,
2 datasets had statistically significant negative correlation.


                                                                   27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.13    R ESULTS WHEN AGGREGATING OVER ALL METRICS

When we perform robust rank aggregation over all the metrics, instead of only 5 anomaly injection
metrics (scale, noise, cutoff, contextual and speedup), we observed a degradation in the performance
of both minimum influence metric (MIM) and robust Borda. MIM has more significant wins and
fewer significant losses when only the 5 best performing metrics are aggregated. This degradation
in performance can be explained by the fact that some metrics have ranking performance worse than
random model selection, for example model centrality metrics and prediction likelihood.

                                            Significant Wins      Significant Losses
                Ranking Methods/Baselines   SS     Random      Oracle SS Random
                         MIM                 0        1           5        3      1
                     Robust Borda            0        2           6        2      1

Table 5: Results of pairwise-statistical tests, when aggregation is performed using all metrics on
n = 6 datasets.

                                            Significant Wins      Significant Losses
                Ranking Methods/Baselines   SS     Random      Oracle SS Random
                         MIM                 2        3           5        0      0
                     Robust Borda            2        4           5        2      1

Table 6: Results of pairwise-statistical tests, when aggregation is performed using only best per-
forming 5 metrics on n = 6 datasets.


A.14    D OES T HEOREM 1 HOLD IN PRACTICE ?

In this short experiment we provide empirical support for Theorem 1.

Experimental setup. Theorem 1 considers error bounds when ranking two models. Thus, for
each time series we identify the best- and worst-performing models and empirically test whether
aggregation over more rankings helps reduce this error. We varied the number of surrogate metrics
from 2 to 17, and perform borda rank aggregation to find the best model. The performance of
the aggregated borda rank is measured as the adjusted best F1 of the top ranked  model. For each
combination of m metrics, we report the performance averaged over all 17

                                                                         m   unique combinations
of the metrics.

Results. First, we present the performance of the best model as identified by borda aggregation of
a combination of metrics, averaged across all the time-series. Overall, we see a clear trend where the
performance of the selected best model increases with the number of surrogate metrics (rankings).

                Average performance when using m metrics              Adjusted best F1
                              m = 2 metrics                                0.588
                              m = 5 metrics                                0.795
                              m = 8 metrics                                0.784
                              m = 11 metrics                               0.829
                              m = 14 metrics                               0.821
                              m = 17 metrics                               0.838

Table 7: Adjusted best F1 of the best model as identified by borda aggregation of all possible combi-
nations of m metrics, averaged across all time-series datasets. Increasing the number of surrogate
metrics improves model selection performance.

In only 27 out of 181 time-series, we did not observe a monotonic improvement as the number
of metrics increased. However, we notice that in all such cases, the performance of all anomaly
detection models was low and similar to each other. Under such circumstances, not only do surrogate
metrics tend to be noisy, violating the assumptions of the theorem, but also, model selection does
not matter much.


                                                 28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Below, as an example, we also report the results of two individual time-series where we can see our
theorem at play, and another time-series where our theorem does not hold:

                Average performance when using m metrics          Adjusted best F1
                              m = 2 metrics                            0.507
                              m = 5 metrics                            0.701
                              m = 8 metrics                            0.584
                              m = 11 metrics                           0.742
                              m = 14 metrics                           0.629
                              m = 17 metrics                           0.984

Table 8: Adjusted best F1 of the best model as identified by borda aggregation of all possible com-
binations of m metrics, on machine-3-6 time-series of the Server Machine dataset. Increasing the
number of surrogate metrics improves model selection performance.

                Average performance when using m metrics          Adjusted best F1
                              m = 2 metrics                            0.566
                              m = 5 metrics                            0.742
                              m = 8 metrics                            0.645
                              m = 11 metrics                           0.780
                              m = 14 metrics                           0.677
                              m = 17 metrics                           0.999

Table 9: Adjusted best F1 of the best model as identified by borda aggregation of all possible combi-
nations of m metrics, InternalBleeding17 time-series of the UCR Anomaly Archive. Increasing the
number of surrogate metrics improves model selection performance.

                Average performance when using m metrics          Adjusted best F1
                              m = 2 metrics                            0.324
                              m = 5 metrics                            0.396
                              m = 8 metrics                            0.272
                              m = 11 metrics                           0.268
                              m = 14 metrics                           0.240
                              m = 17 metrics                           0.240

Table 10: Adjusted best F1 of the best model as identified by borda aggregation of all possible
combinations of m metrics, on DISTORTEDInternalBleeding17 time-series of the UCR Anomaly
Archive. In this time-series, increasing the number of surrogate metrics hurts model selection per-
formance.


                                                 29
