Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N EURAL AGENTS S TRUGGLE TO TAKE T URNS
IN B IDIRECTIONAL E MERGENT C OMMUNICATION

 Valentin Taillandier                                                    Dieuwke Hupkes
 ENS PSL, Inria                                                          Meta AI Research
 valentin.taillandier@gmail.com                                          dieuwkehupkes@fb.com

 Benoı̂t Sagot                           Emmanuel Dupoux           Paul Michel∗
 Inria                                   Meta AI Research          ENS PSL, Inria
 benoit.sagot@inria.fr                   dpx@fb.com                pmichel31415@gmail.com



                                              A BSTRACT
            The spontaneous exchange of turns is a central aspect of human communication.
            Although turn-taking conventions come to us naturally, artificial dialogue agents
            struggle to coordinate, and must rely on hard-coded rules to engage in interactive
            conversations with human interlocutors. In this paper, we investigate the condi-
            tions under which artificial agents may naturally develop turn-taking conventions
            in a simple language game. We describe a cooperative task where success is con-
            tingent on the exchange of information along a shared communication channel
            where talking over each other hinders communication. Despite these environmen-
            tal constraints, neural-network based agents trained to solve this task with rein-
            forcement learning do not systematically adopt turn-taking conventions. However,
            we find that agents that do agree on turn-taking protocols end up performing better.
            Moreover, agents that are forced to perform turn-taking can learn to solve the task
            more quickly. This suggests that turn-taking may help to generate conversations
            that are easier for speakers to interpret.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Natural conversations involve a rapid exchange of ut-
terances where speakers coordinate on-the-fly to avoid                          Time
talking over each other. This turn-taking phenomenon
is ubiquitous across cultures (Stivers et al., 2009) and
is even found in some forms of animal communication
(Pika et al., 2018; Demartsev et al., 2018). The abil-
ity to engage in spontaneous turn-taking develops early              ★     ⬤     ★      ■           ⬤
                                                                                                    ★
in humans, even before linguistic competence (Nguyen
et al., 2021) and allows us to hold fluent conversations
with very little downtime between utterances (Heldner &
Edlund, 2010). In contrast, fluid turn-taking is difficult
to replicate in artificial dialogue systems. Modern con-
versational agents often rely on explicit cues, for instance    Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed
pressing “enter” in text-based chatbots, the use of spe-        game. Both agents can exchange utter-
cific wake-words (Gao et al., 2020), or long silences of        ances through a shared communication
pre-determined length (Skantze, 2021).                          channel. At each step of the conversa-
                                                                tion, agents can decide to either speak or
The goal of this paper is to provide a testbed for studying     stay silent. However, information can-
the conditions under which artificial agents may develop        not be transmitted if both agents decide
a turn-taking convention to resolve a cooperative task. We      to speak at the same time.
describe a simple two-player game where agents observe
partial views on an object which they must reconstruct. Agents can exchange information by emit-
ting symbols across a shared communication channel over multiple rounds. The game exhibits two
    ∗
        Now at DeepMind.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


key features: first, at each round agents can decide to either talk or stay silent. However, if both
agents decide to talk at the same time, they are not able to hear the other agent’s message. Second,
agents get a higher score if they solve the task in fewer rounds. This creates an explicit pressure
towards a protocol that allows the agents to solve the task quickly while minimizing overlap.
In experiments, we find that simple neural-network-based agents trained with reinforcement learning
do not consistently develop natural turn-taking strategies. However, agents that do develop a turn-
taking protocol are able to achieve a much higher score, sometimes solving the task perfectly. To
shed light on this finding, we perform an in-depth analysis of an asymmetric version of the game,
where one agent has all the information. We show that in this case, there is an optimal strategy
that does not rely on turn-taking. However, we demonstrate empirically that agents fail to solve the
game when they are forced to use this strategy. In contrast, agents that are forced to use strategies in
multiple turns rapidly achieve almost perfect accuracy.

2     R ELATED W ORK
Schegloff (2000) attributes the first description of turn-taking to Goffman (1955), although the term
“turn-taking” itself was coined much later (Yngve, 1970). Since then, and following early seminal
work in the 70s (Duncan, 1972; Sacks et al., 1978), turn-taking has been the subject of considerable
study under the umbrella of “conversation analysis” (Levinson, 1983). For example, researchers
have sought to characterize linguistic and paralinguistic cues involved in organizing turns (Stephens
& Beattie, 1986; Kendon, 1967; Clancy et al., 1996), to understand the time-scales involved in turn
changes (Stivers et al., 2009; Heldner & Edlund, 2010) or to identify turn-taking conventions in
non-human primates (Rossano, 2013; Rossano & Liebal, 2014; Demartsev et al., 2018).
Research in automated dialogue systems dates back to early efforts in the 60s and 70s (Weizenbaum,
1966; Bobrow et al., 1977). Particularly relevant to our work is a line of research on task-based meth-
ods, which formulates dialogue as a reinforcement learning problem to satisfy some user-relevant
task (Walker, 2000; Levin et al., 2000). After the success of early deep-learning based models
(Vinyals & Le, 2015; Li et al., 2016), most state-of-the-art systems (Adiwardana et al., 2020; Zhang
et al., 2020) are now generally built on top of large pretrained models (Radford et al.; Lewis et al.,
2020). Research in dialogue systems focuses primarily on text-based models, and spoken dialogue
systems are generally implemented as speech recognition/generation scaffolding around a text-based
core (Chen et al., 2018). However, there have been recent on addressing phenomena specific to spon-
taneous spoken dialogue such as filled pauses (Székely et al., 2019) or non-verbal vocalizations and
turn changes (Nguyen et al., 2021).
Our work belongs to a long line of research devoted to the use of computational models for sim-
ulating the emergence of language (Batali, 1998; Cangelosi & Parisi, 2002). With the advent of
deep learning, there has been a surge of interest in emergent communication among neural-network
agents trained with reinforcement learning (Lazaridou et al., 2017; Foerster et al., 2016; Lazaridou &
Baroni, 2020). The overwhelming majority of research in this area focuses on unidirectional sender-
receiver communication (see Havrylov & Titov (2017); Bouchacourt & Baroni (2018); Chaabouni
et al. (2020) inter alia) based on variants of the Lewis signaling game (Lewis, 1969; Skyrms, 2010).
Although several authors have studied bidirectional communication (Kottur et al., 2017; Graesser
et al., 2019), alternating turns are usually hard-coded into the game.

3     M ETHOD : A T ESTBED FOR THE E MERGENCE OF T URN -TAKING
There is evidence in the conversational analysis literature that turn-taking systems in human lan-
guages almost universally tend to favor (1) few instances of overlapping speech and (2) minimal
pauses between turns (Stivers et al., 2009). In this section, we describe a communication game
based on a variant of the Lewis signaling game (Lewis, 1969) which encapsulates these features.

3.1   G AME D ESCRIPTION

The game is played between two agents, Agent 1 and Agent 2. Before every episode of the game,
an object x is drawn according to distribution p from a pool X and both agents observe partial views
on the object, x̂1 and x̂2 . The goal of the game is for the agents to communicate enough information
to reconstruct the original input x. Throughout the paper, we will experiment with two versions of


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the game: a symmetric variant where both agents observe partial views, and an asymmetric variant
where one agent (by convention, Agent 2) has access to the full object (x̂2 = x).

3.1.1   C ONVERSATION OVER A S HARED C HANNEL
During an episode, conversation between both agents proceeds over T communication steps. At
every step t ∈ {1, . . . , T }, each agent i ∈ {1, 2} must choose one of two actions:

 • SILENCE: the agent says nothing
 • SPEAK: the agent emits a symbol sit taken from a finite vocabulary V = {w1 , . . . , w|V | }. The
   agent chooses which symbol to send (there are therefore |V | possible SPEAK actions).

Agents choose their respective actions synchronously and independently: they cannot coordinate to
choose their action based on the other agent’s action at the same time-step.
To emulate the presence of a single auditory channel, we introduce an additional environmental
constraint depending on the actions chosen by the agents. Two situations may occur:

1. if at least one agent stays SILENT, communication succeeds. In this case, both agents are able
   to observe each other’s actions, including any symbol sent.
2. both agents may attempt to SPEAK at the same time. We call this situation overlap: in this case,
   we do not allow the agents to perceive each other’s actions directly, to simulate failure to transmit
   information. We detail specific strategies for modeling overlap in Section 3.1.2.

After each step of the conversation, agents can make a guess as to the original object x, based on
the communication history they have observed and receive a reward rt for this communication step.
                                                                   PT
Importantly, agents are trained to maximize their total reward R = t=1 rt . This means that agents
are encouraged to reconstruct the correct object (and thus get maximal reward) as soon as possible,
thus creating a pressure towards efficient communication (Rita et al., 2020).

3.1.2   M ODELING OVERLAPS
Central to our game is the special handling of overlaps: agents cannot simply communicate infor-
mation simultaneously. We implement this constraint by perturbing the symbols emitted by each
agent. We experiment with several ways to corrupt the emitted symbols to represent a failure of
communication that may result from agents speaking over each other:

 • Noise: instead of observing the symbol emitted by their communication partner, each agent ob-
   serves a special <noise> symbol. Both agents are aware that they have attempted to communi-
   cate but they do not observe the exact message sent by each other at this specific time-step.
 • Misunderstanding: another possibility is that agents misunderstand each other in case of overlap.
   We implement this by substituting the emitted symbols with random symbols from the vocabulary.
 • Walkie-Talkie: in this more restrictive setting, the communication channel behaves akin to
   a walkie-talkie device: when agents speak simultaneously, they perceive the other’s action as
   SILENT. This is a more punitive case of overlap because the agents are not able to detect that
   they are overlapping.

In most experiments, we adopt the Noise model. However, we will show that the choice of the
overlap model can have large consequences on the emergent protocol.

3.1.3   O BJECTS AND PARTIAL V IEWS
To facilitate analysis and enable fine-grained control of the difficulty of the game, in the remaining
of this paper we consider games where the underlying objects x are simple attribute-value vectors
(Kottur et al., 2017; Chaabouni et al., 2020).1 Specifically, each object x is a vector of Na attributes,
each of which can take Nv distinct values, for a total of NvNa possible combinations. We represent
    1
      Although the game could be performed on other objects, such as partially obstructed images (Graesser
et al., 2019).


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a partial view x̂ on an object x by masking Nm of its attributes. At every episode of the game, we
sample an object x and randomly mask some of its attributes according to a distribution δm (·|x) to
obtain partial views x̂.
In the asymmetric version of the game, only one partial view is sampled (x̂1 ) since Agent 2 observes
the original object. In the symmetric variant, both partial views x̂1 and x̂2 are obtained by sampling
masks independently for both.

3.2     M ODELING THE AGENTS

3.2.1    G ENERAL A RCHITECTURE
During an episode of the game, agents must achieve two tasks: they must exchange information
across the communication channel, and they must be able to reconstruct the original object x based
on their conversation history. For this purpose, each agent i must implement two functions:

• π a (at | St−1
               i
                  ), an action policy which defines a distribution over one of the |V | + 1 possible
  actions (either stay silent or emit one of the |V | symbols)
• π r (x′t | St−1
              i
                  ), a reconstruction function which defines a distribution over possible reconstruc-
  tions of the original input x
                                           i
Both distributions are conditioned on St−1    , the state of the conversation up until step t − 1 from the
                               i
point of view of agent i. St−1      encapsulates (1) the original partial view x̂i observed by the agent,
(2) the history of all past actions of the agent ai<t and finally (3) the symbols received from the other
agent j, ŝj<t . Recall that the latter may not correspond exactly to the symbols emitted by the other
agent j if the agents overlapped.
                                                                                   i
In practice we implement these functions with a shared conversation encoder h(St−1     ) which maps
                           i             j
the conversation state St−1 := (a<t , ŝ<t , x̂i ) onto a continuous representation (for instance by
means of a recurrent neural network). Both the action policy and the reconstruction function are
functions of this encoding (see Figure 2). The action policy is parameterized as a class-based soft-
max (Goodman, 2001), where we first predict the type of action, either SILENT or SPEAK. If the
latter is chosen, a separate softmax operator predicts the emitted symbol. We factor the reconstruc-
tion function into Na independent classifiers, one for predicting the value of each attribute (out of
Nv candidates).

3.2.2    S TANDARD T RAINING O BJECTIVES
During training, each agent is then trained to maximize two objectives, a conversation objective Jconv
with respect to its action policy and a reconstruction objective Jrec with respect to its reconstruction
function:
                          Jconv,i = E x∼p E π1a (·|x̂1 ) R1 (S) + R2 (S)

                                      x̂1 ,x̂2 ∼δm   S∼πa (·|x̂ )
                                                            2   2

                                                                    T
                                                                    X
                           Jrec,i = E      x∼p    E π1a (·|x̂1 )          log πir (x | Sti )
                                      x̂1 ,x̂2 ∼δm S∼π2a (·|x̂2 )
                                                                    t=1
where ES∼πθa (·|x̂1 ),πθa (·|x̂2 ) denotes the expectation taken over all conversations sampled from the
              1          2
agents’ policies conditioned on x̂1 and x̂2 . Both agents learn to maximize the joint reward R1 + R2 ,
making the game fully cooperative. We will refer to this objective as the Standard objective.
To encourage agents to communicate about their missing information, we experiment with an al-
ternative objective where agents must not only reconstruct their masked attributes, but also predict
which attributes are masked for their interlocutor. We call this objective Reciprocal, since agent i
must be able to reconstruct x̂j and not x.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETTINGS
4.1     G AME PARAMETERS


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In all experiments, inputs are vectors of Na =
10 attributes with Nv = 16 possible values, re-
sulting in ≈ 1012 total combinations. Unless                        Agent 1
specified otherwise, agents are optimized on a
                                                                                                    Agent 2
training set of 106 examples. We also sample a
validation and test set of 1,000 examples each.
We set the number of masks Nm = 2. During
training, the positions of the masked attributes
are sampled uniformly on-the-fly. At evalua-
                                                   Figure 2: Overview of a step of the game from
tion time, we exhaust all possible combinations
                                                   the point of view of Agent 1. The agent takes
of masks for the first agent. In the symmetric          1
                                                   in St−1  and tries to reconstruct the object, yield-
setting, we sample another pair of mask inde-
pendently for the second agent.                    ing reward rt1 . Simultaneously, the agent sam-
                                                   ples an action a1t and observes symbol ŝ2t emitted
We set the size of the vocabulary to |V | = 8. by agent 2. The conversation state St1 is updated
Importantly, we are careful to choose a com- based on both agent’s actions.
munication channel that is small enough to dis-
qualify trivial strategies where each agent simply describes the entirety of its partial view. Indeed, a
single agent needs Nv log[|V |+1] Na steps to fully describe a vector of Na attributes with Nv values
using a vocabulary of size |V |.2 With a vocabulary size of 8 this corresponds to ≈ 13 steps per agent
(26 in the symmetric setting). Therefore we limit the size of the channel to T = 8 in the asymmetric
variant and 16 in the symmetric variant. This means that to solve the task, agents must leverage the
fact that they share information about the problem if they are to solve the task successfully.

4.2   E VALUATION M ETRICS

We evaluate agents by their ability to reconstruct the original object at the end of the conversation.
We report the average accuracy over all masked attributes. Note that in the symmetric version of
the game, it is possible that some attributes are masked for both agents, meaning that the original
value cannot be reconstructed. We exclude these occurrences from the computation, which means
that the maximum accuracy is always 100%.
We also analyze the resulting conversations in terms of number of turns and overlaps, following
standard conversation analysis taxonomy (Sacks et al., 1978). Specifically, a turn starts when an
agent i is speaking and the other agent j isn’t. The turn lasts up until agent i becomes silent. If the
next agent speaking is still agent i, the turn continues and any silence is counted as an “intra-turn
pause”. However, if the next agent speaking is agent j, the turn ends before the first silence, and
agent j’s turn starts whenever it starts speaking. If there are intermediate steps between the two
turns where both agent are silent, they are counted as a “gap” in the conversation. Therefore, each
timestep between the start of the first turn and the end of the last turn can be counted either as agent
i’s turn, agent j’s turn, or a gap. Additionally, we also record all timesteps where agents speak over
each other (overlap).

4.3   AGENT I MPLEMENTATIONS

We implement the conversation encoder hi of each agent as single layer LSTM networks (Hochreiter
& Schmidhuber, 1997) with hidden dimension 512 and input dimension 256. At each step t, agent i
encodes the state of the conversation as hit = LSTM(hit−1 , eait−1 + eŝj ) where hit−1 is the hidden
                                                                        t−1
state corresponding to the previous timestep and eait−1 and eŝit−1 are embeddings of the previous
action ait−1 and the symbol ŝit−1 received from the other agent at step t − 1.
At the beginning of the conversation, the values of the partial views on the inputs, x̂i are encoded
as Na 256-dimensional embeddings, one for each attribute. For each attribute we learn Nv + 1
256-dimensional embeddings, one for each values and one to represent the masked attribute. The
concatenated Na × 256 dimensional representation of x̂i is then fed into a fully connected layer
mapping to a 512-dimensional encoding. This input encoding is used to initialize the hidden state
of the recurrent network.
    2
      The basis of the logarithm is |V | + 1 because agents can transmit information not only by emitting one of
the |V | symbols, but also by staying silent.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


          Accuracy       Overlaps    #Turns                      Accuracy     Overlaps    #Turns
 Stand. 92.63±2.55 0.00±0.00 1.00±0.00             Stand. 50.60±6.24 1.42±0.56 7.00±1.29
 Recip. 90.10±12.17 0.77±0.72 2.05±0.23            Recip. 83.63±6.91 3.07±0.89 5.34±1.45
      (a) Metrics for the asymmetric game.                (b) Metrics for the symmetric game.

Table 1: Metrics for both asymmetric and symmetric game with both standard and reciprocal
objective. We report standard deviation across 20 runs.
4.4   AGENT T RAINING

Agents are trained to maximize their objectives using gradient descent with minibatching. At each
step of the optimization process, we sample objects x uniformly from the training set, and partial
views x̂1 and x̂2 according to the masking distribution δm (· | x). We then unroll the conversation
by repeatedly sampling from each agent’s  policy until the maximum number of steps have been
reached, yielding conversation S = St1 , St2 t=1...T .
We can obtain gradient estimates for Jrec by automatic differentiation. For maximizing Jconv with re-
spect to the policies π a , we must resort to reinforcement learning. Specifically, we estimate ∇θi Jconv
using REINFORCE (Williams, 1992), a policy gradient algorithm. We  set the rewards to be the re-
                                                      PT
construction log probability of both agents RSi = i=1 log πir x | Sti . We use the average reward
in a minibatch as a baseline to reduce the variance of the REINFORCE updates (Sutton et al., 1999),
and add an entropy maximization term to encourage exploration (Williams & Peng, 1991). Our
implementation is written in Pytorch (Paszke et al., 2019), and is based on the EGG framework
(Kharitonov et al., 2021).

4.5   T RAINING H YPERPARAMETERS

Agents are trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015) with a learning rate of 0.001,
a batch size of 2048 and a weight of 0.001 for the entropy term. We train for a total of 600, 000
steps, and keep the pair of agents with the highest accuracy on the validation set. Unless indicated
otherwise, all experiments are run for 20 different random seeds and we report both the mean and
the standard deviation of each metric across all runs. See Appendix 7 for additional reproducibility.

5     R ESULTS
5.1   A SYMMETRIC G AME : AGENTS D EFAULT TO U NIDIRECTIONAL C OMMUNICATION
We first train agents to perform the asymmet-
ric version of the game where Agent 2 has all
                                                                     Pearson : -0.83      Pearson : 0.77
the information. In Table 1a we report recon-                  100
struction accuracy (of Agent 1), the number of                  95
                                                    Accuracy


overlaps and the number of turns when agents
are trained with both the standard and recip-
                                                                90
rocal objective. We find that agents trained                    85
with the standard objective adopt unidirectional                80
communication strategies where only the agent
that has all the information communicates (only                         1      2         1.5    2.0        2.5
one turn, no overlap). However, agents are not                          Overlaps               Turns
able to solve the game completely, consistently
converging to about 92% accuracy.                   Figure 3: Correlation between turn-taking met-
                                                    rics and accuracy in conversations developed by
On the other hand, agents trained with the re-      agents for the asymmetric game (p-value < 104 ).
ciprocal objective are encouraged to communi-
cate both ways to exchange information. We observe that agents generally develop protocols in
more than one turn, albeit with some amount of overlap. Although agents reach lower accuracies
on average, the variant across runs is very high. In fact, we find that more than half of the runs see
agents achieve an accuracy greater than 98% (by comparison, in the standard mode the best accu-
racy across all runs is 97.7%). To understand the source of this variability, in Figure 3 we report the
accuracies reached by different agent pairs as a function of the number of turns and overlaps of their
conversations. Conversations involving turn-taking (two or more turns, minimal overlap) correlate


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Accuracy                          Overlaps                            Turns
                                           4
                                                                           8
        80
                                           3
        60                                                                 6
                                           2
        40                                                                 4
                                           1
        20              Noise                                              2
                        Misunderstanding
                        Walkie-Talkie      0
        0                                                                  0
             Standard       Reciprocal         Standard       Reciprocal       Standard           Reciprocal

      Figure 4: Influence of the overlap model on the emergent protocols for the symmetric game.

strongly with high accuracy. However, there are several outliers where agents are not able to develop
efficient turn-taking and accuracy is much lower. In other words, while agents do not systematically
agree on turn-taking protocols, those that do consistently perform almost perfectly at the game.
Appendix C showcases a successful “question-answer” based strategy, where Agent 1 first declares
the masked positions and Agent 2 responds with the corresponding values.
5.2     S YMMETRIC G AME : N OT A LL T URN - BASED S TRATEGIES A RE E QUAL
In the symmetric version of the game both agents observe masked inputs. Therefore it is not possible
for the agents to rely solely on unidirectional communication. In Table 1b, we observe that agents
achieve much lower accuracy than in the asymmetric game. In particular with standard training
objective agents reach below 50% accuracy. Interestingly, agents develop protocols involving many
short turns (≈ 7 on average) with few overlaps.
Training with the reciprocal objective results in much higher accuracy. Agents still engage in turn
taking, but the conversation involves fewer, longer turns (≈ 5 turns). We postulate that in this case
agents adopt a similar strategy as in the asymmetric setting, first declaring their masked position and
then announcing the missing values (see Appendix E for a qualitative example).
Overall, these results suggest that successful turn-taking does not necessarily entail success at the
task (as for agents trained with the standard objective). Winning strategies rely on question-answers
style conversations (agents trained with the Reciprocal objective).

5.3     I NFLUENCE OF OVERLAP M ODELING C HOICES

Up to this point, all experiments were performed with the “Noise” implementation of overlaps.
However, it stands to reason that different models of overlaps may lead to different strategies. Fig-
ure 4 reports results for the symmetric game with all three implementations (see Appendix D for
the asymmetric game). Although there is some variance, both Noise and Misunderstanding result
in approximately the same behavior. On the other hand, agents trained in the Walkie-Talkie mode
avoid overlaps at all costs: in this mode overlapping is much more punitive since agents that talk
over each other are not aware that they overlapped. Consequently we find that agents struggle to
perform conversations with multiple turns, and accuracy is much lower.
6      A NALYSIS
In this section we investigate why some agents adopting turn-taking conventions achieve higher
accuracy. For the sake of simplicity, we focus our analysis on the simpler, asymmetric setting where
one agent (namely Agent 2) has all the information.

6.1     O PTIMAL S TRATEGIES

We describe two theoretical strategies which agents may adopt to solve the game while avoiding
overlaps. For each, we can compute the length of conversation L needed for the agents to fully
recover the original object (see Appendix A for derivations).

• Question-answers (QA): Agent 1 first communicates the position of here masks to Agent 2 (the
  “question”). Based on this information, Agent 2 (who knows the full object x) answers with the


                                                          7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    values of the corresponding attributes. This strategy requires two turns, and so agents
                                                                                          must agree
                                                                                     Na
    on a turn-taking convention. The total length of the conversation is LQA = log Nm +Nm log Nv ,
    where the first term corresponds to the length of the question and the second to the length of the
    answer. As shown in Section 5.1, we find that agents sometimes learn to adopt this strategy when
    they are trained with the reciprocal objective.
• Error-correcting code (ECC): A more efficient approach is based on Reed-Solomon error-
  correcting codes (Reed & Solomon, 1960). In this strategy, both agents can agree on Nm well-
  chosen linear encodings of the objects such that it is sufficient for Agent 2 to send the evaluation
  of these linear functions on x. Agent 1 can then provably reconstruct x by evaluating the same
  linear functions on x̂ and comparing the result with the message from Agent 2 (see Appendix B
  for a detailed explanation). The length of the conversation is then only LECC = Nm log PNa ,Nv ,
  where PNa ,Nv is the smallest prime number greater than max(Na , Nv ).

In our setting, the corresponding lengths (rounded to the next integer) are LQA = 5 and LECC = 3.
On the surface, ECC is much more efficient than QA: it requires 2 fewer steps to accomplish, and it
only requires unidirectional communication.

6.2    T URN - TAKING FACILITATES L EARNING

100                                                 We have established that in the asymmetric setting, turn-
 80                                 Policy          taking is not the optimal strategy for solving the game as
                                       QA           early as possible given the environmental constraints of a
 60
 40                                    ECC          shared communication channel. This seems to contradict
                                       RL-TT        our results in Section 5.1, where we found that agents en-
 20                                    RL-Uni       gaging in turn-taking performed better than agents relying
      0      50k       100k     150k         200k   on unidirectional communication. To understand this dis-
                   Training steps                   crepancy, we compare the performance of the agents us-
                                                    ing any of these communication strategies. We compare
Figure 5: Validation accuracy through-              four protocols: the two hard-coded strategies QA and
out training with fixed policies. Conver-           ECC, and two strategies learned by agents through re-
sations involving turn-taking (dashed               inforcement learning. We select one policy where agents
lines) are learned much faster.                     engage in turn-taking (RL-TT) and one where only uni-
                                                    directional communication occurs (RL-Uni).
Figure 5 depicts the evolution of the reconstruction accuracy for pairs of agents trained purely to
solve the task using a fixed policy. We find that turn-taking strategies not only enable the agent to
reach the highest accuracy, but convergence is dramatically faster. In contrast, agents forced to adopt
RL-Uni learn much slower. Finally, agents are not able to learn to solve the game using ECC, even
though it is theoretically the most efficient strategy.
6.3    D ISCUSSION
These findings seem to discredit purely functional explanations for turn-taking as the most efficient
communication strategy through a shared channel. Indeed, our theoretical analysis asserts that turn-
taking is not optimal under these constraints. Nevertheless, according to Figure 5, conversations
involving turn-taking are easier to interpret for agents than more sophisticated alternatives like ECC.
Moreover, agents learn to decode these conversations much earlier. This begs the question whether
turn-taking may have developed as a response to extraneous pressures beyond the efficient transfer of
information. More future work is warranted to determine whether these findings generalize beyond
our simple setting.


7     A DDITIONAL R EPRODUCIBILITY D ETAILS

All experiments are run on single Nvidia V100 GPUs (16 or 32GB VRAM). Training takes about 4
hours (resp. 6 hours) for 100k steps for the asymmetric (resp. symmetric) experiments. A pair of
agents totals 8,792k parameters and can run on a single GPU with a batch size of 2048.
Training parameters (learning rate and entropy coefficient) were chosen via a preliminary grid search
in the asymmetric setting.


                                                          8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The code used for the analysis in this paper is publicly available on a GitHub repository.3


8       L IMITATIONS

Regarding agent modeling, we resort to simple LSTMs mostly for reasons of computational effi-
ciency. However, neural architectures (e.g. Transformers; Vaswani et al., 2017) may imbue agents
with different inductive biases and affect the resulting strategy. On a similar note, we only use a very
simple reinforcement learning algorithm (REINFORCE with a baseline and entropy penalty). There
are more sophisticated methods dedicated to multi-agent reinforcement learning in the literature (Pa-
poudakis et al., 2021) such as counterfactual policy gradient (Foerster et al., 2018) or multi-agent
variants of actor-critic algorithms (Yu et al., 2021). The use of such approaches may for instance
enable agents to discover elaborate turn-based strategies (involving multiple questions and answers)
without the use of an explicit auxiliary reciprocal guessing objective.
Modeling overlaps is the central feature of our proposed game. For the sake of simplicity, we
only considered “discrete” implementations of overlap, replacing one symbol with another. A more
elaborate alternative would be to represent symbols as actual speech signals (e.g. phonemes) and
overlaps as the superposition of two signals. There is also some skepticism of the assumption that
overlap significantly perturbs the original signal (see, e.g. Levinson, 2016). Moreover, sign lan-
guages also exhibit turn-taking, even though communication is not constrained by a shared auditory
channel (Vos et al., 2016). This suggests that we could also model the effect of overlap as a difficulty
(intrinsic to the agents) of producing and perceiving simultaneously (rather than a perturbation of the
perceived signal), although it is not clear how this should be implemented. We leave the exploration
of these alternatives to future work.


9       C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we studied the emergence of turn-taking conventions in two-way communication.
We proposed a simple language game where two agents must exchange information using a shared
communication channel to solve a cooperative task. This enabled us to make several observations:
first, neural network agents trained to play this game struggled to agree on effective turn-based
strategies. Despite this fact, agents that did engage in turn-taking tended to achieve higher accuracy
across the board. Detailed analysis showed that while turn-based communication is not necessarily
optimal in theory, in practice it is much easier for agents to learn than more efficient alternatives. We
hope that this work can foster future research on 1. understanding the origins of turn-taking in human
communication and 2. developing conversational agents that can achieve turn-taking naturally.


R EFERENCES
Daniel Adiwardana, Minh-Thang Luong, David R So, Jamie Hall, Noah Fiedel, Romal Thoppilan,
  Zi Yang, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Gaurav Nemade, Yifeng Lu, et al. Towards a human-like open-
  domain chatbot. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09977, 2020.

John Batali. Computational simulations of the emergence of grammar. Approaches to the evolution
  of language: Social and cognitive bases, pp. 405, 1998.

Daniel G Bobrow, Ronald M Kaplan, Martin Kay, Donald A Norman, Henry Thompson, and Terry
  Winograd. Gus, a frame-driven dialog system. Artificial intelligence, 8(2):155–173, 1977.

Diane Bouchacourt and Marco Baroni. How agents see things: On visual representations in an emer-
  gent language game. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
  Language Processing, pp. 981–985, 2018.

Angelo Cangelosi and Domenico Parisi. Computer simulation: A new scientific approach to the
  study of language evolution. In Simulating the evolution of language, pp. 3–28. Springer, 2002.
    3
        https://github.com/vHitsuji/turntaking


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rahma Chaabouni, Eugene Kharitonov, Diane Bouchacourt, Emmanuel Dupoux, and Marco Baroni.
  Compositionality and generalization in emergent languages. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
  Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4427–4442, 2020.
Yun-Nung Chen, Asli Celikyilmaz, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur. Deep learning for dialogue systems. In
  Proceedings of the 27th international conference on computational linguistics: Tutorial abstracts,
  pp. 25–31, 2018.
Patricia M Clancy, Sandra A Thompson, Ryoko Suzuki, and Hongyin Tao. The conversational use
  of reactive tokens in english, japanese, and mandarin. Journal of pragmatics, 26(3):355–387,
  1996.
Vlad Demartsev, Ariana Strandburg-Peshkin, Michaela Ruffner, and Marta Manser. Vocal turn-
  taking in meerkat group calling sessions. Current Biology, 28(22):3661–3666, 2018.
Starkey Duncan. Some signals and rules for taking speaking turns in conversations. Journal of
  personality and social psychology, 23(2):283, 1972.
Pierre Dusart. Explicit estimates of some functions over primes. The Ramanujan Journal, 45(1):
  227–251, January 2018. ISSN 1572-9303. doi: 10.1007/s11139-016-9839-4.
Jakob Foerster, Ioannis Alexandros Assael, Nando De Freitas, and Shimon Whiteson. Learning
  to communicate with deep multi-agent reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 29, 2016.
Jakob Foerster, Gregory Farquhar, Triantafyllos Afouras, Nantas Nardelli, and Shimon Whiteson.
  Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence, volume 32, 2018.
Yixin Gao, Yuriy Mishchenko, Anish Shah, Spyros Matsoukas, and Shiv Vitaladevuni. Towards
  data-efficient modeling for wake word spotting. In ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Con-
  ference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 7479–7483. IEEE, 2020.
Erving Goffman. On face-work: An analysis of ritual elements in social interaction. Psychiatry, 18
  (3):213–231, 1955.
Joshua T Goodman. A bit of progress in language modeling. Computer Speech & Language, 15(4):
  403–434, 2001.
Laura Harding Graesser, Kyunghyun Cho, and Douwe Kiela. Emergent linguistic phenomena in
  multi-agent communication games. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
  in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
  Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp. 3700–3710, 2019.
Serhii Havrylov and Ivan Titov. Emergence of language with multi-agent games: Learning to com-
  municate with sequences of symbols. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30,
  2017.
Mattias Heldner and Jens Edlund. Pauses, gaps and overlaps in conversations. Journal of Phonetics,
 38(4):555–568, 2010.
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.
Adam Kendon. Some functions of gaze-direction in social interaction. Acta psychologica, 26:22–63,
  1967.
Eugene Kharitonov, Roberto Dessı̀, Rahma Chaabouni, Diane Bouchacourt, and Marco Baroni.
  EGG: a toolkit for research on Emergence of lanGuage in Games. https://github.com/
  facebookresearch/EGG, 2021.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Satwik Kottur, José Moura, Stefan Lee, and Dhruv Batra. Natural language does not emerge ‘nat-
  urally’in multi-agent dialog. In Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in
  Natural Language Processing, pp. 2962–2967, 2017.
Angeliki Lazaridou and Marco Baroni. Emergent multi-agent communication in the deep learning
  era. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.02419, 2020.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Alexander Peysakhovich, and Marco Baroni. Multi-agent cooperation and
  the emergence of (natural) language. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2017.
Esther Levin, Roberto Pieraccini, and Wieland Eckert. A stochastic model of human-machine in-
  teraction for learning dialog strategies. IEEE Transactions on speech and audio processing, 8(1):
  11–23, 2000.
Stephen C Levinson. Conversational Structure, Chapter 6. Cambridge university press, 1983.
Stephen C Levinson. Turn-taking in human communication–origins and implications for language
  processing. Trends in cognitive sciences, 20(1):6–14, 2016.
David Lewis. Convention: A philosophical study. John Wiley & Sons, 1969.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
 Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Bart: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
 training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension. In Proceedings of the
 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 7871–7880, 2020.
Jiwei Li, Michel Galley, Chris Brockett, Jianfeng Gao, and William B Dolan. A diversity-promoting
  objective function for neural conversation models. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, pp. 110–119, 2016.
Vivian Nguyen, Otto Versyp, Christopher Cox, and Riccardo Fusaroli. A systematic review and
  bayesian meta-analysis of the development of turn taking in adult–child vocal interactions. Child
  Development, 2021.
Georgios Papoudakis, Filippos Christianos, Lukas Schäfer, and Stefano V Albrecht. Benchmarking
  multi-agent deep reinforcement learning algorithms in cooperative tasks. In Thirty-fifth Con-
  ference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1),
  2021.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Simone Pika, Ray Wilkinson, Kobin H Kendrick, and Sonja C Vernes. Taking turns: bridging the
  gap between human and animal communication. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 285(1880):
  20180598, 2018.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training.
Irving S Reed and Gustave Solomon. Polynomial codes over certain finite fields. Journal of the
   society for industrial and applied mathematics, 8(2):300–304, 1960.
Mathieu Rita, Rahma Chaabouni, and Emmanuel Dupoux. “lazimpa”: Lazy and impatient neural
 agents learn to communicate efficiently. In Proceedings of the 24th Conference on Computational
 Natural Language Learning, pp. 335–343, 2020.
Federico Rossano. Sequence organization and timing of bonobo mother-infant interactions. Inter-
  action studies, 14(2):160–189, 2013.
Federico Rossano and Katja Liebal. Requests’ and ‘offers’ in orangutans and human infants. Re-
  questing in social interaction, pp. 333–362, 2014.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Harvey Sacks, Emanuel A Schegloff, and Gail Jefferson. A simplest systematics for the organization
  of turn taking for conversation. In Studies in the organization of conversational interaction, pp.
  7–55. Elsevier, 1978.

Emanuel A Schegloff. Overlapping talk and the organization of turn-taking for conversation. Lan-
  guage in society, 29(1):1–63, 2000.

Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system technical
  journal, 27(3):379–423, 1948.

Gabriel Skantze. Turn-taking in conversational systems and human-robot interaction: a review.
  Computer Speech & Language, 67:101178, 2021.

Brian Skyrms. Signals: Evolution, Learning, and Information. Oxford University Press, 2010.

Jane Stephens and Geoffrey Beattie. On judging the ends of speaker turns in conversation. Journal
  of Language and Social Psychology, 5(2):119–134, 1986.

Tanya Stivers, Nicholas J Enfield, Penelope Brown, Christina Englert, Makoto Hayashi, Trine
  Heinemann, Gertie Hoymann, Federico Rossano, Jan Peter De Ruiter, Kyung-Eun Yoon, et al.
  Universals and cultural variation in turn-taking in conversation. Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences, 106(26):10587–10592, 2009.

Richard S Sutton, David McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient methods
  for reinforcement learning with function approximation. 12, 1999.

Éva Székely, Gustav Eje Henter, Jonas Beskow, and Joakim Gustafson. Spontaneous conversational
   speech synthesis from found data. In Interspeech, pp. 4435–4439, 2019.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.

Oriol Vinyals and Quoc Le. A neural conversational model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05869, 2015.

C de Vos, Francisco J Torreira, and Stephen C Levinson. Turn-timing in signed conversations.
  coordinating stroke-to-stroke turn boundaries. 2016.

Marilyn A Walker. An application of reinforcement learning to dialogue strategy selection in a
 spoken dialogue system for email. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 12:387–416, 2000.

Joseph Weizenbaum. Eliza—a computer program for the study of natural language communication
  between man and machine. Communications of the ACM, 9(1):36–45, 1966.

Ronald J Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine learning, 8(3):229–256, 1992.

Ronald J Williams and Jing Peng. Function optimization using connectionist reinforcement learning
  algorithms. Connection Science, 3(3):241–268, 1991.

Victor H Yngve. On getting a word in edgewise. In Chicago Linguistics Society, 6th Meeting, 1970,
  pp. 567–578, 1970.

Chao Yu, Akash Velu, Eugene Vinitsky, Yu Wang, Alexandre Bayen, and Yi Wu. The surprising
  effectiveness of ppo in cooperative, multi-agent games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01955, 2021.

Yizhe Zhang, Siqi Sun, Michel Galley, Yen-Chun Chen, Chris Brockett, Xiang Gao, Jianfeng Gao,
  Jingjing Liu, and William B Dolan. Dialogpt: Large-scale generative pre-training for conver-
  sational response generation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations, pp. 270–278, 2020.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    S TRATEGIES FOR A SYMMETRIC G UESSING
Let us focus on the asymmetric version of the game, where only one agent (hereafter the “Guesser”)
must reconstruct the object from a partial view x̂, while the other agent (hereafter the “Oracle”) has
access to the full object x.
In this simplified scenario, we can describe theoretical conversation strategies that allow for solving
the game without overlaps. We characterize each strategy by the effective amount of bits Iguesser
and Ioracle of information that agents have to exchange after which the guesser can accurately
reconstruct x.

Naive strategy: A simple protocol is for the oracle to describe the entirety of the input x. This
strategy requires little coordination: the guesser does not need to speak, she must simply parse
the message to reconstruct x. Given that there are NvNa possible objects (distributed uniformly),
classical information theory (Shannon, 1948) tells us that the number of bits needed to encode the
objects is I = − log2 1/NvNa = Na log2 Nv .
                                     Iguesser = 0
                                      Ioracle = Na log|V |+1 Nv

Question-answer: Naturally the naive strategy is sub-optimal: it does not leverage the fact that
the guesser only needs to uncover the Nm masked attribute. If the oracle knows which attributes the
guesser is missing, she could simply send their values, which can be encoded in Nm log2 Nv bits of
information.
However, the guesser must first communicate the position of her Nm missing  attributes. The number
                                                                             Na
of possible combinations of masks is given by the binomial coefficient N       m
                                                                                  = Na !/Nm !(Na −Nm )!,
and masks    are  chosen  uniformly   at random.     Consequently  the  guesser’s message needs to be
       Na

log2 N  m
            bits long. This is particularly efficient when Nm  is small in comparison to Na . However,
this strategy requires bidirectional communication: both agents must learn to take turns, and the
oracle must learn to act conditioned on the guesser’s message.

                                                              Na
                                      Iguesser = log|V |+1
                                                              Nm
                                       Ioracle = Nm log|V |+1 Nv

Error Correcting Code (ECC): Although the turn-taking strategy outlined above appears as a
natural solution, there exists an even more efficient solution which doesn’t necessitate any turn-
taking whatsoever. Consider the simplest case where there is only Nm = 1 masked attribute, and
assume that both agents agree on a numerical encoding of each value (the integers from 1 to Nv ). In
this case it is sufficient for the oracle to send the sum of the encoding of all values in x, modulo Nv .
Upon reception, the guesser can simply compare this value with the sum of all Na − 1 attributes it
observes in x̂ to retrieve the missing value. In this case the oracle only needs to send log2 Nv bits of
information for the guesser to be able to reconstruct x̂.
This strategy can be extended to an arbitrary number of masks, borrowing ideas from the literature
on error correcting codes. In particular, there is an encoding scheme based on Reed-Solomon codes
(Reed & Solomon, 1960) in which the oracle evaluates well-chosen linear functions modulo PNa ,Nv ,
the smallest prime number greater than both Na and Nv . Upon reception, the guesser can provably
retrieve the values of the missing attributes by solving a system of Nm linear equations in a finite
field with PNa ,Nv elements. We refer to Appendix B for a detailed explanation of this code.
ECC is the most efficient strategy so far: it only necessitates communicating Nm numbers of value
up to PNa ,Nv , leading to a total effective amount of bits of I = Nm log2 PNa ,Nv . Moreover, it
doesn’t necessitate any turn taking at all: only the oracle needs to speak. However, the agent to
agree upon a more sophisticated convention: in particular recovering the missing attributes from the
message is not trivial.
                                     Iguesser = 0
                                      Ioracle = Nm log2 PNa ,Nv


                                                   13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Moreover, the proposition 5.4 in (Dusart, 2018) shows that for any x ≥ 89693, we can find a
prime number p so that x < p ≤ x(1 + 1/ln3 x). This allows us to bound PNa ,Nv and shows that
Ioracle = Nm log2 PNa ,Nv is never really far from Nm log2 max(Na , Nv ).

Computing the length L of a communication: Knowing that agents are using discrete tokens
in a vocabulary of size |V | + 1 (including silence), we can compute the effective length L of a
conversation with

                                      Iguesser            Ioracle
                             L=                    +
                                   log (|V | + 1)      log (|V | + 1)
This analysis can inform our choice of game parameters: for instance we choose |V | and T such
that the naive strategy does not allow the agents to solve the game.


B    E RROR C ORRECTING C ODE (ECC) S TRATEGY

We describe in more details on the construction of the ECC protocol. Let’s assume that x̂ is the
partial view of x, including a number of Nm masks at the positions k1 , · · · kNm .
The idea for the oracle agent is to compute Nm values, v1 , · · · vNm defined as
                                         X
                               vk (x) :=    xi ik−1 (mod PNa ,Nv )                                 (1)
                                           i

where PNa ,Nv is the smallest prime number so that P ≥ max(Na , Nv ). All the values are computed
modulo PNa ,Nv , which means that we only keep the remainder of the division by PNa ,Nv . The
amount of bits of information to transmit the values is therefore Ioracle = Nm log2 PNa ,Nv .
Let us show that the Nm values v1 (x), . . . vNm (x) are sufficient to reconstruct x knowing x̂. Let
v1 (x̂), . . . vNm (x̂) be the values computed by Agent 1 by applying Equation 1 to x̂, counting masks
as 0. By comparing vk (x) and vk (x̂), we obtain the following linear system
                                                                   
                                        v1 (x) − v1 (x̂)          xk1
                                               ..               . 
                                                          = W  ..                               (2)
                                                        
                                               .
                                vNm (x) − vNm (x̂)                      xkNm

where
                                                                       
                                          1                ···     1
                                         k0               ···    kNm 
                                    W =  ..               ..      ..                             (3)
                                                                     
                                         .                   .     . 
                                               k0Nm        ···     Nm
                                                                  kNm


is a matrix with elements in the field Z/PNa ,Nv Z of integers modulo PNa ,Nv . W is known as a
Vandermonde matrix, and its determinant is given by
                                        Y
                        det(W ) =             (kj − ki ) (mod PNa ,Nv )
                                     1≤i<j≤Nm

Note that 0 < (kj − ki ) < PNa ,Nv for any i, j. This means that det(W ) cannot be a multiple of
PNa ,Nv , since it is a prime number. Consequently, det(W ) ̸= 0 modulo PNa ,Nv , which means that
W is invertible in Z/PNa ,Nv Z. To find the missing values, the guesser agent can simply solve the
system by inverting W .


C    E XAMPLE OF A LEARNED QUESTION - ANSWER STRATEGY

Figure 6 showcases a successful “question-answer” based strategy , where Agent 1 first declares the
masked positions and Agent 2 responds with the corresponding values.


                                                      14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                             Turn
                                  100%
                                   75%
                                   50%                                                             Agent 1
                                   25%                                                             Agent 2
                                    0%
                                                Mask Prediction Accuracy (Agent 2)
                                  100%
                                   75%
                                   50%
                                   25%
                                    0%
                                                                Accuracy (Agent 1)
                                  100%
                                   75%
                                   50%
                                   25%
                                    0%
                                                1          2      3         4        5        6   7     8
                                                               Communication steps
Figure 6: Example of question-answer strategy developed by a pair of agents in the asymmetric
game with the reciprocal objective. During the first 3 steps, Agent 1 sends the position of the
masked attributes: Agent 2 is able to correctly predict the masked positions. Afterward, Agent 2
responds with the missing values, and Agent 1’s accuracy increases accordingly.
                            Accuracy                                      Overlaps                                 Turns
                                                    1.50
           1.0
                                                    1.25                                          2.0
           0.8                                      1.00
                                                    0.75                                          1.5
           0.6
                                                    0.50                                          1.0
           0.4
                   Noise                            0.25
           0.2     Misunderstanding                 0.00                                          0.5
                   Walkie-Talkie
           0.0                                      0.25                                          0.0
                 Standard          Reciprocal                  Standard          Reciprocal             Standard           Reciprocal
                        Objective                                     Objective                                Objective

    Figure 7: Influence of the overlap model on the emergent protocols for the asymmetric game.

D     I NFLUENCE OF OVERLAP M ODEL IN THE A SYMMETRIC G AME
In Figure 7, we depict the influence of the choice of overlap model on the performance of the
agents in the asymmetric game. Similarly to the symmetric game, Noise and Misunderstanding are
relatively similar. Unsurprisingly, with the Walkie-Talkie model agents develop strategies without
overlaps. However, contrary to the symmetric game here agents are able to develop a strategy in
two turns even with this more punitive implementation of overlaps. We hypothesise that this is due
to the smaller number of turns required to solve the game (only 2 versus at least 4 in the symmetric
games). With only one turn change, it is easier to avoid overlaps.

E    Q UALITATIVE E XAMPLE OF Q UESTION - ANSWER S TRATEGY IN THE
     S YMMETRIC G AME
Figure 8 shows an example strategy developed by a pair of agents trained to play the symmetric
game with the reciprocal objective. Agents follow a similar strategy as the asymmetric case (Figure
6 in the main text): in the first few steps, they exchange information about the positions of their
masks. Based on this information, the rest of the conversation is devoted to communicating the
values of these masked attributes.



                                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                    Turn
                    100%
                     75%
                     50%
                                                                  Agent 1
                     25%                                          Agent 2
                      0%
                                Mask Prediction Accuracy (Agent 2)
                    100%
                     75%
                     50%
                     25%
                      0%
                                         Accuracy (Agent 1)
                    100%
                     75%
                     50%
                     25%
                      0%
                                Mask Prediction Accuracy (Agent 1)
                    100%
                     75%
                     50%
                     25%
                      0%
                                         Accuracy (Agent 2)
                    100%
                     75%
                     50%
                     25%
                      0%
                              1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213141516
                                        Communication steps
Figure 8: Example of question-answer strategy developed by a pair of agents in the symmetric game
with the reciprocal objective. During the first 4 steps, Both agents communicate the positions of
their masks. Afterwards, they each respond with the corresponding missing values.


                                               16
