Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


U NDERSTANDING HTML WITH L ARGE L ANGUAGE
M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT
            Large language models (LLMs) have shown exceptional performance on a va-
            riety of natural language tasks. Yet, their capabilities for HTML understanding
            – i.e., parsing the raw HTML of a webpage, with applications to automation of
            web-based tasks, crawling, and browser-assisted retrieval – have not been fully
            explored. We contribute HTML understanding models (fine-tuned LLMs) and an
            in-depth analysis of their capabilities under three tasks: (i) Semantic Classifica-
            tion of HTML elements, (ii) Description Generation for HTML inputs, and (iii)
            Autonomous Web Navigation of HTML pages. While previous work has devel-
            oped dedicated architectures and training procedures for HTML understanding,
            we show that LLMs pretrained on standard natural language corpora transfer re-
            markably well to HTML understanding tasks. For instance, fine-tuned LLMs are
            12% more accurate at semantic classification compared to models trained exclu-
            sively on the task dataset. Moreover, when fine-tuned on data from the MiniWoB
            benchmark, LLMs successfully complete 50% more tasks using 192x less data
            compared to the previous best supervised model. Out of the LLMs we evalu-
            ate, we show evidence that T5-based models are ideal due to their bidirectional
            encoder-decoder architecture. To promote further research on LLMs for HTML
            understanding, we create and open-source a large-scale HTML dataset distilled
            and auto-labeled from CommonCrawl.1


1       I NTRODUCTION
Web crawling (Olston et al., 2010), form-filling (Diaz et al., 2013; Gur et al., 2021), or information
retrieving web agents (Nogueira & Cho, 2016) are important for both automating and assisting
users in web-based tasks. These and similar applications rely on models that can search for specific
content or controls on a web page as well as navigate a website autonomously. Since a web page in
its raw form is represented as an HTML-based text sequence, the success of models for web-based
tasks relies on their ability to understand HTML semantics, structure, and embedded interactions.
The predominant approach to web automation and HTML understanding is to train specialized mod-
els, i.e., gathering application-specific datasets and designing neural network (NN) architectures to
leverage inductive biases of the HTML’s structure; see, e.g., Liu et al. (2018); Toyama et al. (2021);
Gur et al. (2021); Humphreys et al. (2022). However, both dataset collection and neural architecture
design are expensive, time-consuming, and require highly-specialized, domain-specific knowledge.
Meanwhile, in the natural language processing (NLP) literature, large language models (LLMs) have
emerged as a solution to the difficulties of dataset collection and specialized NN design (Kaplan
et al., 2020; Bommasani et al., 2021). A popular paradigm in NLP is to take an off-the-shelf LLM
– pretrained on a large text corpus via an unsupervised and task-agnostic learning objective – and
either fine-tune or prompt the LLM on a small task-specific dataset. This paradigm has shown
exceptional performance on a variety of NLP tasks (Xue et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020; Austin
et al., 2021). Whether LLMs can be applied to HTML understanding – especially given the much
larger context and sequence lengths – remains an under-explored question.
In this paper, we investigate whether LLMs can be applied to HTML understanding to produce
better-performing, more sample-efficient HTML understanding models and without the need for
    1
        See visualizations of the results at https://sites.google.com/view/llm4html/home.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


<html>
   <body>
       <form class="login-form">
          <div>
             <label class="form-label" for=”uName”>
                Enter Email Address
             </label>
             <label class="form-label" for=”pass”>
                Enter Password:
             </label>
          </div>
          <div>
            <input type="email" id="uName”>
             <input type="password" id="pass">
             <span class="hidden">
                Please enter your password.
             </span>
          </div>
          <button type="submit">Sign In</button>
        </form>
   </body>
</html>


                                                      <div><label class="form-label" for=”uName”>Email Address</label><label
                                                      class="form-label" for=”pass”>Enter Password: </label></div><div><input
                                                      type="email" id="uName” target><input type="password" id="pass"><span
                                                      class="hidden">Please enter your password.</span></div>



                        (a)                                                                               (b)

Figure 1: a) HTML example page with a highlighted salient element, an element of interest (dashed box).
All canonical tasks evaluate a distinct interaction with this element, either by classifying it as one of a set of
categories, generating a text description of its purpose, or applying an action as part of a sequential navigation
of a multi-page website. b) LLM architectures overview. Dashed boxes denote sub-modules that are specific to
either encoder-only or encoder-decoder models. For encoder-only models, we add an extra classification layer.
Decoder-only models (not in the diagram) are similar to encoder-decoder models, the main difference is that
the HTML snippet is fed to the decoder and processed from left-to-right.


custom NN architecture design. To that end, we present a suite of three benchmarking tasks for
HTML understanding that capture the essence of these applications and require understanding both
structure and content. First, we devise Semantic Classification as a task that requires a model to
classify a given HTML element into one of a set of categories, such as address, email, password
etc., with application to automated form-filling. Second, we present Description Generation, a
label-extraction task where a model is given an HTML snippet and is asked to produce a natural
language description. For instance for an email field, the description might be “Please enter your
email address.” Note that in the majority of web pages, this connection between input elements and
description content is only implicit in the raw HTML code and inferring such links is a prerequisite
for higher-level navigation objectives. The third task is Autonomous Web Navigation (Shi et al.,
2017). A model is presented with an HTML page paired with a natural language command and
must apply appropriate actions on a sequence of HTML pages to satisfy the command. See Figure
1a for a simplified example of these tasks.
With these benchmark tasks in hand, we evaluate the transfer capabilities of a variety of pretrained
LLMs (Table 1), varying in architecture (encoder-only, encoder-decoder, or decoder-only), model
size (from 24.6M to 62B parameters), and training data corpora (both including and excluding pre-
training NLP and HTML corpus). While prior work universally pre-parses the HTML as input to the
model (Gur et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2018; Nakano et al., 2021), ours – to the best of our knowledge – is
the first work that uses raw, unprocessed HTML. Our results show that LLMs demonstrate a remark-
able level of HTML understanding across all tasks, with up to 192× more sample-efficiency than
models trained from scratch, and achieving a new SoTA for supervised learning on the MiniWoB
benchmark suite (Shi et al., 2017). The encoder-decoder architectures with bi-directional attention
show the best performance across the board even when their pretraining does not include HTML. In
addition, we show that the performance scales sub-linearly with the model size.
The broader objective of this research is to advance the integration of LLMs with autonomous web
agents. It has only been in the last year that researchers have begun to utilize LLMs outside of
NLP and integrate them as core capabilities in autonomy (Lu et al. (2021); Ahn et al. (2022)). In
this context, LLMs are reasoning engines for sequential decision making agents interacting with
environments.
The present work is the first in the research literature to embed an LLM and train it as an agent for
autonomous web navigation. This requires new implementations to adapt LLM training for behavior
cloning in addition to designing interfaces for integrating text generation into a perception-compute-


                                                                       2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


action cycle operating in a stateful web environment. Our implementation allows us to answer new
questions regarding trade-offs among various model characteristics.
We believe these contributions expand the scope of language models and connect their unique capa-
bilities with autonomous agents for the web. We provide a new perspective on machine learning for
HTML understanding and web automation, showing that pretrained LLMs can achieve significant
performance on such tasks, reducing the need for specialized architectures and training protocols.
To encourage further research in this direction, we open sourced 2 model weights for agents used in
the WoB environment and plan to open-source our dataset for description generation and.


2        R ELATED W ORK

HTML Understanding Autonomous web navigation has been a popular application for neural net-
work models, and a variety of works propose simulated websites for training web-based agents, with
application to task fulfillment (Yao et al., 2022; Gur et al., 2021; Burns et al., 2022; Mazumder &
Riva, 2020; Shi et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018) as well as information retrieval or question-answering
(Adolphs et al., 2021; Nogueira & Cho, 2016). Simulated websites provide an easy way to evaluate
models online, and for this reason we use the existing MiniWoB benchmark (Shi et al., 2017) for our
web navigation setting. However, it is still important to have a mechanism for evaluating models on
a wide variety of real-world websites. This was the key motivation for generating our own dataset
for the description generation task, which is distilled and auto-labeled from CommonCrawl and is a
key contribution of our paper.
Alongside these benchmarks, many works have developed models for web navigation and related
subtasks (Pasupat et al., 2018; Bommasani et al., 2021; He et al., 2021; Gur et al., 2021; Humphreys
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2018; Jia et al., 2019). These works often rely on specialized neural network
architectures that leverage inductive biases of HTML structure, or on preprocessing of HTML to
make it easier to input to a model (Li et al. (2021a;b)). In contrast, our work takes a minimalist
approach, providing HTML in text form with minimal processing and using widely-adopted trans-
former networks.
LLMs and HTML Works that explore the intersection of LLMs and HTML generally fall into two
categories. The first category uses LLMs to assist web navigation (Nakano et al., 2021; Yao et al.,
2022), and typically relies on a custom preprocessing to map the context and structure of a web page
to natural language, thus severely restricting what HTML pages the model can parse. The second
category pretrains LLMs on a large corpora of HTML text (Aghajanyan et al., 2021). However,
these works typically restrict the model evaluation to standard NLP tasks, e.g., summarization and
question/answering as opposed to tasks more relevant to HTML understanding and web automation.
Our work can be thought of as the reverse: We keep the pretraining of LLMs unchanged and focus
on the mechanisms for transferring the pretrained LLMs to HTML-relevant tasks.


3        B RIEF BACKGROUND ON HTML AS S EMI -S TRUCTURED T EXT DATA

HTML is a markup language, used to organize web page structure and content. Consider the
example HTML page in Figure 1a. This web page includes two adjacent input elements, one for
e-mail and another for password, with their corresponding labels on a separate branch of the page.
These inputs and labels are one of many possible elements that serve as HTML building blocks.
Each element has a set of attributes – key and value pair – that describe the element’s content, such
as style and human-readable text. When rendered in a browser, these attributes will be responsible
for how the element is shown and where it is positioned. In the example in Figure 1a, the first
input has three attributes, tag="input", type="email", and id="uName", that identify
the element as an email input with an identifier (“uName”) that can be accessed programmatically.


     2
         https://drive.google.com/corp/drive/folders/1aNXHyj-PU3hJcaofWqabRh3urmr4H_
g-


                                                  3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                                                                                                     Model
               Task                                Dataset                       Size   Input     Architecture   Output   Task Output
                                                                                                    Enc-Dec
    Autonomous Web Navigation         MiniWoB Demos (Shi et al., 2017)           12K     Page                     Text     Dictionary
                                                                                                      Dec
      Semantic Classification   Annotated Shopping Webpages (Gur et al., 2021)   28K    Snippet       All         Text     Category
                                                                                                    Enc-Dec
      Description Generation                CommonCrawl (new)                    85K    Snippet                   Text       Text
                                                                                                      Dec


Table 1: Task, dataset, and model summary. All models receive raw HTML. Autonomous Web Navigation
receives the entire HTML, while the other tasks receive HTML snippets extracted given salient element.


4      C ANONICAL TASKS FOR HTML U NDERSTANDING
We devise three canonical tasks to study HTML understanding capabilities of LLM-based web
agents. These tasks require correctly interpreting both structure and content to varying degrees
to make predictions, with autonomous navigation being the most challenging capability of the three.
Autonomous Web Navigation. This task evaluates how well a model navigates multi-page web-
sites as a sequential decision-making problem (Shi et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018). At the beginning
of an episode, the agent is given a natural language instruction, e.g. Enter the username “lyda”
and the password “N22t” into the text fields and press login. The agent applies actions to a se-
quence of HTML pages, where each action is of the form function(selector, text). The
function is one of click or type, selector is an integer pointer that uniquely identifies an ele-
ment, and text is a text to input if the type functionality is activated. An episode terminates when
either the page reaches a terminal state (e.g., the ‘sign in’ button is clicked) or the maximum number
of steps is reached.
Semantic Classification. Many HTML understanding applications require a model that can classify
HTML elements into standardized categories. For example, in automated form-filling (Diaz et al.,
2013; Gur et al., 2021), it is useful to identify a ‘submit button’ across many websites (e.g., shopping,
flight booking, utility application) with various button representations (e.g., position, color, or text).
Thus, we formulate Semantic Classification as classifying elements into role categories. Take the
example HTML in Figure 1a which includes two input elements and a submit button. Let’s
pick the first input as an element of interest to be classified by the system, also called a salient
element. The system should classify this element as username, since it appears on a login page and
it has a label with Email Address which is typically associated with the username in form-filling
applications. To solve this, the system can aggregate information from multiple sources in the page
– the label that says Enter Email Address, the input attributes (type=“email” and id=“uName”),
or even the ordering of other elements in the page such as ‘password’ and ‘sign in’.
Description Generation. Motivated by applications in accessibility-minded web browser con-
trol (Jorgensen & Binsted, 2005), we formulate description generation as an extractive problem
where the goal is to locate the textual description of an element in the HTML and generate it as
output. For instance, the description of the salient element in Figure 1a is Enter Email Address;
when rendered, this label will appear above the ‘email’ input field. HTML provides a large
amount of flexibility, and so in general a descriptive text that appears alongside a specific element
when rendered can be very far from that element when looking at the HTML plaintext. Thus, this
task evaluates a model’s ability to understand the structure of HTML as it would appear to a user,
despite not having access to the rendered web page directly.

5      DATASETS
Each of our canonical tasks requires a separate dataset, with the description generation task using a
newly contributed, auto-labelled dataset based on CommonCrawl.
Autonomous Web Navigation. We use the 12K demonstrations included in the publicly available
MiniWoB benchmark (Shi et al., 2017), which encompass 62 website applications ranging from
email forwarding to social media interactions. Each demonstration is a sequence of (instruction,
HTML, action) tuples. Every element in a MiniWoB demonstration is accompanied by a reference
number unique within its respective pages. This number can be used as an element selector, making
the action space unified across all tasks and time steps. For instance, the action in Figure 1a would be


                                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


type(ref=5, ”username@email.com”), where 5 refers to the index of the input when counted from
top-to-bottom. As model input, we concatenate the natural language instruction and HTML into a
single text input sequence. Similarly, we treat the action as a text sequence for the model to predict.
Semantic Classification. We use a dataset of 28K labelled examples, containing 66 different cat-
egories, of the form (HTML, element, category), previously used in the context of environment
generation (Gur et al., 2021). The dataset consists of HTMLs from real-world shopping websites
and categories relevant to form-filling during payment and checkout on these websites.
Description Generation. For this task, we derive a dataset from CommonCrawl.3 CommonCrawl
does not include renderings or annotations that would reveal what text in the HTML is associated
with which elements. Instead, we infer descriptions of various elements by exploiting a special
attribute in the HTML schema known as for. As an example in Figure 1a, the first label in
the HTML has a for attribute with value uName, which is the id of the element described by
label; in this case, the id is that of the first input in the page. This annotation does not affect
the rendering of the page and is typically used for accessibility purposes. We utilize the information
given by these for attributes to create a large-scale dataset to study description generation. A small
sample is available in the supplemental material, while the entire dataset will be available upon
publication.
Specifically, we collected 100 WARC (from April 2019) files from the CommonCrawl project and
extracted all HTML labels that have a for attribute. Removing non-Unicode and alphanumeric
text in HTML labels results in a 400K example datset. We balance the distribution of labels,
effectively downsampling the dataset to 85K samples. Each example is represented as (HTML,
element, description), where HTML is the HTML plaintext of the page, element is the element
whose id attribute matches that appearing in the label’s for attribute, and description is the text
inside the label element (see example in Figure 1a). More details of the dataset can be found in
Appendix A.1.



6       P RE -P ROCESSING

In treating HTML as token sequences, we minimize any HTML tree pre-processing prior to model
input. We thus provide HTML as raw text (i.e., sequences of text tokens) and only apply a snippet
extraction pre-processing for pages which are too large to fit into the typical LLMs context windows.
Snippet Extraction. Real HTML pages can grow extremely large, reaching thousands of elements,
far beyond the context window of the largest LLM that we studied (1920 tokens in PaLM (Chowdh-
ery et al., 2022)). LLMs typically truncate such long sequences, which can be detrimental to HTML
understanding as HTMLs are not linearly structured. We take an element-centric approach and ex-
tract HTML snippets (a small portion of HTML code) surrounding a salient element (Figure 5). A
simple heuristic, which controls the tree’s width and depth, guides the process: Start with a salient
element and traverse its ancestors in the HTML tree until a stopping condition is satisfied. As we
traverse up, we estimate the height of the tree and the increased number of descendants of the new
root. We stop when either metric violates a pre-defined limit and take the resulting sub-tree as the
snippet. We mark the salient element using a special attribute, called target, to distinguish it from
other elements. We perform the snippet extraction for the semantic classification and description
generation datasets, and keep the full HTML pages in MiniWoB because these pages are typically
much smaller than real-world HTML.
HTML un-Parsing. We provide the models with the unparsed plaintext HTML in the form of
a sequence of tokens. This canonical representation does not require specific model architectures
such as hierarchical networks (Liu et al., 2018; Gur et al., 2021) and can be fed into any LLM. We
transform all datasets by converting every HTML page or snippet into a sequence. For MiniWoB,
we additionally concatenate (action history, instruction, HTML) tuples into a single sequence.



    3
        http://commoncrawl.org


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


7     M ODEL T RAINING

We study a variety of transformer-based LLMs (Vaswani et al., 2017) with different sizes and archi-
tectures for HTML understanding tasks (Table 1). In the rest of the text, we prefix models fine-tuned
for Autonomous Web Navigation, Description Generation, and Semantic Classification with WebN-
, WebD-, and WebC-, respectively. For instance, WebD–T5-3B is the three billion parameter T5
model (Raffel et al., 2020) fine-tuned for the Description Generation task. The rest of this section
elaborates on training details.
Encoder-Decoder and Decoder-only Models. We train encoder-decoder models, i.e., T5 (Raffel
et al., 2020), and decoder-only models, i.e., LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022) and PaLM (Chowdh-
ery et al., 2022), with text input and text output (Figure 1b). Inputs are raw HTML pages or snippet
texts; similarly, outputs are categories, natural language descriptions, or actions represented as text.
Namely, for Semantic Classificationwe use the textual representation of categories, similar to previ-
ous classification problems in NLP (Raffel et al., 2020). For Autonomous Web Navigation, actions
are converted into text by first converting them into key and value pairs and then concatenating the
pairs.
Many websites in MiniWoB require multiple interactions, such as click-button-sequence or click-
checkboxes, where each interaction might cause a subtle change in the website state. For instance,
after clicking on a checkbox in the click-checkboxes website, its value flips from positive to negative
or the other way around, which is not always reflected in LLMs’ predictions and leads to action
repetitions. We solve this issue by augmenting tuples in the dataset with a sequence of past actions,
(action history, instruction, HTML, action), and allowing LLMs to learn from past experience.
Encoder-only Models. We train encoder-only models, i.e., BERT (Devlin et al., 2018), with text
input and categorical output. We keep semantic categories as discrete one-hot classes. To train
encoder-only models, we add a new classification layer after the final encoder layer to produce a
distribution over semantic categories. In addition to the typical BERT models, we study Mobile-
BERT (Sun et al., 2020), distilled from BERT-large with inverted bottlenecks, and Albert-XL (Lan
et al., 2020), with parameter sharing and embedding split.


8     R ESULTS

We now present the results of fine-tuned LLMs for HTML understanding. We compare the models’
performance with the existing baselines where possible (autonomous web navigation) and against
other LLM architectures and training regimes (all tasks). Sections 8.1, 8.2, and 8.3 evaluate task-
specific performance, while Section 8.4 assesses the performance across all the tasks.
Metrics: For autonomous web navigation we evaluate models’ Success Rate, which is averaged over
100 episodes per task. For the other tasks, we use Accuracy to measure exact match between predic-
tion and ground truth. In the description generation task, we additionally provide evaluations using
alternative ‘soft’ text evaluation metrics, BLEU and ROUGE-1, measuring the similarity between
predicted and ground truth text.

8.1   AUTONOMOUS W EB NAVIGATION R ESULTS

For Autonomous Web Navigation we fine-tune two WebN- encoder-decoder architectures (WebN-
T5-large and WebN-T5-3B) on 12k demonstrations from human-annotated real websites. We eval-
uate the models on MiniWob (Liu et al., 2018) benchmark, and compare with specialized architec-
tures trained using supervised learning (SL) on 2.4 million human expert demonstrations CC-Net
(SL) (Humphreys et al., 2022), and two RL models bootstrapped with SL, CC-Net (SL) (CC-Net
(SL & RL) (Humphreys et al., 2022), and WGE (SL & RL) (Liu et al., 2018)). Additionally, we
compare with the decoder-only architecture (WebN-Lambda-1B) and perform an ablation study on
the impact of including the action history in the input.
Comparison to SoTA. Since previous works report success on only a subset of websites in Mini-
WoB, we evaluate on 48 out of 62 websites that are common across all models. Table 8 in the
Appendix reports fine-grained results while Figure 2a presents results averaged over all websites.
Compared to CC-Net (SL) which is trained on all 2.4M demonstrations, WebN-T5-3B improves the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                12K            2.4M
               Demos          Demos
                                                            Model Name             Success (%)     Model Size
                                                            T5-large                  18.1          800M
                                                            LaMDA-1B                  15.6            1B
                                                            T5-3B                     11.1            3B
                                                            WebN-T5-large             46.4          800M
                                                            WebN-LaMDA-1B             48.8            1B
                                                            WebN-T5-3B                51.8            3B
           (a) Baseline comparison.                                     (b) Pre-training effect.

Figure 2: a) WebN–T5* performance compared to the previous SOTA models on MiniWoB benchmark.
WebN-T5-3B improves the task success 16% while using 192 times less data, compared to the best supervised
learning (SL) model, CC-Net (SL). LLMs performance is only surpassed by works utilizing RL, requiring or-
ders of magnitude more online experience interaction with websites. b) LLMs with and without pretraining
on Autonomous Web Navigation task. Those with pretraining (denoted by the ‘WebN-’ prefix) show a 2.5-4.5x
performance improvement.


        Model Name               Test (%)    Dev (%)    Model Size     Code in training Corpus
        WebC-MobileBERT            78.1       77.7         24.6 M
        WebC-Albert-XL             83.5       83.1         58.9 M
        WebC-BERT-smallest         84.4       83.6         38.7 M
        WebC-BERT-small            84.4       85.2         52.8 M
        WebC-BERT-medium           85.2       84.5           67 M
                                                                                    0%
        WebC-BERT-base             83.9       84.8        109.5 M
        WebC-BERT-large            84.1       85.8        335.2 M
        WebC-T5-base               86.8       89.9          250 M
        WebC-T5-large              87.0       89.3          800 M
        WebC-T5-3B                 87.7       90.3             3B
        WebC-LaMDA-1B              87.4       87.1             1B           12.5% Code
        WebC-PaLM-8B               86.6       89.9             8B      5% Code (0.875% HTML)
        WebC-PaLM-62B              88.7       90.5            62 B     5% Code (0.875% HTML)
        T5-large                   76.4       75.2          800 M
        T5-3B                      77.2       73.8             3B                   0%
        PaLM-8B                    73.3       70.1             8B

Table 2: LLMs performance on the Semantic Classification task. Fine-tuning off-the-shelf pretrained LLMs
(model names with prefix ‘Web*’) helps LLMs transfer better compared to training the same architecture from
scratch on the HTML dataset (model names without prefix ‘Web*’), improving the accuracy of PaLM-8B more
than 12%. While WebC-PaLM-62B clearly performed better than all other models, we found WebC-T5-large
to be competitive with much larger models such as WebC-LaMDA-1B or WebC-PaLM-8B.


success 16% while only training on 12K publicly-available demonstrations, yielding over 192x im-
provement in sample-efficiency. We find that all choices of LLMs outperform previous SL models.
Notably, WebN-T5-3B significantly improves on websites requiring multiple-action sequences such
as click checkboxes or websites requiring entering text such as login user (Table 8). We observe that
the performance of LLMs is only surpassed by previous works utilizing RL, which require orders of
magnitude more online experience interaction. Extending our fine-tuned LLMs to an RL setting is
a promising avenue for future work.
Action history ablation. Across all LLMs we consistently observe a decrease in success, on av-
erage 6.4%, when past actions are excluded from the inputs (Figure 2a). Action history helps with
websites that require entering multiple texts, as well as understanding minor changes that could be
difficult to detect (e.g. click checkboxes and multi layout). multi layout requires entering 3 different
texts in the website where the layout is randomized at each episode, yet, surprisingly, even the (rel-
atively smaller) WebN-T5-large model without action history outperforms the CC-Net (SL) model;
illustrating that incorporating action history is not the only contributing factor for the better success.


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                                                    Categories

   Figure 3: Accuracy per classification category of the WebC-T5-3B model on the development dataset.

                                                                                 WebC-PaLM         WebC-T5-3B
                                                                                T5-3B (full data / no pretraining)
                                                                         85

       New         Height     Test (%)    Dev (%)                        80

 descendants (%)                                                         75


                                                              Accuracy
       25             3         87.7        90.3                         70
       25             4         88.6        89.2                         65
       50             3         88.4        90.0
                                                                         60
       50             4         89.3        89.2
       300            5         87.8        88.8                         55
                                                                              500        1000          1500          2000
       500            7         75.8        74.5                                            Data Size
                       (a)                                                                  (b)

Figure 4: a) Effect of snippet extraction parameters on WebC-T5-3B. Increases above 50% in new descendants
and height of 4. Large increases in both parameters lead to large snippets and decrease in accuracy. b) Accu-
racy over training data size. Using only 1000 labeled examples (4.4% of all training dataset), WebC-T5-3B
outperforms T5-3B (full data without pretraining) which is trained on all available labeled data (approximately
30k examples), and outperforms WebC-PaLM-8B which is an order of magnitude larger.


8.2   S EMANTIC C LASSIFICATION TASK R ESULTS

To evaluate the Semantic Classification task, we compare the T5 encoder-decoder architecture’s
three size variants (WebC-T5-base, WebC-T5-large, and WebC-T5-3B) fine-tuned on 22K real,
human-labeled training websites. We compare with a fine-tuned encoder only architectures
(WebC-*BERT*), three fine-tuned decoder-only architectures (WebC-LaMDA and PaLM), and both
encoder-decoder and decoder-only models trained on human labeled websites from scratch. Results
are presented in Table-2, where we find that all WebC-LLMs perform well and significantly better
than the same architectures without pretraining.
Accuracy per category. In Figure 3, we present accuracy distribution of the WebC-T5-3B model
on the development dataset. The fine-tuned encoder-decoder model performs strongly on a majority
of the categories (Figure 3), even on those with very few samples. For instance, the model is 100%
accurate on password new which has only 56 training examples, because the class is unambiguous.
On the other hand, unsurprisingly, the performance drops when the category is ambiguous, such as
in the email category which is frequently mistaken as username.
Snippet generation ablation. Two hyper-parameters govern snippet generation: percentage of
new descendants and height of the new root. While small variations of both parameters do not
change the performance, increasing both degrades the performance significantly (Table 4a). With
new descendants up to 500% and height up to 7, the performance drops by more than 15%. Note
that snippet generation returns the full-page HTML when both parameters increase indefinitely.
Data size impact. When varying the fine-tuning training data sizes (1, 5, 10, 20, or 50 samples per
class) in Figure 4b, WebC-T5-3B slightly outperforms WebC-PaLM-8B which is an order of mag-
nitude larger. Compared to T5-3B that is trained on all available HTML data without pretraining,
WebC-T5-3B achieves better performance while using only 3.4% of labeled data (1000 samples),


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                                       Test                                   Dev
  Model Name            Accuracy(%)    BLEU      ROUGE-1      Accuracy(%)     BLEU      ROUGE-1
  WebD-T5-large             83.2        90.2       90.5           84.3         91.7       91.5
  WebD-LaMDA-1B             83.3        87.5       90.2           84.3         88.6       91.2
  WebD-T5-3B                 84         90.8       90.9           85.2         92.1       91.9
  Closest Description       57.4        24.4       59.2           60.8         23.9       62.1

                          Table 3: Description generation accuracy of LLMs.


thus highlighting the benefit of using standard off-the-shelf pretrained LLMs for HTML understand-
ing.

8.3     D ESCRIPTION G ENERATION TASK R ESULTS

For Description Generation we split the CommonCrawl dataset based on URL top-level domains to
test LLMs’ capabilities to generalize to unseen HTML. We fine-tune encoder-decoder architectures
(WebD–T5*) and decoder-only models (WebD–LaMDA*), with results presented in Table 3. We
also evaluate a strong heuristic baseline which simply finds the description closest to the salient
element in the HTML text (Closest Description).
Accuracy and Similarity Performance We show results of our evaluations in Table 3. All models
achieve high scores across all metrics, achieving ≈ 84% on the accuracy in terms of exact match and
a higher non-exact match score based on BLEU and ROUGE-1 (≈ 91%). This difference indicates
that the models are capable of locating the descriptions, but not always generating the exact output.

8.4     HTML U NDERSTANDING LLM S P ERFORMANCE A NALYSIS ACROSS TASKS

We now analyze our results in aggregate to derive our main conclusions.

8.4.1    P RETRAINING E FFECT: P RETRAINING ON L ARGE T EXT C ORPORA M ATTERS
Fine-tuned pretrained LLMs outperform LLMs trained on HTML-only data, improving the perfor-
mance by more than 34.1% on the Autonomous Web Navigation (Table 2b), and 10% to 12.7% on
the Semantic Classification task (Table 2).
Since Autonomous Web Navigation is the most difficult task, the improved performance is an en-
couraging evidence of the value of LLMs in HTML understanding tasks. Specifically, we observe
that LLMs without pretraining are comparable to fine-tuned pretrained models only on websites that
require simple text matching. In contrast, for websites such as click checkboxes, text matching is
harder and we find that pretraining is key to good performance. We also found that without pretrain-
ing, model outputs were frequently in an incorrect format such as invalid dictionaries or invalid refs
with non-integer values. This suggests that the large corpora used for pretraining helps models to
learn general HTML structure.

8.4.2    A RCHITECTURE E FFECT: T5- BASED M ODELS P ERFORM B EST ACROSS A LL TASKS
Encoder-decoder T5 based models perform better across all three tasks. On the Autonomous Web
Navigation task, encoder-decoder (WebN-T5) architectures are better or comparable to WebN-
LaMDA-1B (Figure 2a). On the Semantic Classification, the smallest encoder-decoder model
(WebC-T5-base) performs comparably to much larger decoder-only models (WebC-LaMDA-1B or
WebC-PaLM-8B) and the largest encoder-only model (WebC-BERT-large) which has 85M more pa-
rameters (Table 2). We also observe that decoder-only PaLM-8B performs worse than much-smaller
encoder-decoder T5-large when trained only on HTML data. Finally, on the Description Generation
encoder-decoder architecture has higher BLEU score.
One possible explanation for the strong performance of T5-based moels is the encoder-decoder
architecture of these models. Namely, T5 models utilize an encoder with a bidirectional attention
mechanism, not present in the LaMDA and PaLM decoders. The bidirectional attention mechanism
can process HTML pages from both ends, potentially overcoming the loss of information when
tree-structured HTML pages are converted into a fixed linear text sequences.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


8.4.3    M ODEL S IZE E FFECT: S IZE (S UB - LINEARLY ) M ATTERS

Across the tasks it appears that the architecture plays an important role in the model performance.
Model size and performance are also positively correlated, although they reach diminishing returns.
For instance, the model performance is roughly O(log log n) with respect to model size on Seman-
tic Classification (Figure 4b in Appendix). On the Autonomous Web Navigation task, performance
grows slowly with the model size (Table 8), while on the Description Generation it plateaus (Ta-
ble 3).

8.5     D ISCUSSION

Bi-directional attention vs training corpora: Pretraining on large corpora matters, yielding ≤4.5x
performance improvements. Larger models tend to be better and we credit the bidirectional attention
for T5’s best overall performance across the tasks. PaLM and LaMDA include HTML and other
code in their pretraining corpora, while BERT and T5 architectures did not, showing that pretraining
on HTML is not necessary for strong performance when fine-tuned for HTML understanding. This
strengthens the hypothesis behind the role of the bidirectional attention, and opens up the possibility
to further improve the performance of T5 architectures by pretraining them on corpora with HTML.
Practical impact on labeling: When available, the pretrained LLMs need very little new expert
data (200x and 30x reduction on the web navigation and classification tasks, respectively). This has
a big potential impact on practical applications, reducing the data collection time and cost by orders
of magnitude.
Bigger is not always better: When choosing the model size, the expected performance gains (sub-
linear at best and asymptotic at worst) should be considered alongside the model’s training and
inference time and cost. For instance, on the classification task, the largest model WebC-PaLM-62B
takes several days to fine-tune, and evaluates at 30 Hz, while WebC-T5-large fine-tunes in several
hours and evaluates at 700 Hz – an order of magnitude more expensive for a single percent uplift in
accuracy. BERT models on the other hand train in minutes. If the application does not require high
precision, these might be a good choice.
Context window is a bottleneck: The major bottleneck for the HTML understanding tasks seems to
be the context window length that the current LLMs support, even with models that accept 1000+ to-
kens. It remains prohibitive to evaluate web navigation tasks on real websites that are orders of mag-
nitude larger than pages in MiniWob. Similarly, we observed that increasing the snippet size leads
to major performance degradation. This makes HTML understanding an interesting benchmark for
future LLM development. For instance, new methods may need to be developed to compress the
state representation of web content for use in LLM context windows.


9     C ONCLUSION

We presented canonical tasks and fine-tuned LLMs for HTML understanding. The comprehensive
evaluations and analyses over a range of architectures, dataset sizes, and baselines yields practical
findings and highlights current limitations of these models. We find that a) pretraining is critical for
the performance and can reduce labeled data requirements, improving sample efficiency up to 200x;
b) model architecture is the second-most important factor, and T5 models with bidirectional attention
and encoder-decoder architecture perform the best across the board; c) given a choice, model size
should be evaluated in the context of the model’s training and inference performance, as the model
size sub-linearly correlates with its performance. Finally, the proposed HTML understanding tasks
highlight the relatively short context window that limits current LLMs, suggesting possibilities for
future research that incorporate or eliminate this constraint.


R EFERENCES
Leonard Adolphs, Benjamin Boerschinger, Christian Buck, Michelle Chen Huebscher, Massimil-
  iano Ciaramita, Lasse Espeholt, Thomas Hofmann, and Yannic Kilcher. Boosting search engines
  with interactive agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00527, 2021.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Armen Aghajanyan, Dmytro Okhonko, Mike Lewis, Mandar Joshi, Hu Xu, Gargi Ghosh, and Luke
  Zettlemoyer. Htlm: Hyper-text pre-training and prompting of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2107.06955, 2021.
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, et al. Do as i can, not as i say:
 Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan,
  Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, et al. On the opportu-
  nities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Andrea Burns, Deniz Arsan, Sanjna Agrawal, Ranjitha Kumar, Kate Saenko, and Bryan A Plummer.
  Interactive mobile app navigation with uncertain or under-specified natural language commands.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.02312, 2022.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Oscar Diaz, Itziar Otaduy, and Gorka Puente. User-driven automation of web form filling. In
  International Conference on Web Engineering, pp. 171–185. Springer, 2013.
Izzeddin Gur, Natasha Jaques, Yingjie Miao, Jongwook Choi, Manoj Tiwari, Honglak Lee, and
   Aleksandra Faust. Environment generation for zero-shot compositional reinforcement learning.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:4157–4169, 2021.
Zecheng He, Srinivas Sunkara, Xiaoxue Zang, Ying Xu, Lijuan Liu, Nevan Wichers, Gabriel Schu-
  biner, Ruby Lee, and Jindong Chen. Actionbert: Leveraging user actions for semantic under-
  standing of user interfaces. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 35, pp. 5931–5938, 2021.
Peter C Humphreys, David Raposo, Tobias Pohlen, Gregory Thornton, Rachita Chhaparia, Alistair
  Muldal, Josh Abramson, Petko Georgiev, Adam Santoro, and Timothy Lillicrap. A data-driven
  approach for learning to control computers. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 9466–9482. PMLR, 2022.
Sheng Jia, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Jimmy Ba. DOM-q-NET: Grounded RL on structured lan-
  guage. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=HJgd1nAqFX.
Chuck Jorgensen and Kim Binsted. Web browser control using emg based sub vocal speech recog-
  nition. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
  pp. 294c–294c. IEEE, 2005.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
   Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
   models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361, 2020.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Goodman, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu Sori-
  cut. Albert: A lite bert for self-supervised learning of language representations. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Chenliang Li, Bin Bi, Ming Yan, Wei Wang, Songfang Huang, Fei Huang, and Luo Si. Structurallm:
  Structural pre-training for form understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.11210, 2021a.

Junlong Li, Yiheng Xu, Lei Cui, and Furu Wei. Markuplm: Pre-training of text and markup language
  for visually-rich document understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08518, 2021b.

Evan Zheran Liu, Kelvin Guu, Panupong Pasupat, Tianlin Shi, and Percy Liang. Reinforcement
  learning on web interfaces using workflow-guided exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.08802,
  2018.

Kevin Lu, Aditya Grover, Pieter Abbeel, and Igor Mordatch. Pretrained transformers as universal
  computation engines. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.05247, 2021.

Sahisnu Mazumder and Oriana Riva. Flin: A flexible natural language interface for web navigation.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12844, 2020.

Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
  pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.

Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. End-to-end goal-driven web navigation. Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 29, 2016.

Christopher Olston, Marc Najork, et al. Web crawling. Foundations and Trends R in Information
  Retrieval, 4(3):175–246, 2010.

Panupong Pasupat, Tian-Shun Jiang, Evan Zheran Liu, Kelvin Guu, and Percy Liang. Mapping
  natural language commands to web elements. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.09132, 2018.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 21(140):1–67, 2020.

Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of bits: An
  open-domain platform for web-based agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 3135–3144. PMLR, 2017.

Zhiqing Sun, Hongkun Yu, Xiaodan Song, Renjie Liu, Yiming Yang, and Denny Zhou. Mobile-
  BERT: a compact task-agnostic BERT for resource-limited devices. In Proceedings of the 58th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational
  Linguistics, 2020.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven
  Zheng, Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin,
  James Qin, Dehao Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts, Maarten Bosma, Yanqi
  Zhou, Chung-Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc Pickett, Kathleen S. Meier-
  Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny So-
  raker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson,
  Alejandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna,
  Matthew Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Cohen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil,
  Blaise Aguera-Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed H. Chi, and Quoc Le. Lamda: Language
  models for dialog applications. CoRR, 2022.

Daniel Toyama, Philippe Hamel, Anita Gergely, Gheorghe Comanici, Amelia Glaese, Zafarali
  Ahmed, Tyler Jackson, Shibl Mourad, and Doina Precup. Androidenv: a reinforcement learn-
  ing platform for android. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.13231, 2021.

Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
  Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural informa-
  tion processing systems, 30, 2017.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                   HTML
<html>
   <body>
       <form class="login-form">
          <div>
             <label class="form-label" for=”uName”>
                                                                                                                               if expandable:
                 Enter Email Address
             </label>
                                                                                                                                   expand
                  <label class="form-label" for=”pass”>
                                                                                                                                                     <div>
                 Enter Password:
             </label>                                             <input name="uName">                                                                 <input type="email" id="uName”>
          </div>                                       salient                             snippet                                        expand
          <div>                                                   <input name="pass">                  <input type="email" id="uName”>
                                                                                                                                                       <input type="password" id="pass">
                                                                                                                                                       <span class="hidden">
                                                                                                                                                                                           otherwise <input type="email"
            <input type="email" id="uName”>           elements                            generation                                     one level        Please enter your password.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     id="uName” target>
                                                                 <button type="submit">                                                                </span>                              output
             <input type="password" id="pass">                                                                                              up       </div>
             <span class="hidden">
                 Please enter your password.
             </span>
          </div>
          <button type="submit">Sign In</button>
        </form>
   </body>
</html>


Figure 5: High-level overview of our pre-processing pipeline for generating snippets from a full HTML web-
page. Given the page, we detect salient elements and for each one of them we extract snippets by recursively
moving up in the HTML tree until a validation heuristic fails.


Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi,
  Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, and Jamie Brew. Huggingface’s
  transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. CoRR, abs/1910.03771, 2019. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.03771.

Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant, Aditya
  Barua, and Colin Raffel. mt5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text transformer. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2010.11934, 2020.

Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-
  world web interaction with grounded language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.01206, 2022.


A          A PPENDIX

A.1           DATASET D ETAIL

Examining the description distribution, we found the original 400K dataset to be very skewed; only
20 descriptions (such as Email and Password) were covering 50% of the dataset. We sub-sampled the
dataset so that each unique description has at most 10 data points. We also found that for attributes
are almost always defined for HTML labels. This could cause a model to overfit and just find the
label element in the HTML and ignore everything else. To avoid this sort of ‘cheating’ we replace
the tags of HTML labels by randomly sampling from {div, span, a, label}. These tags
are also frequently used to inject text in HTML but they are very rarely used with for attributes.
Finally, we removed examples where there are only a single text in the HTML since models can
trivially generate descriptions by finding the only text in the HTML, which biases model weights
and evaluation metrics. After this final step, we have a total of 85K labeled examples.

A.1.1              S NIPPET G ENERATION

In Figure 5, we give a high-level overview of our snippet generation procedure.

A.2           A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

A.2.1              S EMANTIC C LASSIFICATION

Error Analysis. We manually examined 50 errors of T5-3B model over the development set (Ta-
ble 4) and assigned them into one of the 9 error types that we devised. We found that 32% of the
errors are due to lack of information in the HTML snippets, which is mainly the result of lost in-
formation during snippet extraction process. Annotation errors or email/username ambiguity make
up 30% of the errors. These can’t be improved without revising the annotated data or adding extra
information to resolve the ambiguity. We also found that the model sometimes picks a more general
category, or a nearby text misleads the model; the latter usually happens when the HTML snippet is
long where majority of the elements are noise.


                                                                                                       13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


 Error Type                                                                     Percentage of Examples
 Not enough information in the HTML snippet                                               30
 Incorrect annotation (ex: ”unknown role” instead of ”organization”)                      12
 Annotation tool translates user selection incorrectly                                     8
 Email/Username ambiguity                                                                 10
 More general category (ex: ”header” instead of ”cart header”)                             8
 Immediate neighboring text misleads                                                       8
 Incorrect date formatting (ex: ”mm” instead of ”mmm”)                                     4
 No information in the HTML snippet                                                        2
 Others                                                                                   18

Table 4: Types of errors over 50 manually examined examples. 32% of errors are due to lack of information
in HTML snippets, 30% of errors are related to annotations or can’t be improved due to ambiguity (email/user-
name), and the remaining errors are incorrect predictions by the model.


Few-Shot Prompting In Table 5, we present few-shot prompting performance of a 540B PaLM
model. We probe the model using a prompt template <html> Role: <category> with 1 ex-
ample per category and generate categories using greedy-decoding. In our preliminary experiments,
we found that few-shot prompting achieves only 45.6 accuracy, much lower than a model fine-tuned
on the same data (Figure 6). We found two common problems – the model is not able to canonicalize
predictions into categories and many of the examples are dropped due to context length.
We developed post-processing methods to al-
leviate the canonicalization problem and pre-        Model Name                     Test Dev
processing methods to reduce lengths of ex-          PaLM-540B                      64.2 60.3
amples. Adding a dictionary-based mapping            - w/o Example Cleaning         57.9 57.2
on predictions – a manually curated paraphrase       - w/o Category Rewriting       52.1 50.7
dictionary – improves the performance to 52.1.       - w/o Dictionary Mapping 45.6 45.1
We also tried rewriting predictions by chang-
ing the order of tokens around ” ” such as Table 5: Few-shot prompting performance with differ-
name first to first name which further improved ent pre- and post-processing steps.
the performance to 57.9. Finally, we cleaned
examples in the prompt by removing certain el-
ements such as ”svg”, ”path”, ”img”, and ”iframe” and also removing class attribute from every
element; this pre-processing step gives 64.2.

Figure 6: Performance comparison w.r.t. increasing model size. As the model size increases, we
observe an increase in overall accuracy with PaLM-62B model achieving the highest accuracy while
being 7x larger than PaLM-8B.


                                                     14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


A.3   S AMPLE E PISODES FROM M INI W O B

See Table 6 for an example episode of web navigation inferred by a fine-tuned LLM.

A.4   D ETAILED M INI W O B R ESULTS

See Table 7 for detailed performance of various models on MiniWob.

A.5   R ESOURCE R EQUIREMENTS

See Table 8.

A.6   S TRUCTURE D EPENDENCE A BLATION S TUDY

We conducted an ablation study to examine the sensitivity of model performance to preserving
structural information. To do so, we evaluate the model’s performance on HTML input with criti-
cal structure components removed. We kept the order of elements and their attributes fixed while
corrupting the nesting structure by removing closing tags.
Removing closing tags corresponds to a valid traversal (BFS) and keeps the order of elements the
same as the text based input.
As a simple example:

<div id="form"><div><input id="username"></div></div>

would be converted into:

<div id="form"><div><input id="username">

We evaluated the trained WebN-T5-3B model on the same set of synthetic websites from the
MiniWoB benchmark with this aspect of structure removed from the HTML pages. WebN-T5-
3B achieves a 45.4% success rate, 6% lower than before, suggesting that WebN-T5-3B is at least
partially dependent on the DOM topology.

A.7   TASK - SPECIFIC M ODELS

An alternative to LLMs is to adapt bespoke task-specific architectures tailored towards processing
of structured documents and HTML (Li et al. (2021b;a)).
StructuralLM (Li et al. (2021a)) is an approach specifically tailored for document understanding
(i.e., combinations of images and text), and thus makes several simplifying assumptions for its model
that limit its applicability to HTML understanding (i.e., trees of elements with a richer structure and
functionality). It is trained only on the textual content of a document - the markup information is
ignored. For example, any input field or dropdown in a document would be missing from the model
inputs. All of the tasks we study require knowledge of this information. For example, in autonomous
navigation the model needs to interact with input elements (e.g. text, checkboxes, dropdowns) such
as username and password in the login-user task in MiniWoB. Typically, a “type” action with a
reference to an element and a text argument is generated by the model. Without knowing which
input elements are available in the page, it is impossible to generate a reference to any input element.
While MarkupLM (Li et al. (2021b)) is better tailored for understanding HTML pages, it has similar
drawbacks as StructuralLM in that it focuses solely on text and structure of text while ignoring
everything else in the markup. To illustrate our point better, we used the open source implementation
of MarkupLM from the HuggingFace library (Wolf et al. (2019)) to process the sample HTML
snippet in Figure-1(b). The MarkupLM ignores all input elements, both username and password,
and generates <s>Email AddressEnter Password:Please enter your password.</s> which is the
text input to the MarkupLM Transformer. Classifying this text as username or password is not
possible without the additional context on which input element is the salient element (in this context
it is the username). See below for the code to reproduce our result.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


from transformers import MarkupLMProcessor
processor = MarkupLMProcessor.from_pretrained(f"microsoft/markuplm-base")
snippet = ’’’<div><label class="form-label" for="uName">Email Address
</label><label class="form-label" for="pass">Enter Password:
</label></div><div><input type="email" id="uName" target><input
type="password" id="pass"><span class="hidden">Please enter your password.
</span></div>’’’
encoding = processor(snippet)
print(processor.batch_decode(encoding["input_ids"]))

MarkupLM is also evaluated on NLP-like tasks such as QA or entity classification where understand-
ing page content is paramount, whereas we focus on HTML understanding tasks such as autonomous
navigation where both content and the page’s layout structure need to be understood.
We perform a quantitative evaluation of MarkupLM on our tasks to understand how significant
these limitations are. We fine-tune the MarkupLM-base model on the semantic classification task,
using the same setup as other WebC models but with the suggested hyperparameters from (Li et al.
(2021b)). We use the MarkupLM implementation from the HuggingFace library (Wolf et al. (2019)).
On development and test sets, MarkupLM-base achieves 65% and 66% accuracy, respectively. These
results are more than 16% lower compared to similar size WebC-BERT-base results that we report
in our work. This suggests that although domain specific models may be suitable for processing
HTML for NLP tasks, the generality, flexibility, and sample efficiency LLMs provide advantages
for autonomous navigation tasks.


                                               16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Table 6: A sample web page and corresponding episode using the T5-3B model. At each time step,
previous actions, instruction, and HTML are concatenated into a single HTML text. Note that at the
beginning of episode, there is no past actions and we simply concatenate instruction and HTML.
Action is generated as a sequence of tokens which is later parsed into a dictionary. The ref in the
action points to an element that has a ref attribute with the same value. For instance, at the beginning
of episode, ref: 6 corresponds to an input with ref=6. At the end of the episode, the model clicks on
the submit button and the episode terminates.

                                              Web page


                                HTML Text                                          Action Text


                                                                              {action: click, ref: 6}


                                                                             {action: click, ref: 10}


                                                                             {action: click, ref: 12}


                                                  17                         {action: click, ref: 14}
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                                                  {action: click, ref: 16}


                                                  {action: click, ref: 17}


                                             18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


Table 7: Success rate comparison of various models in MiniWoB tasks. Baseline results are borrowed from
(Humphreys et al., 2022). Note that these are normalized between 0 and 1.
          TASK                Human                                 CC-Net    CC-Net     World      Workflow     Learning   DOM-Q-Net     Workflow       Learning    Aggregated    Aggregated
                                      WebN-T5-3B   WebN-T5-3B     (SL & RL)    (SL)        of        guided         to        (RL)         guided           to         SOTA          SOTA
                                                   (no history)                           bits     exploration   navigate                exploration     navigate    (SL & RL)    (Augmented)
                                                                                       (SL & RL)   (SL & RL)     the web                (Augmented)      the web
                                                                                                                   (RL)                                (Augmented)
           bisect-angle        0.92       n/a           n/a         0.97       0.29      0.8           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          0.8          0.8
            book-flight        0.87        0             0          0.87        0          0            0           n/a        n/a            0              1            0            1
           chase-circle        0.82       n/a           n/a         0.93       0.8         1           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           1            1
       choose-date-easy        0.99      0.03          0.05         0.99       0.42       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
    choose-date-medium         0.98        0             0          0.99       0.26       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
           choose-date         0.97        0             0          0.97       0.12        0            0           n/a         1             0             n/a           1            1
            choose-list        0.98      0.26          0.14         0.99       0.19      0.25         0.16         0.26        n/a          0.16           0.26         0.26         0.26
           circle-center       0.96       n/a           n/a         0.97       0.36      0.98          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.98         0.98
   click-button-sequence       0.94        1             1            1        0.47      0.22         0.99          n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
           click-button        0.98        1           0.96           1        0.78      0.62           1            1          1             1              1            1            1
  click-checkboxes-large       0.87      0.22            0          0.71        0         n/a         0.68          n/a        n/a          0.84            n/a         0.68         0.84
   click-checkboxes-soft       0.73      0.54          0.43         0.95       0.04       n/a         0.51          n/a        n/a          0.94            n/a         0.51         0.94
 click-checkboxes-transfer     0.98      0.63          0.34         0.99       0.36       n/a         0.64          n/a        n/a          0.64            n/a         0.64         0.64
       click-checkboxes        0.97      0.96          0.84         0.98       0.32      0.48         0.98          n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
      click-collapsible-2      0.97        0           0.01         0.98       0.17      0.11         0.65          n/a        n/a          0.99            n/a         0.65         0.99
       click-collapsible       0.99        0           0.01           1        0.81      0.98           1            1         n/a            1              1            1            1
            click-color        0.97      0.27          0.23           1        0.82      0.23           1           n/a        n/a            1             n/a           1            1
         click-dialog-2        0.99      0.24          0.35           1        0.88      0.53           1           n/a        n/a            1             n/a           1            1
           click-dialog          1         1             1            1        0.95        1            1            1          1             1              1            1            1
              click-link       0.99        1           0.96         0.99       0.59      0.31           1            1          1             1              1            1            1
          click-menu-2         0.98       n/a           n/a         0.83       0.52      0.16          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.16         0.16
            click-menu         0.97      0.37          0.38         0.94       0.22      0.13          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.13         0.13
           click-option        0.99      0.87          0.78         0.99       0.21      0.28           1           n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
              click-pie        0.98      0.51          0.14         0.97       0.15      0.15         0.32           1         n/a          0.32             1            1            1
        click-scroll-list      0.91        0             0           0.6       0.01      0.07          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.07         0.07
           click-shades        0.91        0             0            1        0.04      0.27         0.22          n/a        n/a          0.99            n/a         0.27         0.99
            click-shape        0.88      0.53          0.54         0.95       0.11      0.11         0.64          n/a        n/a          0.64            n/a         0.64         0.64
        click-tab-2-easy       0.99       n/a           n/a         0.99       0.61       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
        click-tab-2-hard       0.96      0.12          0.13         0.98       0.19       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
     click-tab-2-medium        0.97       n/a           n/a         0.99       0.54       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
            click-tab-2        0.97      0.18          0.09         0.98       0.27      0.08         0.64          n/a         1           0.98            n/a           1            1
              click-tab        0.99      0.74            1            1        0.95      0.97         0.55           1          1             1              1            1            1
            click-test-2       0.99        1             1            1        0.95      0.83           1           n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
      click-test-transfer      0.99       n/a           n/a           1        0.94       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
              click-test         1         1             1            1         1          1            1           n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
           click-widget        0.83        1           0.97           1        0.56      0.34         0.93          n/a         1           0.93            n/a           1            1
           copy-paste-2        0.94       n/a           n/a         0.63       0.01        0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
            copy-paste         0.94       n/a           n/a         0.79       0.04        0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
           count-shape         0.82      0.41          0.43         0.85       0.21      0.18         0.59          n/a        n/a          0.76            n/a         0.59         0.76
            count-sides        0.98       n/a           n/a           1        0.74      0.3           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          0.3          0.3
              drag-box         0.99       n/a           n/a           1        0.61      0.31          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.31         0.31
             drag-cube         0.99       n/a           n/a         0.79       0.23      0.18          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.18         0.18
             drag-item         0.98       n/a           n/a           1        0.61       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
        drag-items-grid        0.87       n/a           n/a         0.98       0.05      0.01          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.01         0.01
            drag-items         0.93       n/a           n/a         0.99       0.13      0.41          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.41         0.41
           drag-shapes         0.96       n/a           n/a         0.99       0.26      0.92          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.92         0.92
      drag-sort-numbers        0.92       n/a           n/a         0.97       0.11      0.66          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.66         0.66
     email-inbox-delete        0.99       n/a           n/a           1        0.22       n/a          n/a          n/a         1            n/a            n/a           1            1
email-inbox-forward-nl-turk    0.88      0.33          0.09           1         0         n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
  email-inbox-forward-nl       0.91      0.60          0.09           1         0         n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
    email-inbox-forward        0.96       n/a           n/a           1        0.01       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
   email-inbox-important       0.99       n/a           n/a           1        0.3        n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
     email-inbox-nl-turk       0.93      0.23          0.26           1        0.05       n/a         0.77          n/a        n/a          0.93            n/a         0.77         0.93
    email-inbox-noscroll       0.96       n/a           n/a           1        0.13       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
      email-inbox-reply        0.91       n/a           n/a           1         0         n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
   email-inbox-star-reply      0.95       n/a           n/a           1        0.11       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
           email-inbox         0.96      0.38          0.21           1        0.09      0.03         0.43          n/a       0.54          0.99            n/a         0.54         0.99
             enter-date        0.97        0             0            1        0.02      0.61           0            1         n/a          0.96             1            1            1
        enter-password         0.96      0.97          0.92           1        0.02        0          0.99           1          1             1              1            1            1
            enter-text-2       0.91       n/a           n/a         0.98       0.04        0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
     enter-text-dynamic        0.97      0.98          0.92           1        0.39        1            1            1          1             1              1            1            1
              enter-text       0.98      0.89          0.99           1        0.35        0            1           n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
             enter-time        0.98        0           0.01         0.97       0.04      0.08         0.52          n/a        n/a           0.9            n/a         0.52          0.9
          find-midpoint        0.94       n/a           n/a         0.97       0.35      0.31          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.31         0.31
             find-word         0.96       n/a           n/a         0.88       0.05        0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
           focus-text-2        0.99        1             1            1        0.96      0.83           1           n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
             focus-text          1         1             1            1        0.99      0.95           1           n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
        grid-coordinate        0.87      0.49          0.42           1        0.66      0.26           1           n/a        n/a            1             n/a           1            1
         guess-number          0.99        0             0            1        0.21      0.2            0           n/a        n/a            0             n/a          0.2          0.2
        highlight-text-2       0.97       n/a           n/a           1        0.4       0.13          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.13         0.13
          highlight-text       0.97       n/a           n/a           1        0.51      0.9           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          0.9          0.9
         identify-shape        0.98      0.88          0.89           1        0.68      0.36          0.9          n/a        n/a            1             n/a          0.9           1
       login-user-popup        0.94      0.72          0.40           1        0.02       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
             login-user        0.96      0.82          0.64           1         0          0          0.99           1          1             1              1            1            1
          moving-items         0.18       n/a           n/a         0.88       0.13      0.78          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.78         0.78
          multi-layouts        0.95      0.83          0.48           1         0         n/a         0.99          n/a        n/a            1             n/a         0.99           1
        multi-orderings        0.96      0.88          0.64           1         0         n/a         0.05          n/a        n/a            1             n/a         0.05           1
           navigate-tree       0.98      0.91          0.99         0.99       0.32      0.2          0.99           1          1           0.99             1            1            1
    number-checkboxes          0.96       n/a           n/a         0.99        0        0.16          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.16         0.16
           read-table-2        0.95       n/a           n/a         0.94        0          0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
             read-table        0.97       n/a           n/a         0.97       0.01        0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
         resize-textarea       0.94       n/a           n/a           1        0.27      0.11          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.11         0.11
            right-angle        0.87       n/a           n/a         0.98       0.26      0.38          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.38         0.38
           scroll-text-2       0.97       n/a           n/a           1        0.88      0.96          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.96         0.96
             scroll-text       0.97       n/a           n/a         0.96       0.04        0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
          search-engine        0.97      0.34          0.34           1        0.15        0          0.26          n/a         1           0.99            n/a           1            1
            simon-says         0.62       n/a           n/a           0        0.02      0.28          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.28         0.28
         simple-algebra        0.86       n/a           n/a         0.75       0.03      0.04          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.04         0.04
      simple-arithmetic        0.96       n/a           n/a         0.86       0.38      0.07          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.07         0.07
        social-media-all       0.89        0             0          0.75        0         n/a         0.01          n/a        n/a          0.01             1          0.01           1
     social-media-some         0.91      0.02            0          0.85       0.01       n/a         0.01          n/a        n/a          0.42            n/a         0.01         0.42
           social-media        0.96      0.21          0.24          0.9       0.03      0.23         0.39          n/a         1             1             n/a           1            1
               terminal        0.88       n/a           n/a         -0.01       0          0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
             text-editor       0.88       n/a           n/a         0.98       0.11      0.01          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.01         0.01
         text-transform        0.86       n/a           n/a          0.6       0.19        0           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           0            0
             tic-tac-toe       0.71      0.48          0.40         0.83       0.32      0.34         0.37          n/a        n/a          0.47            n/a         0.37         0.47
           unicode-test        0.99       n/a           n/a           1        0.86       n/a          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a          n/a          n/a
      use-autocomplete         0.98      0.22          0.15           1        0.07        0          0.78          n/a        n/a          0.98            n/a         0.78         0.98
       use-colorwheel-2        0.94       n/a           n/a         0.95       0.38        1           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           1            1
        use-colorwheel          0.9       n/a           n/a         0.98       0.68        1           n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a           1            1
            use-slider-2       0.97       n/a           n/a         0.95       0.03      0.15          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.15         0.15
             use-slider        0.98       n/a           n/a         0.91       0.18      0.51          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.51         0.51
            use-spinner        0.98      0.07          0.05           1        0.47      0.17         0.04          n/a        n/a          0.04            n/a         0.17         0.17
         visual-addition       0.97       n/a           n/a         0.99       0.36      0.01          n/a          n/a        n/a           n/a            n/a         0.01         0.01


                                                                                           19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2022


                          Table 8: Resource requirements and running time of LLMs.
Model Name   Model Size   TPU version   Batch size   Input sequence length   Examples per sec (training)   Examples per sec (inference)
  PaLM         62B          TPU v4          8                1920                     9.313                          30.51
  PaLM          8B          TPU v4          32               1920                      64.4                          184.3
   T5           3B          TPU v4         128                512                     163.8                          734.5
 LaMDA          1B          TPU v2         128                512                     363.1                          1416


                                                               20
