M ULTI -TASK O PTION L EARNING AND D ISCOVERY FOR
S TOCHASTIC PATH P LANNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT

         This paper addresses the problem of reliably and efficiently solving broad classes
         of long-horizon stochastic path planning problems. Starting with a vanilla RL
         formulation with a stochastic dynamics simulator and an occupancy matrix of
         the environment, our approach computes useful options with policies as well as
         high-level paths that compose the discovered options.
         Our main contributions are (1) data-driven methods for creating abstract states that
         serve as end points for helpful options, (2) methods for computing option policies
         using auto-generated option guides in the form of dense pseudo-reward functions,
         and (3) an overarching algorithm for composing the computed options. We show
         that this approach yields strong guarantees of executability and solvability: under
         fairly general conditions, the computed option guides lead to composable option
         policies and consequently ensure downward refinability. Empirical evaluation on
         a range of robots, environments, and tasks shows that this approach effectively
         transfers knowledge across related tasks and that it outperforms existing approaches
         by a significant margin.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Autonomous robots must compute long-horizon motion plans (or path plans) to accomplish their
tasks. Robots use controllers to execute these motion plans by reaching each point in the motion
plan. However, the physical dynamics can be noisy and controllers are not always able to achieve
precise trajectory targets. This prevents robots from deterministically reaching a goal while executing
the computed motion plan and increases the complexity of the motion planning problem. Several
approaches (Schaul et al., 2015; Pong et al., 2018) have used reinforcement learning (RL) to solve
multi-goal stochastic path planning problems by learning goal-conditioned reactive policies. However,
these approaches work only for short-horizon problems (Eysenbach et al., 2019). On the other hand,
multiple approaches have been designed for handling stochasticity in motion planning (Alterovitz
et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2016), but they require discrete actions for the robot. This paper addresses
the following question: Can we develop effective approaches that can efficiently compute plans for
long-horizon continuous stochastic path planning problems? In this paper, we show that we can
develop such an approach by learning abstract states and then learning options that serve as actions
between these abstract states.
Abstractions play an important role in long-horizon planning. Temporally abstracted high-level
actions reduce the horizon of the problem in order to reduce the complexity of the overall decision-
making problem. E.g., a task of reaching a location in a building can be solved using abstract
actions such as “go from room A to corridor A”, “reach elevator from corridor A”, etc., if one can
automatically identify these regions of saliency. Each of these actions is a temporally abstracted
action. Not only do these actions reduce the complexity of the problem, but they also allow the
transfer of knowledge across multiple tasks. E.g, if we learn how to reach room B from room A for a
task, we can reuse the same solution when this abstract action is required to solve some other task.
Reinforcement learning allows learning policies that account for the stochasticity of the environment.
Recent work (Lyu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2018; Kokel et al., 2021) has shown that combining RL
with abstractions and symbolic planning has enabled robots to solve long-horizon problems that
require complex reasoning. However, these approaches require hand-coded abstractions. In this paper,


                                                  1
we show that the abstractions automatically learned (Shah & Srivastava, 2022) can be efficiently
combined with deep reinforcement learning approaches.
The main contributions to this paper are: (1) A formal foundation for constructing a library of
two different types of options that are task-independent and transferable, (2) A novel approach
for auto-generating dense pseudo-reward function in the form of option guides that can be used to
learn policies for synthesized options, and (3) An overall hierarchical algorithm approach that uses
combines these automatically synthesized abstract actions with reinforcement learning and uses them
for multi-task long-horizon continuous stochastic path planning problems. We also show that these
options are composable and can be used as abstract actions with high-level search algorithms.
Our formal approach provides theoretical guarantees about the composability of the options and their
executability using an option guide. We present an extensive evaluation of our approach using two
separates sets of automatically synthesized options in a total of 14 settings to answer three critical
questions: (1) Does this approach learn useful high-level planning representations? (2) Do these
learned representations support transferring learning to new tasks?
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 some of the existing approaches that are closely
related to our approach; Sec. 3 introduces a few existing ideas used by our approach; Sec. 4 presents
our algorithm; Sec. 5 presents an extensive empirical evaluation of our approach.


2    R ELATED W ORK

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach that uses a data-driven approach for synthesizing
transferable and composable options and leverages these options with a hierarchical algorithm to
compute solutions for stochastic path planning problems It builds upon the concepts of abstraction,
stochastic motion planning, option discovery, and hierarchical reinforcement learning and combines
reinforcement learning with planning. Here, we discuss related work from each of these areas.
Motion planning is a well-researched area. Numerous approaches( (Kavraki et al., 1996; LaValle,
1998; Kuffner & LaValle, 2000; Pivtoraiko et al., 2009; Saxena et al., 2022)) have been developed
for motion planning in deterministic environments. Kavraki et al. (1996); LaValle (1998); Kuffner
& LaValle (2000) develop sampling-based techniques that randomly sample configurations in the
environment and connect them for computing a motion plan from the initial and goal configurations.
Holte et al. (1996); Pivtoraiko et al. (2009); Saxena et al. (2022) discretize the configuration space
and use search techniques such as A⇤ search to compute motion plans in the discrete space.
Multiple approaches (Du et al., 2010; Kurniawati et al., 2012; Vitus et al., 2012; Berg et al., 2017;
Hibbard et al., 2022) have been developed for performing motion planning with stochastic dynamics.
Alterovitz et al. (2007) build a weighted graph called stochastic motion roadmap (SMR) inspired from
the probabilistic roadmaps (PRM) (Kavraki et al., 1996) where the weights capture the probability of
the robot making the corresponding transition. Sun et al. (2016) use linear quadratic regulator -- a
linear controller that does not explicitly avoid collisions -- along with value iteration to compute a
trajectory that maximizes the expected reward. However, these approaches require an analytical model
of the transition probability of the robot’s dynamics. Tamar et al. (2016) develop a fully differentiable
neural module that approximates the value iteration and can be used for computing solutions for
stochastic path planning problems. However, these approaches (Alterovitz et al., 2007; Sun et al.,
2016; Tamar et al., 2016) require discretized actions. Du et al. (2010); Van Den Berg et al. (2012)
formulate a stochastic motion planning problem as a POMDP to capture the uncertainty in robot
sensing and movements. Multiple approaches (Jurgenson & Tamar, 2019; Eysenbach et al., 2019;
Jurgenson et al., 2020) design end-to-end reinforcement learning approaches for solving stochastic
motion planning problems. These approaches only learn policies to solve one path planning problem
at a time and do not transfer knowledge across multiple problems. In contrast, our approach does not
require discrete actions and learn options that are transferrable to different problems.
Several approaches have considered the problem of learning task-specific subgoals. Kulkarni et al.
(2016); Bacon et al. (2017); Nachum et al. (2018; 2019); Czechowski et al. (2021) use intrinsic
reward functions to learn a two-level hierarchical policy. The high-level policy predicts a subgoal
that the low-level goal-conditioned policy should achieve. The high-level and low-level policies
are then trained simultaneously using simulations in the environment. Paul et al. (2019) combine
imitation learning with reinforcement learning for identifying subgoals from expert trajectories and


                                                    2
bootstrap reinforcement learning. Levy et al. (2019) learn a multi-level policy where each level learns
subgoals for the policy at the lower level using Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) (Andrychowicz
et al., 2017) for control problems rather than long-horizon motion planning problems in deterministic
settings. Kim et al. (2021) randomly sample subgoals in the environment and use a path planning
algorithm to select the closest subgoal and learn a policy that achieves this subgoal.
Numerous approaches (Stolle & Precup, 2002; Şimşek et al., 2005; Brunskill & Li, 2014; Kurutach
et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2019; Bagaria & Konidaris, 2020; Bagaria et al., 2021) perform
hierarchical learning by identifying task-specific options through experience collected in the test
environment and then use these options (Sutton et al., 1999) along with low-level primitive actions.
Stolle & Precup (2002); Şimşek et al. (2005) lay foundation for discovering options in discrete
settings. They collect trajectories in the environment and use them to identify high-frequency states in
the environment. These states are used as termination sets of the options and initiation sets are derived
by selecting states that lead to these high-frequency states. Once options are identified, they use
Q-learning to learn policies for these options independently to formulate Semi-MDPs (Sutton et al.,
1999). Bagaria & Konidaris (2020) learn options in a reverse fashion. They compute trajectories in
the environment that reaches the goal state. In these trajectories, they use the last K points to define
an option. They use these points to define the initiation set of the option and the goal state is used as
the termination set. They continue to partition rest of collected trajectories similarly and generate a
fixed number (a hyperparameter) of options.
Approaches for combining symbolic planning with reinforcement learning (Silver & Ciosek, 2012;
Yang et al., 2018; Jinnai et al., 2019; Lyu et al., 2019; Kokel et al., 2021) use pre-defined abstract
models to combine symbolic planning with reinforcement learning. In contrast, our approach learns
such options (including initiation and termination sets) as well as their policies and uses them to
compute solutions for stochastic path planning problems with continuous state and action spaces.
Now, we discuss some of the existing concepts required to understand our approach.


3    BACKGROUND

Motion planning Let X = Xfree [ Xobs be the configuration space of a robot R and let O be the
set of obstacles in a given environment. Given a collision function f : X ! {0, 1}, Xfree represents
the set of configurations that are not in collision with any obstacle o 2 O such that f (x) = 0 and
Xobs represents the set of configurations in collision such that f (x) = 1. Let xi 2 Xfree be the initial
configuration of the robot and xg 2 Xfree be the goal configuration of the robot. The motion planning
problem can be defined as:
Definition 1. A motion planning problem M is defined as a 4-tuple hX , f, xi , xg i, where X =
Xfree [ Xobs is the configuration space, f is the collision function, xi is an initial configuration, and
xg is a goal configuration.

A solution to a motion planning problem is a motion plan ⌧ . A motion plan is a sequence of
configurations hx0 , . . . , xn i such that x0 = xi , xn = xg , and 8x 2 ⌧, f (x) = 0. Robots use
controller that accepts sequenced configurations from the motion plan and generates controls that take
the robot from one configuration to the next configuration. In practice, these environment dynamics
are noisy, which introduces stochasticity in the overall motion planning problem. This stochasticity
can be handled by computing a motion policy ⇡ : X ! X that takes the current configuration of the
robot and generates the next waypoint for the robot.
Markov decision process In this work, we define the stochastic path planning problem as a
continuous stochastic shortest path (SSP) problem (Bertsekas & Tsitsiklis, 1991). A continuous
stochastic shortest path problem is defined as a 5-tuple hX , A, T, C, s0 , Gi where X is a continuous
state space (configuration space of the robot), A is a set of continuous actions, T : X ⇥A⇥X ! [0, 1]
is a transition function, C : X ! R is a cost function, s0 is an initial state, and G ✓ S is a set of
goal states. Discount factor is set to 1 for this work. A solution to an SSP is a policy ⇡ : X ! A
that maps states to actions that take the robot to the goal states and minimizes the cumulative cost.
Dynamic programming methods such as value iteration (VI) or policy iteration (PI) can be used
to compute such policies when every component of the MDP is known. When one or more SSP
components are unknown various reinforcement learning (RL) approaches (Watkins, 1989; Mnih
et al., 2015; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2018) can be used to learn policies.


                                                   3
  Options framework Options framework (Sutton et al., 1999) models options as temporal abstrac-
  tion over primitive actions in an MDP. Let S be the state-space of an MDP. An option o is defined as
  3-tuple hIo , o , ⇡o i. Io ✓ S defines the initiation set of an option o. An option o can be applied in a
  state s iff s 2 Io . o is the termination set of an option o. Execution of an option o terminates when
  the agent reaches a state s 2 o . ⇡o : S ! A defines policy for the option o. Sutton et al. (1999)
  define Semi-Markov Decision Process (SMDP) by adding available options to the set of primitive
  actions available in the MDP. Solution for an SMDP is a policy ⇡ : S ! Ā where Ā = A [ O and
  O is a set of options.
  Automated synthesis of abstractions Shah & Srivastava (2022) use region-based Voronoi di-
  agrams (RBVDs) to define abstractions for motion planning problems. To construct effective
  abstractions, they use critical regions (Molina et al., 2020) to construct the RBVD. Intuitively, critical
  regions are defined as regions that have a high density of solutions for a given class of problems but
  low sampling probability under uniform sampling distribution. Shah & Srivastava (2022) use critical
  regions to define RBVDs as follows:
  Definition 2. Given a configuration space X , let dc define minimum distance between a configuration
  x 2 X and a region ✓ X . Given a set of regions and a robot R, a region-based Voronoi diagram
     is a partitioning of X such that for every Voronoi cell i 2 there exists a region i 2 such
  that forall x 2 and forall j 6= i , dc (x, i ) < dc (x, j ) and each i is connected.
  In this framework, abstract states are defined using a bijective function ` : ! S that maps each
  Voronoi cell to an abstract state. The abstraction function ↵ : X ! S is defined such that ↵(x) = s
  if and only if there exists a Voronoi cell such that x 2 and `( ) = s. A configuration x 2 X is
  said to be in the high-level abstract state s 2 S (denoted by x 2 s) if ↵(x) = s. In this work, we use
  RBVDs along with critical regions to construct abstractions and synthesize options.

   4   O UR A PPROACH

  Algorithm 1: Stochastic Hierarchical Abstraction-        Alg. 1 outlines our approach -- stochastic
   guided Robot Planner (SHARP)                            hierarchical abstraction-guided robot planner
                                                           (SHARP) -- for computing a policy for the given
   Input: Training environments Etrain , c-space X ,
             initial configuration xi , goal configuration stochastic path planning problem. Our approach
             xg                                            requires a robot simulator to compute path plans.
   Output: A policy ⇧ composed of options                  It takes the occupancy matrix of the environment
 1 ⇥       get_critical_regions_predicter();               along with the initial and goal configuration of
 2 if ⇥ is not trained then                                the robot as the input and produces a policy com-
 3       train ⇥ using Etrain                              posed of options as the output.
 4 if abstraction is not constructed then                  Learning the critical regions The first step
 5              predict_critical_regions(etest ,⇥);        in our approach is to identify critical regions in
 6              construct_RBVD(etest , );                  the given environment. We use a deep neural
 7       O      synthesize_option_endpoints( , );          network to identify these critical regions. We
 8 si , sg     get_abstract_states(xi ,xg );               train (lines 1-3) this neural network with the
 9 p      A*_search(O,si ,sg );                            kinematic model of the robot and a set of train-
10 ⇧ = empty_list;                                         ing environments Etrain that do not include the
11 ⇡0       learn_policy(xi ,Io1 );                        test environments. We discuss this in detail in
12 ⇧.add(⇡0 );
                                                           Sec. 4.1. Once the network is trained, the same
13 foreach o 2 p do
                                                           network is used to identify critical regions (line
14       if o.policy does not exist then
15            G      compute_option_guide(Io , o );        5) in all test environments for the same robot.
16            train o.policy;                              Synthesizing option endpoints Alg. 1 uses
17            adjust the cost of the option o;             these identified critical regions to construct
18       ⇧.add(o.policy);                                  RBVD (line 6) and generate a set of abstract
                                                           states (line 7). We then use this RBVD to con-
19 ⇡n+1        learn_policy( on ,xg );                     struct a collection of options and synthesize op-
20 ⇧.add(⇡n+1 );
21 return ⇧;
                                                           tion endpoints for the given environment (line
                                                           7). Sec. 4.2 explains this step in detail. These
   option are synthesized only once per the robot and the environment. They are reused for each
   subsequent pair of initial and goal pairs. We refer to option endpoints as options for brevity.
   Options as abstract actions Let O be the set of synthesized options. Our approach uses these
   options as high-level abstract actions. It considers the initiation sets of these options as preconditions


                                                       4
for the abstract actions and the termination sets as their effects. We identify the abstract initial and
goal state for the robot’s initial and goal configuration (line 8) and use the A⇤ search to compute a
sequence of identified abstract actions that takes the robot from the initial abstract state to the goal
abstract state (line 9). We use the Euclidean distance between the termination set of the corresponding
option and the goal configuration as the heuristic for the A⇤ search. The A⇤ search also requires the
costs for the options which are initially unknown. Therefore, we use the Euclidean distance between
the initiation and termination sets of an option as an approximation to its cost.
Computing policies for options Let p = ho1 , . . . , on i be the sequence of options that takes the
robot from its initial abstract state s0 to its goal abstract state sg . Alg. 1 then computes policies for
each of the options in this sequence of options. It first starts by computing a policy ⇡0 that takes the
robot from its initial configuration xi to some point in the initiation set of the first option o1 (line 11).
Alg. 1 then starts computing the policy for every option in p. First, we check if a policy for an option
is already computed from the previous call of Alg. 1 or not (line 14). If it is already computed, we
use the same policy. Otherwise, our approach computes an option guide for the given option using its
endpoints, and it then uses this option guide to compute a policy for the option (lines 15-16). Sec. 4.3
presents this in details. Lastly, Alg. 1 computes a policy that takes the robot from the termination set
of the last option in p to the goal configuration xg (line 19).
Updating the option costs To efficiently transfer the learned option policies, our approach needs
to update the option costs that A⇤ search uses to compute the sequence of options. We update this
cost (line 17) by collecting rollouts of the learned policy and using the average number of steps from
the initiation set to the termination set as an approximation of the cost of the option. Now, we explain
each step of our approach in detail.


4.1   L EARNING C RITICAL R EGIONS

Our approach first needs to identify critical regions (Sec. 3) to synthesize options in the given
environment. Recall that critical regions are regions in the environment that have a high density of
solutions for the given class of problems but at the same time, they are hard to sample under uniform
distribution over the configuration space. The training data is generated by solving randomly sampled
motion planning problems. Input into the network is an occupancy matrix of the environment that
represents the free space and obstacles in the given environment. Labels represent critical regions in
the given environment.
These critical region predictors are environment independent and they are also generalizable across
robots to a large extent. Furthermore, the approach presented here directly used the open-source
critical regions predictors made available by Shah & Srivastava (2022). These predictors are envi-
ronment independent and need to be trained only once per kinematic characteristics of a robot. E.g.,
the non-holonomic robots used to evaluate our approach (details in Sec. 5) are different from those
used by Shah & Srivastava (2022) but we used the critical regions predictor developed by them for a
rectangular holonomic robot.
Shah & Srivastava (2022) use 20 training environments (Etrain ) to generate the training data. For
each training environment etrain 2 Etrain , they randomly sample 100 goal configurations. Shah &
Srivastava (2022) randomly sample 50 initial configurations for each goal configuration and compute
motion plans for them using an off-the-shelf motion planner and a kinematic model of the robot.
They use UNet (Ronneberger et al., 2015) with Tanh activation function for intermediate layers and
Sigmoid activation for the last layer. They use the weighted logarithmic loss as the loss function.
Lastly, they use ADAM optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014) with learning rate 10 4 to minimize the loss
function for 50, 000 epochs.


4.2   S YNTHESIZING O PTION E NDPOINTS

The central idea of this paper is to synthesize transferable options using the set of critical regions
   and the RBVD . Our approach uses these critical regions and RBVD for identifying option
endpoints, i.e., initiation and termination sets. In this work, we define two types of options: 1. Options
between centroids of two critical regions -- centroid options (Oc ) and 2. Options between interfaces
of two pairs of abstract states -- interface options (Oi ). Now we define each of these options.


                                                     5
Centroid options Centroid options are defined using centroids of two neighboring critical regions.
Intuitively, these options define abstract actions that transition between a pair of critical regions.
Formally, let be the set of critical regions and be the RBVD constructed using the critical regions
  . Let S be a set of abstract states defined using the RBVD .
Definition 3. Let si 2 S be an abstract state in the RBVD with the corresponding critical region
  i 2 . Let d be the Euclidean distance measure and let t define a threshold distance. Let ci be the
centroid of the critical region ri . A centroid region of the critical region ri with the centroid ci is
defined as a set of configuration points {x|x 2 si ^ d(x, ci ) < t}.

We use this definition to define the endpoints for the centroid options as follows:
Definition 4. Let si , sj 2 S be a pair of neighboring states in an RBVD constructed using the set
of critical regions . Let i , j 2 be the critical regions for the abstract states si and sj and let ci
and cj be their centroids regions. The endpoints for a centroid option are defined as a pair hIij , ij i
such that Iij = ci and ij = cj .
Interface options Interface options are defined using intersections of high-level states. Intuitively,
these options define high-level temporally abstracted actions between intersections of pairs of abstract
states and take the robot across the high-level states. To construct interface options, we first need to
identify interface regions between a pair of neighboring abstract states. Let S be a set of abstract
states defined using the RBVD . We define interface region as follows:
Definition 5. Let si , sj 2 S be a pair of neighboring states and i and j be their corresponding
critical regions. Let dc (x, ) define the minimum euclidean distance between configuration x 2 X
and some point in a region ⇢ X . Let p be a configuration such that dc (p, i ) = dc (p, j ) that is, p
is on the border of the Voronoi cells that define si and sj . Given the Euclidean distance measure d
and a threshold distance t, an interface region for a pair of neighboring states (si , sj ) is defined as
a set {x|(x 2 si _ x 2 sj ) ^ d(x, p) < t}.

We use this definition of interface regions to define endpoints for the interface options as follows:
Definition 6. Let si , sj , sk 2 S be abstract states in the RBVD such that si and sj are neighbors
and sj and sk are neighbors. Let ˆij and ˆjk be the interface regions for pairs of high-level states
(si , sj ) and (sj , sk ). The endpoints for an interface option are defined as a pair hIoijk , oijk i such
that Ioijk = ˆij and oijk = ˆjk .

We construct a collection of options for the given environment using these definitions for endpoints
of centroid and interface options. Let V : S ⇥ S ! {0, 1} define a neighborhood function such
that V(si , sj ) = 1 iff si , sj 2 S are neighbors. We define the set of centroid options as Oc =
{oij |8si , sj V(si , sj ) = 1} with endpoints computed as in Def. 4 . Similarly, we define the set of
interface options as Oi = {oijk |8si , sj , sk V(si , sj ) = 1 ^ V(sj , sk ) = 1} with endpoints computed
as in Def. 6.
                                                                           Our approach uses this collection of
    # ∉ ℐ%!       # ∉ ℐ%"       # ∉ ℐ%#   # ∉ '%$       # ≠ #'             options to compute a composed policy.
                                                                           Let s1 , . . . , sn be a set of distinct adja-
          # ∈ ℐ%      # ∈ ℐ%       …          # ∈ '%          # = #'
     q!
              !
                 q"
                            "
                             q$          q#
                                                    $
                                                     q#&"             q#&$ cent states such that V(si , si+1 ) = 1.
                                                                           Let O = {o1 , . . . , on } be the set of
                                                                           centroid or interface options for these
Figure 1: A policy composed of a collection of options o1 , . . . , on sequence of adjacent states. The com-
for a sequence of distinct adjacent abstract states s1 , . . . , sn .
                                                                           posed policy ⇧O is a finite state au-
                                                                           tomaton as shown in Fig. 1. Recall
that for a sequence of options o1 , . . . , on , Alg. 1 computes ⇡0 and ⇡n+1 as special cases. For a
controller state qi , ⇧(x) = ⇡i (x) where ⇡i represents the policy for option oi 2 O. The controller
makes a transition qi ! qi+1 when the robot reaches a configuration x 2 Ioi+1 . Now, we prove the
existence of a composed policy for our approach. Recall that for a configuration space X and a set of
critical regions , the RBVD induces a set of abstract state S and an abstraction function ↵.
Theorem 4.1. Let x1 and xn be the initial and goal configurations of the robot such that s1 = ↵(x1 )
and sn = ↵(xn ). Let V : S ⇥ S ! {0, 1} be the neighborhood function as defined above. Let O be
the set of centroid or interface options. If there exists a sequence of distinct abstract states s1 , . . . , sn
such that V(si , si+1 ) = 1 then there exists a composed policy ⇧ such that the resultant configuration
after the termination of every option in ⇧ would be the goal configuration xn .

                                                             6
Proof. (Sketch) The proof directly derives from the definition of the endpoints for the centroid and
interface options. Given a sequence of adjacent abstract states s1 , . . . , sn , Def. 4 and 6 ensures a
sequence of options o1 , . . . , on such that i = Ii+1 . This implies that an option can be executed
once the previous option is terminated. Given this sequence of options o1 , . . . , on , according to
the definition of the compound policy, there exists a compound policy ⇧ such that for every pair
of options oi , oj 2 ⇧, Ioj = oi . Thus, we can say that if every option in ⇧ terminates, then the
resulting configuration would be the goal configuration.

4.3   S YNTHESIZING AND USING O PTION G UIDES

Once we identify the endpoints -- initiation and termination sets -- for the option, we use these sets to
compute option guides for these options. We use option guides to formulate a reward function that
is used to train policies for them. The option guides contain two components: a guide path and a
pseudo reward function. We formally define an option guide as follows:
Definition 7. Given an option oi 2 O with option endpoints hIi , i i, an option guide Goi is defined
as 4-tuple hIi , i , Gi , Ri i where Ii and i are endpoints of the option oi , Gi is the guide path, and
Ri is the pseudo reward function.
We now define both components of the option guide. A guide path is a motion plan from the initiation
set to the termination set of an option. Recall that ↵ is an abstraction function defined using the
RBVD . We defune a guide path as follows:
Definition 8. Let X be the configuration space of the robot R. Let d be the Euclidean distance
measure. Given an option oi with endpoints hIi , i i, let cIi and c i define centroids for the initiation
and termination sets respectively. Given a threshold distance t and the Euclidean distance measure d,
a guide path Gi for the option oi is a sequence of points [p1 , . . . , pn ] in the configurations space X
such that p1 = cIi , pn = c i , for each pair of consecutive points pi , pj 2 Gi , d(pi , pj ) < t, and for
every point pi 2 Gi , pi 2 ↵(Ii ) or pi 2 ↵( i ).
Here, we abuse the notation and use the abstraction function with a set of low-level configurations
rather than a single configuration. Intuitively, ↵(Ii ) = {↵(x)|8x 2 Ii }. It can be similarly computed
for i . We generate this guide path using a sampling-based motion planner HARP (Shah & Srivastava,
2022) and the kinematic model of the robot.
The guide path is used to define a pseudo reward function R for the option. It is a dense reward
function that provides a reward to the robot according to the distance of the robot from the nearest
point in the guide path and the distance from the last point of the guide path. For an option oi , we
define the dense pseudo reward function Ri : X ! R as follows:
Definition 9. Let oi be an option with endpoints hIi , i i and let Gi = [p1 , . . . , pn ] be the guide path.
Given a configuration x 2 X , let n(x) = pi define the closest point in the guide path. Let d be the
Euclidean distance measure. The pseudo reward function Ri (x) is defined as:
                         8
                         < rt                                if x 2 i
                Ri (x) = rp                                  if x 2 S/{↵(Ii ), ↵( i )}
                         :
                              (d(x, n(x)) + d(n(x), pn )) otherwise
Here rt is a large positive reward and rp is a large negative reward that can be tuned as hyperparam-
eters. Intuitively, we wish to automatically generate a dense pseudo-reward function based on the
information available form the environment. Thus rather than providing only a sparse reward function
(e.g. “+1 when you reach the termination set of the option”), we develop the pseudo reward function
that captures this condition (first case), a penalty for straying away from the source and target abstract
states (second case), and a reward for covering more of the option guide (third case).
Given an option oi with endpoints hIi , i i and an option guide Gi = hIi , i , Gi , Ri i, our approach
can use arbitrary reinforcement learning algorithm to learn the policy for the option. For our empirical
evaluation (Sec. 5), we use Soft Actor Critic (Haarnoja et al., 2018).

5     E MPIRICAL E VALUATION
We conduct an extensive evaluation of our approach in a total of four different environments with
two different robots. All experiments were conducted on a system running Ubuntu 18.04 with AMD


                                                     7
Figure 2: The figure shows the time taken by our approach and baselines to compute path plans in the test
environment. Results for an additional environment is in the Appendix B. The x-axis shows the problem instance
and the y-axis shows the time in seconds. The reported time for our approach includes time to predict critical
regions, construct abstractions, and learn policies for all the options. Each subsequent problem instance uses
trained policies for options from the previous problems if there exists one. Timeout was set to 2400 seconds. The
numbers are averaged over 5 independent trails. The transparent bars for SAC show that training was stopped as
it reached the timeout.


Ryzen Threadripper 3960X 24-core processor and two NVidia 3080 GPUs. We implement our
approach using PyBullet (Coumans & Bai, 2016) robotics simulator. PyBullet does not explicitly
model stochasticity in the movement of the robot. Therefore, we use random perturbations in the
actions to introduce stochasticity in the environment while training and use default controllers to
evaluate the learned policies.
We implement our approach using PyTorch and Stable Baselines. We use a 2 layered neural network
with each layer containing 256 neurons in every layer to learn policy for each option. The input to the
network is the current configuration of the robot and a vector to the nearest point on the guide path
for the current option. The network outputs the next point for the robot to reach. We use rt = 1000
and rp = 100 for the pseudo reward function with maximum learning steps set to 150k to learn
policy for each option. We evaluate our model for 20 episode every 10k steps and stop the training if
we achieve an average reward of 500. Our code and data are available in the supplementary material.
Evaluating our approach We evaluate our approach using a total of 7 environments. They are
inspired by indoor household and office environments. Appendix A shows our test environments.
Dimensions of the first four environments (App. A.1) are 15m ⇥ 15m. The rest of the environments
(App. A.2) are of the size 75m ⇥ 75m . These environments were not included in the set of training
environments used to train the network that identifies critical regions. We generate 5 motion planning
tasks (P1-P5) for each environment to evaluate our approach. We use two non-holonomic robots to
evaluate our approach in these four environments: the ClearPath Husky robot (H) and the AgileX
Limo (L). The Husky is a 4-wheeled differential drive robot that can move in one direction and rotate
in place. The Limo is also a 4-wheeled robot that can move in one direction and has a steering.
We considered a set of recent approaches (Kulkarni et al., 2016; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Levy et al.,
2019; Bagaria & Konidaris, 2020) before selecting two approaches to evaluate against our approach.
First, we compare our approach against vanilla soft actor-critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018). SAC is
an off-policy deep reinforcement learning approach and learns a single policy for taking the robot
from its initial configuration to the goal configuration. We use the same network architecture as ours
for the SAC neural network. We use the terminal reward of +1000 and a step reward of 1. We also
evaluate our approach against a sampling-based motion planner RRT (LaValle, 1998) with replanning.
We compute a path plan with RRT and execute it. If the robot does not reach the goal after executing
the entire path plan, then we compute a new path plan from the configuration where the robot ended.
We continue this loop until either the robot reaches the goal configuration or we reach the timeout.
Analysis of the results We thoroughly evaluated our approach to answer three critical questions:
(1) Does this approach learn useful high-level planning representations? (2) Do these learned
representations support transferring learning to new tasks?


                                                       8
Figure 3: The figure shows the success rate of our approach and baselines in the test environments. Results for
an additional environment is in the Appendix B. The x-axis shows the problem instance and the y-axis shows
the fraction of successful executions of the model out of 20 test executions. We used the final policy for our
approach and SAC. RRT computed a new plan for each execution with a timeout set to 2400 seconds. The
numbers are averaged over 5 independent trails.


Fig. 2 shows the time taken by our approach for learning policies compared to the baselines SAC and
RRT. Fig. 2 shows that our approach was able to learn policies significantly faster than the baselines.
In most cases, our approach was able to compute solutions in half of the time taken by the baselines.
Vanilla SAC was not able to reach the threshold average reward of +500 in any environment before
the timeout of 2400 seconds. This shows that our approach was able to learn useful high-level
planning representations that improve the efficiency of the overall stochastic motion planning.
Fig. 3 shows the success rate for our approach and the baselines. Our approach achieves the goal a
significantly higher number of times compared to replanning-based deterministic RRT. Our approach
was able to consistently reach the goal configuration more than 80% of times. On the other hand,
RRT was able to reach the goal only 50% of times in the given timeout of 2400 seconds. For larger
environments (E-F), SAC was not able to solve a single problem. We also conducted a thorough
analysis of options being used across problems P1-P5 in each environment. Appendix C shows the
fraction of options reused by our approach across P1-P5. These reuse rates combined with the success
rates show that our approaches is able to successfully transfer learned options across new tasks.


6    C ONCLUSION

In this paper, we presented the first approach that uses a data-driven process to automatically identify
transferable options. Our approach synthesizes two different types of options: centroid options and
interface options. It uses these options with our hierarchical algorithm for solving stochastic path
planning problems. We also provide a way to automatically generate pseudo reward functions for
synthesized options to efficiently learn their policies. We show that learned options can be transferred
to different problems and used to solve new problems. Our formal framework also provides guarantees
on the compossibility of the generated options.
Our empirical evaluation on a large variety of problem settings shows that our approach significantly
outperforms other approaches. Through our empirical evaluation, we show that by combining
reinforcement learning with abstractions and high-level planning we can improve its efficiency and
compute solutions faster. We also show that using reinforcement learning to solve path planning
problems in stochastic environments yields robust plans that perform better than deterministic plans
computed using replanning-based motion planners.


R EFERENCES
Ron Alterovitz, Thierry Siméon, and Ken Goldberg. The stochastic motion roadmap: A sampling
  framework for planning with markov motion uncertainty. In Robotics: Science and systems, 2007.


                                                      9
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay.
 In Proc. NeurIPS, 2017.
Pierre-Luc Bacon, Jean Harb, and Doina Precup. The option-critic architecture. In Proc. AAAI, 2017.
Akhil Bagaria and George Konidaris. Option discovery using deep skill chaining. In Proc. ICLR,
  2020.
Akhil Bagaria, Jason K Senthil, and George Konidaris. Skill discovery for exploration and planning
  using deep skill graphs. In Proc. ICML, 2021.
Jur van den Berg, Sachin Patil, and Ron Alterovitz. Motion planning under uncertainty using
  differential dynamic programming in belief space. In Robotics Research, pp. 473–490. Springer,
  2017.
Dimitri P Bertsekas and John N Tsitsiklis. An analysis of stochastic shortest path problems. Mathe-
  matics of Operations Research, 16(3):580–595, 1991.
Emma Brunskill and Lihong Li. Pac-inspired option discovery in lifelong reinforcement learning. In
 Proc. ICML, 2014.
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games, robotics
  and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016.
Konrad Czechowski, Tomasz Odrzygóźdź, Marek Zbysiński, Michał Zawalski, Krzysztof Olejnik,
 Yuhuai Wu, Łukasz Kuciński, and Piotr Miłoś. Subgoal search for complex reasoning tasks. In
  Proc. NeurIPS, 2021.
Yanzhu Du, David Hsu, Hanna Kurniawati, Wee Sun, Lee Sylvie, CW Ong, and Shao Wei Png. A
  pomdp approach to robot motion planning under uncertainty. In In International Conference on
  Automated Planning & Scheduling, Workshop on Solving Real-World POMDP Problems. Citeseer,
  2010.
Ben Eysenbach, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. Search on the replay buffer: Bridging
  planning and reinforcement learning. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2019.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proc. ICML, 2018.
Michael Hibbard, Abraham P Vinod, Jesse Quattrociocchi, and Ufuk Topcu. Safely: Safe stochastic
 motion planning under constrained sensing via duality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02816, 2022.
Robert C Holte, Maria B Perez, Robert M Zimmer, and Alan J MacDonald. Hierarchical a*: Searching
  abstraction hierarchies efficiently. In AAAI/IAAI, Vol. 1, pp. 530–535, 1996.
Yuu Jinnai, David Abel, David Hershkowitz, Michael Littman, and George Konidaris. Finding
  options that minimize planning time. In Proc. ICML, 2019.
Tom Jurgenson and Aviv Tamar. Harnessing reinforcement learning for neural motion planning. In
  Proc. RSS, 2019.
Tom Jurgenson, Or Avner, Edward Groshev, and Aviv Tamar. Sub-goal trees a framework for goal-
  based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5020–5030.
  PMLR, 2020.
Lydia E Kavraki, Petr Svestka, J-C Latombe, and Mark H Overmars. Probabilistic roadmaps for
  path planning in high-dimensional configuration spaces. IEEE transactions on Robotics and
  Automation, 12(4):566–580, 1996.
Junsu Kim, Younggyo Seo, and Jinwoo Shin. Landmark-guided subgoal generation in hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. In Proc. NeruIPS, 2021.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. Proc. ICLR, 2014.


                                               10
Harsha Kokel, Arjun Manoharan, Sriraam Natarajan, Balaraman Ravindran, and Prasad Tadepalli.
  Reprel: Integrating relational planning and reinforcement learning for effective abstraction. In
  Proc. ICAPS, 2021.
James J Kuffner and Steven M LaValle. Rrt-connect: An efficient approach to single-query path
  planning. In Proc. ICRA, 2000.
Tejas D Kulkarni, Karthik Narasimhan, Ardavan Saeedi, and Josh Tenenbaum. Hierarchical deep
  reinforcement learning: Integrating temporal abstraction and intrinsic motivation. In Proc. NeurIPS,
  2016.
Hanna Kurniawati, Tirthankar Bandyopadhyay, and Nicholas M Patrikalakis. Global motion planning
  under uncertain motion, sensing, and environment map. Autonomous Robots, 33(3):255–272,
  2012.
Thanard Kurutach, Aviv Tamar, Ge Yang, Stuart J Russell, and Pieter Abbeel. Learning plannable
  representations with causal infogan. In Proc. NeruIPS, 2018.
Steven M LaValle. Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path planning. 1998.
Andrew Levy, George Konidaris, Robert Platt, and Kate Saenko. Learning multi-level hierarchies
 with hindsight. In Proc. ICLR, 2019.
Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Proc.
  ICLR, 2016.
Daoming Lyu, Fangkai Yang, Bo Liu, and Steven Gustafson. Sdrl: interpretable and data-efficient
  deep reinforcement learning leveraging symbolic planning. In Proc. AAAI, 2019.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Daniel Molina, Kislay Kumar, and Siddharth Srivastava. Learn and link: Learning critical regions for
  efficient planning. In Proc. ICRA, 2020.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Shane Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2018.
Ofir Nachum, Shixiang Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Near-optimal representation learning
  for hierarchical reinforcement learning. In Proc. ICLR, 2019.
Sujoy Paul, Jeroen Vanbaar, and Amit Roy-Chowdhury. Learning from trajectories via subgoal
  discovery. In Proc. NeurIPS, 2019.
Mihail Pivtoraiko, Ross A Knepper, and Alonzo Kelly. Differentially constrained mobile robot
 motion planning in state lattices. Journal of Field Robotics, 26(3):308–333, 2009.
Vitchyr Pong, Shixiang Gu, Murtaza Dalal, and Sergey Levine. Temporal difference models: Model-
  free deep rl for model-based control. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09081, 2018.
Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
  image segmentation. In Proc. MICCAI, 2015.
Dhruv Mauria Saxena, Tushar Kusnur, and Maxim Likhachev. Amra*: Anytime multi-resolution
  multi-heuristic a. In Proc. ICRA. IEEE, 2022.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators.
  In Proc. ICML, 2015.
Naman Shah and Siddharth Srivastava. Using deep learning to bootstrap abstractions for hierarchical
  robot planning. In Proc. AAMAS, 2022.


                                                 11
David Silver and Kamil Ciosek. Compositional planning using optimal option models. In Proc.
  ICML, 2012.
Özgür Şimşek, Alicia P Wolfe, and Andrew G Barto. Identifying useful subgoals in reinforcement
  learning by local graph partitioning. In Proc. ICML, 2005.
Martin Stolle and Doina Precup. Learning options in reinforcement learning. In International
 Symposium on abstraction, reformulation, and approximation, pp. 212–223. Springer, 2002.
Wen Sun, Jur van den Berg, and Ron Alterovitz. Stochastic extended lqr for optimization-based
 motion planning under uncertainty. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering,
 13(2):437–447, 2016.
Richard S Sutton, Doina Precup, and Satinder Singh. Between mdps and semi-mdps: A framework
  for temporal abstraction in reinforcement learning. Artificial intelligence, 112(1-2):181–211, 1999.
Aviv Tamar, Yi Wu, Garrett Thomas, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Value iteration networks.
  Advances in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016.
Jur Van Den Berg, Sachin Patil, and Ron Alterovitz. Motion planning under uncertainty using
  iterative local optimization in belief space. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 31
  (11):1263–1278, 2012.
Michael P Vitus, Wei Zhang, and Claire J Tomlin. A hierarchical method for stochastic motion
 planning in uncertain environments. In Proc. IROS. IEEE, 2012.
Christopher JCH Watkins. Learning from Delayed Rewards. PhD thesis, King’s College, London,
 1989.
Fangkai Yang, Daoming Lyu, Bo Liu, and Steven Gustafson. Peorl: Integrating symbolic planning
  and hierarchical reinforcement learning for robust decision-making. In Proc. IJCAI, 2018.


                                                 12
