Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S ELF - SUPERVISED O FF - POLICY RANKING VIA
C ROWD L AYER
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT

         Off-policy evaluation (OPE) aims to estimate the online performance of target
         policies given dataset collected by some behavioral policies. OPE is crucial in
         many applications where online policy evaluation is expensive. However, existing
         OPE methods are far from reliable. Fortunately, in many real-world scenarios,
         we care only about the ranking of the evaluating policies, rather than their exact
         online performance. Existing works on off-policy ranking (OPR) adopt a super-
         vised training paradigm, which assumes that there are plenty of deployed policies
         and the labels of their performance are available. However, this assumption does
         not apply to most OPE scenarios because collecting such training data might be
         highly expensive. In this paper, we propose a novel OPR framework called SOC-
         CER, where the existing OPE methods are modeled as workers in a crowdsourcing
         system. SOCCER can be trained in a self-supervised way as it does not require
         any ground-truth labels of policies. Moreover, in order to capture the relative dis-
         crepancies between policies, we propose a novel transformer-based architecture
         to learn effective pairwise policy representations. Experimental results show that
         SOCCER achieves significantly high accuracy in a variety of OPR tasks. Sur-
         prisingly, SOCCER even performs better than baselines trained in a supervised
         way using additional labeled data, which further demonstrates the superiority of
         SOCCER in OPR tasks.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Off-policy evaluation (OPE) aims to estimate online performance of given policies using only histor-
ical data collected by some other behavior policies. It is crucial to deploying reinforcement learning
(RL) to real-world applications, such as trading, advertising, autonomous vehicles and drug trials,
where online policy evaluation might be highly expensive. OPE also becomes increasingly impor-
tant in causal inference and model selection for offline RL (Oberst & Sontag, 2019; Nie et al., 2021).
Most existing works on OPE focus on estimating the online performance of target policies and can
be categorized into three classes: Inverse Propensity Scoring (IPS) based methods, Direct Methods
(DM) and Hybrid Methods (HM). Unfortunately, existing OPE methods are far from reliable in real
applications. Standard IPS based estimators such as importance sampling suffer from high variance
due to the product of importance weights (Hanna et al., 2019). DM requires extra estimators of
environmental dynamics or value functions, which are hard to learn when the observation data is
high-dimensional or insufficient. HM such as doubly robust estimators combine IPS and DM (Jiang
& Li, 2016), yet it often comes with additional hyperparameters that need to be carefully chosen.
Fortunately, in many real-world scenarios, we do not need to estimate the exact online performance
of target policies. Instead, we only care about which policy would perform the best when deployed
online. This inspires us to develop a policy ranker that focuses on predicting the ranking of target
policies regarding to their online performance. A recent work proposes a policy ranking model
called SOPR-T (Jin et al., 2022), which is trained in a supervised paradigm under the assumption that
there are plenty of extra deployed policies whose performance can be used as supervision signals.
However, this assumption is impracticable in many real-world OPE tasks since collecting online
performance of policies can be extremely expensive. In addition, SOPR-T directly maps the data
of state-action pairs to a score, yielding a low-efficient policy representation scheme which fails to
capture the relative discrepancies between policies.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In this paper, we propose a novel Self-supervised Off-poliCy ranking model based on Crowd layER
(SOCCER) to address the above challenges. The novelty of SOCCER is two-fold. First, we employ
a crowdsourcing paradigm to solve the OPR problem, where the workers come from a diverse pool
of existing OPE methods, who provide labels of whether a policy would perform better than another
one. Note that these labels are constructed by comparing the estimated accumulated rewards of the
target policies, thus our model can be trained in a self-supervised way. Moreover, we propose a novel
Policy Comparison Transformer (PCT) architecture to learn efficient policy representations. Instead
of directly mapping the state-action pairs to a policy embedding (as is done in SOPR-T), PCT learns
pairwise representation of two policies capturing difference of them at the same set of states. With
the help of PCT, our policy ranking model generalizes well in the policy space. Experimental results
show that SOCCER not only achieves significant higher ranking performance than existing OPE
methods, but also outperforms baselines trained using additional ground-truth labels.


2    R ELATED W ORKS

Off-policy evaluation/ranking. The goal of OPE is to precisely predict the online performance of
target policies given trajectory data collected by some other behavior policies. Standard importance
sampling approach suffers from exponential variance with respect to the time horizon (Li et al., 2015;
Jiang & Li, 2016). Recent works such as Fitted-Q evaluation (Hoang et al., 2019) and marginalized
importance sampling (Liu et al., 2018) achieve polynomial variance, yet they rely on additional
function approximators. Direct methods avoid the large variance by learning the dynamic model
or Q-function, which could be biased especially when the data is insufficient. Some works study
the hyperparameter-free policy selection problem, yet their method only applies to Q-learning based
policies (Zhang & Jiang, 2021). A recent work directly studies the OPR problem, where it collects
online performance of a large set of policies and uses these labeled data to train a policy ranker (Jin
et al., 2022). However, collecting such data might be extremely expensive in many applications.
Learning from crowds. Crowdsourcing systems enable machine learners to collect labels of large
datasets from crowds. One big issue with crowdsourcing systems is that the labels provided by
crowds are often noisy (S. & Zhang, 2019). To tackle this challenge, various probabilistic generative
methods are proposed for statistical inference (Yuchen et al., 2016; Tian & Zhu, 2015). Another line
of works use discriminative models that find the most likely label for each instance (Jing et al., 2014;
2015). A recently work called Crowd Layer (CL) first describes an algorithm for jointly learning
the target model and the reliability of workers (Filipe & Pereira, 2018). CL proposes a simple yet
efficient crowd layer that can train deep neural networks end-to-end directly from the noisy labels.
In our work, we treat existing OPE methods as workers and adopt CL to process multiple noisy
labels, because CL is naturally compatible with our model.
Policy representation. Compact but informative representations of policies not only benefit the
policy learning process (Tang et al., 2022), but also help with the policy transfer among different
tasks (Isac et al., 2019; G. et al., 2017). A straightforward idea is to represent a policy by its network
parameters, yet this leads to a very sparse representation space. Network Fingerprint (Harb et al.,
2020) proposes a differentiable representation that uses the concatenation of the vectors of actions
outputted by the policy network on a set of probing states. Some recent works try to encode policy
parameters as well as state-action pair data into a low-dimensional embedding space (Tang et al.,
2022; Jin et al., 2022). However, existing works focus on single policy representations, which fail
to capture the relative discrepancies between policies.


3    P ROBLEM STATEMENT

Markov decision process. We consider the underlying environment as a Markov decision process
(MDP) and define an MDP as a finite–horizon tuple M = (S, A, T , P, R, γ). Here, S is the state
space, and A is the action space. T is the length of time horizon. P and R are the transition function
and the reward function, respectively. P(st+1 |st , at ) represents the probability of transitioning from
state st to state st+1 ∈ S when the agent takes action at ∈ A under state st ∈ S and R(st , at ) rep-
resents the immediate reward the agent receives. The expected return of a policy π can be computed
        PT
by EP [ t=1 [γ t R(st , π(st )]], where γ ∈ (0, 1] is the discount factor.


                                                    2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Off-policy ranking. The goal of OPE is to estimate the expected return of a policy π without deploy-
ing it online, given an offline dataset D = {τi }N
                                                 i=1 , where τi = (si,0 , ai,0 , ri,0 , · · · , si,T , ai,T , ri,T )
are trajectories generated by some behavior policies. OPE is usually used for model selection:
We are required to select the most promising policy from a candidate set of available policies
before actual deployment. Take recommender systems as example, we can easily obtain a set of
candidate policies by adjusting the training data or the hyperparameters of the model. However, we
often need to select very few policies from the candidates for online test, since a bad policy would
harm the user experience. Therefore, we care more about the ranking of the candidate policies,
instead of their exact expected reward. We formally define the off-policy ranking problem as follows.

Definition 3.1 (Off-Policy Ranking, OPR). Given a set of trajectory data D = {τi }N     i=1 generated
by some behavior policies and a set of target policies Π = {πj }M    j=1 , an OPR algorithm outputs a
ranking of the target policies that aligns with their online expected accumulated rewards.

Intuitively, OPR should be easier than OPE, since the solution of OPE also implies the solution of
OPR. However, OPR faces some unique challenges. First, since the policy space might be extremely
large, we need efficient policy representations that capture their relative differences so that the policy
ranker could generalize across the policy space. Second, we lack the ground-truth ranking of the
policies in the training set, thus the direct supervised learning approaches do not apply. We will
elaborate on how we address these challenges in Section 4.

4     A PPROACH

In this section, we elaborate on how the OPR problem can be addressed under our SOCCER frame-
work. SOCCER takes the offline trajectory data D and two target policies πi , πj as inputs and
outputs the probability of whether πi would perform better than πj . We begin by introducing how to
learn effective pairwise policy representations under a novel transformer-based architecture. Then,
we will introduce how to train our model using the labels provided by existing OPE methods.

4.1    L EARNING PAIRWISE POLICY REPRESENTATIONS

Pairwise Policy Representation. A policy is generally considered as a conditional distribution
over actions given current state. Therefore, a policy can be naturally represented by a set of state-
action pairs where the actions are sampled from the policy. However, such a straightforward policy
representation could be inefficient since the number of state-action pairs can be extremely large.
Previous works address this issue by extracting high-level features from the state-action pairs using
deep neural networks (Jin et al., 2022). Although these representations reflect the features of single
policies, they fail to capture the discrepancies of different policies at some crucial states.
To this end, we aim to learn pairwise policy representations by comparing two policies’ decisions at
the same set of states. Formally, given a set of states {s1 , ..., sK } and two policies πi , πj , we can
construct the following sequence of state-action pairs by taking actions at these states:

                          τi,j =< (s1 , ai1 ), (s1 , aj1 ), · · · , (sK , aiK ), (sK , ajK ) >,                 (1)
where ai ∼ πi (·|s), and aj ∼ πj (·|s). We denote by χi,j = g(τi,j ) ∈ Rn the pairwise policy
representation where g is a function that maps τi,j to an n-dimensional representation space. Since
our goal is to predict whether πi performs better than πj , therefore a pairwise policy representation
should indicate the order of the two policies. We regard χi,j and χj,i as different representations and
will show how to learn them using transformers. In addition, since the datasets are often very large,
computing the policy representations using all the states can be extremely slow. In practice, we use
a sampled set of states to compute the approximated representations during training, and take the
averaged output results of multiple samples as the final representation during inference.
Policy Comparison Transformer (PCT). Transformers are proved to be effective for learning de-
pendencies between different positions in sequences. Prior works has employed transformers to
extract features from trajectory sequences (Lili et al., 2021; Michael et al., 2021). However, existing
transformer architectures fail to capture the differences of two policies’ decisions. In our work, we
propose the PCT architecture to learn pairwise policy representations. Unlike previous works where


                                                           3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                       Pairwise Decision Sequence                                Input Tokens
                         Sampled States                                ai a j ai a j
                                                                         1   1     2   2          ai aj
                                                                                                   K   K

  Trajectory                            ...                                                ...                                               ...
   Dataset     Sample    s s                  s       Make decisions                                        Project (s,a)
                          1        2              K
                                                       by πm and πn    s s s s
                                                                         1   1     2   2          s s
                                                                                                   K    K
                                                                                                              to tokens     x x x x
                                                                                                                             i
                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                                                                 j
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                         j
                                                                                                                                         2         xi xj
                                                                                                                                                    K   K


                                       Figure 1: Construction of input tokens.


the positional encodings indicate the positions of state-action pairs in a trajectory, PCT uses posi-
tional encoding to distinguish the relative order of two policies. In this way, the learned pairwise
policy representation χi,j can be directly used to predict whether πi performs better than πj .
Figure 1 shows the construction of input tokens. We first sample K states from D and then use a
linear encoder f to map the K state-action pairs into 2K tokens:
                         xik = f (sk , aik ),                  xjk = f (sk , ajk ),              k = 1, ..., K                                          (2)
where i and j represent the indexes of two policies. In order to represent the relative order of πi and
πj , we introduce two one-hot positional encodings eα = [1, 0] and eβ = [0, 1], where eα indicates
the policy ranked higher and eβ indicates the policy ranked lower. We also use an aggregation token
e0 , which is a learnable vector for aggregating the information from the other 2K tokens (Zhu et al.,
2021). The final inputs that indicate πi ranked higher than πj can be represented as:

                        zi>j = [e0 , xi1 + eα , xj1 + eβ , · · · xiK + eα , xjK + eβ ]                                                                  (3)
This construction of inputs has two advantages. First, the two policies share the same set of states,
thus their discrepancies are naturally represented by the different actions taken at these states. Sec-
ond, we can easily get a mirrored representation zj>i by simply exchange the positional encoding
eα and eβ used in zj>i .
We adopt a widely used transformer architecture as our encoder (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). It con-
tains L alternating layers of multi-head self-attention (MSA) and multi-layer perception (MLP) blocks.
Layernorm (LN) and residual connections are applied to the outputs of each block. For brevity, we
re-write the inputs in Equation 3 as z(0) . And the computations at each block can be represented as:
                              ẑ0 = MSA(LN(z(l−1) )) + z(l−1)                                    l = 1, · · · , L
                               l                           (l−1)             l−1                                                                        (4)
                              z = MLP(LN(ẑ                        )) + ẑ                  l = 1, · · · , L
                         χi,j = LN(z0L ).
The final pairwise policy representation χi,j is the corresponding outputs of the aggregation token
e0 taken from z(L) . Note that χi,j changes to χj,i when we exchange the positional encodings eα
and eβ , but they are permutation invariant to the order of inputted state-action pairs.

4.2   A CROWDSOURCING APPROACH TO OPR

In this section, we will introduce how to train the PCT in two cases regarding to the existence
of ground-truth ranking labels of policies. First, we show that the policy ranking problem can be
reduced to a binary classification problem since our pairwise policy representations can be directly
used to predict the ranking of two policies. Second, we will introduce a novel crowdsourcing system
where multiple OPE methods are modeled as workers. We will also show how to train the PCT
leveraging the inaccurate labels provided by the workers.
Reducing OPR to binary classification. We first consider the case when there is a training set
Π′ = {(πi′ , Ri )}Ti=1 consisting of T deployed policies πi′ as well as their real expected accumulated
rewards Ri . In this case, we can directly construct binary labels by comparing the performance of
the two policies. We use an indicator 1Ri >Rj to represent the label of a pair of policies (πi , πj ).
The PCT can be trained by minimizing the following binary cross entropy loss:

                Lsup = −               E      [(1Ri >Rj ) · log(ŷi,j ) + (1Ri ≤Rj ) · log(1 − ŷi,j )],                                                (5)
                           πi ,πj ∼Π′


                                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                       Estimated           Noisy Binary Labels
                                                   Noisy Binary Labels

                                                                                                   { πi , πj }
                           Crowd Layer                                   LCL                      Trajectory
                                                                                                   Dataset

Pairwise Policy
                                                        Probability of whether
Representation                        y    i,j
                                                          πi perfoms better than πj              OPE Worker Set
                  χi,j
                          Linear Projection


                              Policy Comparison Transfrormer Encoder


                                                                         ...
                  e 0    x i eα xj eβ
                          1            1         x i eα x j eβ
                                                    2            2              x i eα x j eβ
                                                                                      K    K



    Aggregation Token          Policy Positional        Input Tokens
                                 Embeddings


                                 Figure 2: The framework of SOCCER.


where ŷi,j = sigmoid(ϕ(χi,j )) represents the predicted probability that πi performs better than
πj . ϕ is a function that projects χi,j to a real number. The final ranking of test policies is based on
their scores computed by:
                                               1 X
                                   scorei =          ŷi,j , i = 1, ..., N,                          (6)
                                              N
                                                         j̸=i

which can be interpreted as the expected probability that πi performs better than other test policies
Rodrigo et al. (2019).
Learning from crowds by Crowd Layer. Supervised training is efficient when the dataset
Π′ = {(πi′ , Ri )}Ti=1 contains enough policies. Unfortunately, collecting such training data can
be extremely expensive in many real applications. Meanwhile, we note that although existing OPE
methods are not robust enough, they actually provide candidate solutions to the OPR problem. To
this end, we aim to borrow ideas from crowdsourcing domain as an alternative way to approach the
OPR problem. Specifically, suppose that there exists a set of OPE algorithms estimating the policy
performance, we can treat these algorithms as crowd workers for generating inaccurate labels and
make use of these labels to train our models. The intuition is that the inaccurate labels generated
by OPE annotators are implicitly conditioned on the ground-truth performance of policies. If we
can take advantage of these labels and learn their relationships with the ground-truth labels, our
prediction ŷi,j would be more close to the ground-truth labels.
In the framework of SOCCER, we adopt Crowd Layer (CL, (Filipe & Pereira, 2018)) as our back-
bone for learning from crowd labels. CL is able to automatically distinguish the good from the
unreliable annotators and capture their individual biases in many other domains, such as image an-
notation (Guan et al., 2018; Li et al., 2022) and music genre classification (Rodrigues et al., 2013).
In addition, CL is naturally compatible with deep learning approaches since it simply adds a crowd
layer to the deep neural networks and can be trained in an end-to-end way. As shown in Figure 2,
we add CL to the top of our predicted probability ŷi,j . During training, CL adjusts the gradients
coming from these noisy labels according to its reliability by scaling them and adjusting their bias.
The adjusted gradients are then backpropagated to PCT according to the chain rule.


                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Formally, assume that there are R annotators of OPE methods. For each annotator r, its estimation
about the expected return of πm is denoted as Rrm . The goal of CL is to train a mapping function
  r
ŷi,j = ζ r (ŷi,j ) to predict the noisy binary label generated by annotator r: yi,j
                                                                                  r
                                                                                      = 1Rri >Rrj . The
overall objective can be written as:

                                               r           r             r                 r
                    LCL = −         E        [yi,j · log(ŷi,j ) + (1 − yi,j ) · log(1 − ŷi,j ).]   (7)
                                r=1,··· ,R
                                πi ,πj ∼Π′
The complete training procedures of SOCCER is summarized in Algorithm 1. In practice, to reduce
the computational cost brought by CL, we set ζ r as a linear projection followed by a sigmoid
function. Therefore, the number of additional parameters only grows linearly with the number of
annotators. Note that the CL is only available during training since we still use ŷi,j to generate the
predicted ranking of test policies.

Algorithm 1: SOCCER Training
Data: Offline Trajectory set D, Policy set Π, OPE worker set W.
Result: Policy comparison transformer g .
N ← n;          # The number of trainning epochs
K ← k;          # The number of sampled states
Initialize the transformer g;
Initialize the aggregation token e0 ;
Initialize the policy positional embeddings eα and eβ ;
Initialize the token encoder f ;
Initialize the linear projection function ϕ;
Initialize the crowd layer ξ;              # Initialize parameters
while N ̸= 0 do
     Sample 2 policies: πi , πj ∼ Π;
     Sample K states: s1 , s2 , · · · , sK ∼ D;
     Take actions by both policies: aik ∼ πi (·|sk ), anj ∼ πj (·|sk );
     Construct a pairwise policy decision sequence:
      τi,j =< (s1 , ai1 ), (s1 , aj1 ), · · · , (sK , aiK ), (sK , ajK ) >;
     Encode state-action pairs into input tokens: xik = f (sk , aik ), xjk = f (sk , ajk );
     Add policy positional embeddings to tokens:
      z0 = [e0 , xi1 + eα , xj1 + eβ , · · · xiK + eα , xjK + eβ ]
     Get the pairwise policy representation: χi,j = f (z0 );
     Get the probability of whether πi performs better than πj : ŷi,j = o(χi,j );
     for each OPE worker r ∈ W do
         Generate the noisy labels: yi,j      r
                                                  = 1Rri >Rrj ;
         Get the estimated noisy labels by crowd layer ξ r : ŷi,j        r
                                                                            = ξ r (ŷi,j );
         Compute the loss according to Equation (7);
         Backpropagate gradients to all parameters for minimizing the loss;
     end
     N ← N − 1;
end



5     E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we compare SOCCER with widely-used OPE methods on various tasks. We also
present ablation studies with respect to PCT and CL, which are the main components of SOCCER.

5.1   E XPERIMENTAL SETTINGS

Trajectory Set. We evaluate SOCCER and all baseline OPE methods on D4RL dataset consisting
of various trajectory sets (Fu et al., 2020). These sets of trajectory data are generated by different
behavioral policies in different simulated environments. Overall, we adopt trajectory sets collected


                                                           6
  Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               HalfCheetah-v2                                   Walker2d-v2
                   expert       full-replay     medium          expert          full-replay      medium


Rank Correlation
Regret@3


                            Figure 3: Comparing SOCCER with other OPE baselines.


  from 2 environments of Mujoco games: Hopper-v2 and Walker2d-v2. Besides, there are 3
  different types of trajectory sets for each environment: expert, full-replay and medium.
  The difference between them is that the behavioral policies collecting these 3 types of trajectories
  show different performance in the simulated environment. And these behavioral policies are trained
  by the Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm online (Haarnoja et al., 2018).
  Policy Set. To evaluate the abilities of all methods to correctly rank a set of policies in an offline
  way. We use the policy set released by Jin et al. (2022) as the candidate set of policies. For each
  trajectory set mentioned above, there are 2 types of policy sets ( referred as Set I and Set II)
  in which the expected return of policies are evenly spaced in the performance range of them. As
  mentioned in Jin et al. (2022), Set I and Set II aim to simulate two kinds of OPE cases. Set
  I consists of policies trained by offline RL algorithms (CQL (Kumar et al., 2020), BEAR (Kumar
  et al., 2019), CRR (Wang et al., 2020)). Since these algorithms have different network architec-
  tures and the generated policies are snapshots of models that stop training at different epochs, the
  policies contained in Set I show diverse behavioral performance. This is aligned with practical
  cases where the sources of policies are diverse and unknown. On the other hand, set II con-
  tains policies trained by SAC, which is the same as the algorithm of training the behavioral policies.
  Therefore, Set II corresponds to the practical OPE cases, such as production development and
  update. The updated policies share many common properties with the policies generating the tra-
  jectory data. In the experiments of ablations, we also compare some models that use extra training
  policy sets for providing supervised labels. These training sets are also released by (Jin et al., 2022),
  and policies in them are trained by SAC online.
  Baselines 1 . We compare SOCCER with six state-of-the-art baselines. i) Fitted Q-Evaluation
  (FQE (Hoang et al., 2019)). It is a value-based OPE method, which learns a neural network to
  approximate the Q-function of the evaluated policy by temporal difference learning on the trajectory
  set. ii) Model-based estimation (MB (Paduraru, 2013)). It learns the dynamics model of environment,
  and estimates the expected return of evaluated policies by computing their average returns of Monte-
  Carlo rollouts in the model environment. iii) Weighted importance sampling (IW (Mahmood et al.,
  2014)). It leverages weighted importance sampling to correct the weight of the reward, regarding the
  collected trajectory data distribution to the data distribution of the evaluated policy. iv) DualDICE
  (Nachum et al., 2019). It also aims to achieve distribution correction yet without directly using
  importance sampling. It learns an estimation of the state-action stationary distribution for achieving
  distribution correction. v) Doubly Robust (DR (Jiang & Li, 2016)). It utilizes an unbiased estimator
  that leverages an estimated environment model to decrease the variance of the unbiased estimates

     1
       We leverage a popular implementation of OPE algorithms: https://github.com/
  google-research/google-research/tree/master/policy_eval. It contains the first 5
  baselines used in our paper


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        HalfCheetah-v2                                   Walker2d-v2
                            expert         full-replay       medium             expert     full-replay   medium

Rank Correlation
Regret@3


                                      Figure 4: Comparing SOCCER with other ablations.


produced by importance sampling techniques. vi) SOPR-T 2 (Jin et al., 2022). This transformer-
based model learns to achieve OPR tasks by learning a score function to score policies according
to their generated state-action pairs. However, it relies on a strong assumption that there are extra
deployed policies as well as these policies’ true performance. Therefore, we only compare it when
there are extra supervised information.
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate all models according two widely-used metrics. i) Spearman’s
rank correlation. It is the Pearson correlation between the ground truth rank sequence
and the evaluated rank sequence of the evaluated policies. ii) Normalized Regret@k. It is
the normalized difference between the actual value of the best policy in the policy set, and the actual
value of the best policy in the estimated top-k set. Mathematically, it can be computed by

                                                                      Vmax − Vtopk
                                                         regret@k =                ,
                                                                      Vmax − Vmin
where Vmax and Vmin is the expected return of the best and the worse policies, respectively, in the
entire set, while Vtopk is the estimated top k policies.

5.2                     H YPERPARAMETERS .

In the implementation of our model, we control the scale of the learning objective function in our
models by controlling the optimization procedure. It is conducted using Adam with a learning rate
of 10−2 , and with no momentum or weight decay. PCT is set as a 8-layer and 8-head transformer,
and the dimensions of representations and all tokens are 128. The aggregation token e0 and the
policy positional embeddings eα and eβ are initialized as random vectors. The token encoder f is a
3-layer MLP followed by a ReLU() activation function, and its feedforward dimension is 128. The
linear projection ϕ is a single-layer MLP. During training, we set the number of training epochs as
100, and use the model snapshots at the final epoch to achieve OPR tasks in experiments. For each
epoch, we sample 1280 pairwise policy decision sequences for training, and each sequence contains
256 sampled states. Besides, in each epoch, we sample 5 models from the baseline models as the
OPE worker to generate noisy labels. In the inference stage, we sample 32 pairwise sequences for
each policy pairs to compute the average score of each policy. All experiments in this paper are
carried out with 3 different seeds, and they are 1, 2, 3, respectively.

                   2
                       We use the official implementation of SOPR-T: https://github.com/SOPR-T/SOPR-T


                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.3   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

Comparison with Other OPE Baselines. We first compare SOCCER against 5 baselines across 2
environments. For each environment, there are 3 different trajectory sets in which each set contains
2 distinct policy sets. So there are 12 policy sets required to be correctly ranked by all models. We
show the rank correlation and regret@k values of the estimated rank sequences generated by each
model in Figure 3.
Overall, we can find SOCCER shows superior performance compared with other baselines. Further-
more, among all policy sets, SOCCER shows the highest rank correlations in 10 sets and the lowest
regret@k in 8 sets, indicating that it can achieve robust and effective performance in diverse sets of
policies. By contrast, the results of other baselines shows high variance across different policy sets.
On the other hand, SOCCER shows great performance on learning noisy labels generated by other
OPE workers. Note that in these experiments, all OPE workers which generate noisy labels for SOC-
CER are directly sampled from the trained models of baselines. We can find that SOCCER could
still perform well despite of the low quality of OPE workers. For example, looking at the results
in Set I of the expert trajectory set in HalfCheetah-v2, all OPE baselines show poor performance
(the average rank correlation of them is about −0.27), indicating that labels generated by them are
very noisy. However, SOCCER shows a high performance (about 0.62) while its supervised in-
formation is from such low-quality labels. Intuitively, we believe that there are two main reasons
causing this phenomenon. First, the effective representation capability of our proposed policy com-
parison transformer could help to reduce the biases of noisy annotators. Second, the crowd layer
could automatically distinguishes the good from the unreliable OPE annotators and captures their
individual biases. In conclusion, SOCCER shows highly effective and robust OPR results across
diverse kinds of policies. Besides, it can largely reduce the biases induced by OPE annotators and
thus gets better performance than these OPE workers.


Ablations. To figure out the importance of each component in our framework. We perform several
ablations on the same policy sets as the experiments mentioned above. All results are illustrated
in Figure 4. Specifically, we compare SOCCER with 3 different models. The first one referred to
SOCCER without CL is the model using our PCT architecture but discarding the crowd layer.
Since it has no module to learn from crowds, so we make train it by providing extra sets of deployed
policies released by (Jin et al., 2022). The second one is SOPR-T (Jin et al., 2022). It is also a
transformer-based model to learn policy representations. The difference between it and SOCCER is
that it learns an individual policy representation, while SOCCER learns pairwise policy representa-
tions which aim to capture subtle differences between any two policies. Furthermore, SOPR-T also
cannot learn from crowds, so we train it in the same supervised way. As shown in Figure 4, SOCCER
without CL shows better results than SOPR-T on 10 policy sets, and SOCCER performs better
than SOPR-T on 8 policy sets. This indicates that in the OPR tasks, our proposed pairwise policy
representation which aims to capture relations between intra-policy decisions has stronger represen-
tation ability than the pointwise policy representation, which regards each policy as an individual
point, without considering the subtle decision differences between policies. On the other hand,
SOCCER and SOPR-T with CL both show comparable performance with SOCCER without
CL and SOPR-T, respectively, while SOCCER and SOPR-T with CL cannot get any supervised
information from extra deployed policies. This indicates that regarding results estimated by other
OPE methods as noisy labels and using a crowd layer to learn from such labels is an effective way
when there is no sufficient extra policies providing supervised labels.



6     C ONCLUSIONS

This paper proposes SOCCER, a novel self-supervised learning framework for addressing OPR
problems. SOCCER is the first framework that combines crowdsourcing with OPR problems. In
order to capture the relative discrepancies between policies, SOCCER employs a policy compari-
son transformer with a novel positional encoding to learn effective pairwise policy representations.
Experimental results show that SOCCER not only outperforms baselines on various tasks but also
generalizes well in diverse policy sets.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszko-
  reit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at
  scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Rodrigues Filipe and Francisco Pereira. Deep learning from crowds. In Proceedings of the AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 1611–1618, 2018.
Justin Fu, Aviral Kumar, Ofir Nachum, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. D4RL: Datasets for deep
  data-driven reinforcement learning. arXiv, 2020.
Bellemare Marc G., Will Dabney, and Rémi Munos. A distributional perspective on reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 449–458, 2017.
Melody Guan, Varun Gulshan, Andrew Dai, and Geoffrey Hinton. Who said what: Modeling in-
 dividual labelers improves classification. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence, pp. 3109–3118, 2018.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In International Confer-
  ence on Machine Learning, pp. 1861–1870, 2018.
Josiah Hanna, Niekum Scott, and Peter Stone. Importance sampling policy evaluation with an
  estimated behavior policy. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2605–2613,
  2019.
Jean Harb, Tom Schaul, Doina Precup, and Pierre-Luc Bacon. Policy evaluation networks. arXiv,
  2020.
Le Hoang, Cameron Voloshin, and Yisong Yue. Batch policy learning under constraints. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3703–3712, 2019.
Arnekvist Isac, Danica Kragic, and Johannes A. Stork. VPE: Variational policy embedding for
  transfer reinforcement learning. In ICRA, pp. 36–42, 2019.
Nan Jiang and Lihong Li. Doubly robust off-policy value evaluation for reinforcement learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 652–661, 2016.
Yue Jin, Yue Zhang, Tao Qin, Xudong Zhang, Jian Yuan, Houqiang Li, and Tie-Yan Liu. Supervised
  off-policy ranking. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 10323–10339, 2022.
Zhang Jing, Xindong Wu, and Victor S. Sheng. Imbalanced multiple noisy labeling. Transactions
  on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 27(2):489–503, 2014.
Zhang Jing, Victor S. Sheng, Jian Wu, and Xindong Wu. Multi-class ground truth inference in
  crowdsourcing with clustering. Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 28(4):1080–
  1085, 2015.
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy Q-Learning
  via bootstrapping error reduction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  11761–11771, 2019.
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, George Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative Q-Learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1179–1191,
  2020.
Junbing Li, Changqing Zhang, Joey Tianyi Zhou, Huazhu Fu, Shuyin Xia, and Qinghua Hu. Deep-
  lift: Deep label-specific feature learning for image annotation. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
  52(8):7732–7741, 2022.
Lihong Li, Rémi Munos, and Csaba Szepesvári. Toward minimax off-policy value estimation. In
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 608–616, 2015.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chen Lili, Lu Kevin, Rajeswaran Aravind, Lee Kimin, Grover Aditya, Laskin Michael, Abbeel
  Pieter, Srinivas Aravind, and Mordatch Igor. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via
  sequence modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 15084–15097,
  2021.
Qiang Liu, Lihong Li, Ziyang Tang, and Dengyong Zhou. Breaking the curse of horizon: Infinite-
  horizon off-policy estimation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  5361–5371, 2018.
A. Rupam Mahmood, Hado P van Hasselt, and Richard S Sutton. Weighted importance sampling
  for off-policy learning with linear function approximation. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2014.
Janner Michael, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
  modeling problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1273–1286, 2021.
Ofir Nachum, Yinlam Chow, Bo Dai, and Lihong Li. DualDICE: Behavior-agnostic estimation
  of discounted stationary distribution corrections. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2019.
Xinkun Nie, Emma Brunskill, and Stefan Wager. Learning when-to-treat policies. Journal of the
  American Statistical Association, 116(533):392–409, 2021.
Michael Oberst and David Sontag. Counterfactual off-policy evaluation with gumbel-max structural
 causal models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4881–4890, 2019.
Cosmin Paduraru. Off-policy evaluation in Markov decision processes. PhD thesis, McGill Univer-
  sity Libraries, 2013.
Nogueira Rodrigo, Wei Yang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jimmy Lin. Multi-stage document ranking with
  bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.14424, 2019.
Filipe Rodrigues, Francisco Pereira, and Bernardete Ribeiro. Learning from multiple annotators:
   Distinguishing good from random labelers. Pattern Recognition Letters, 34(12):1428–1436, 2013.
   ISSN 0167-8655.
Sheng Victor S. and Jing Zhang. Machine learning with crowdsourcing: A brief summary of the past
  research and future directions. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  pp. 9837–9843, 2019.
Hongyao Tang, Zhaopeng Meng, Jianye Hao, Chen Chen, Daniel Graves, Dong Li, Changmin Yu,
  Hangyu Mao, Wulong Liu, Yaodong Yang, Wenyuan Tao, and Li Wang. What about inputting
  policy in value function: Policy representation and policy-extended value function approximator.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 8441–8449, 2022.
Tian Tian and Jun Zhu. Max-margin majority voting for learning from crowds. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1621–1629, 2015.
Ziyu Wang, Alexander Novikov, Konrad Zolna, Josh S Merel, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Scott E
  Reed, Bobak Shahriari, Noah Siegel, Caglar Gulcehre, Nicolas Heess, and Nando de Freitas.
  Critic regularized regression. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 7768–
  7778, 2020.
Zhang Yuchen, Xi Chen, Dengyong Zhou, and Michael I. Jordan. Spectral methods meet em: A
  provably optimal algorithm for crowdsourcing. JMLR, 17(1):3537–3580, 2016.
Siyuan Zhang and Nan Jiang. Towards hyperparameter-free policy selection for offline reinforce-
  ment learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Chen Zhu, Wei Ping, Chaowei Xiao, Mohammad Shoeybi, Tom Goldstein, Anima Anandkumar,
  and Bryan Catanzaro. Long-short transformer: Efficient transformers for language and vision. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 17723–17736, 2021.



                                                11
