Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D IMINISHING R ETURN OF VALUE E XPANSION M ETH -
ODS IN M ODEL -BASED R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

 Daniel Palenicek 12            Michael Lutter 1            João Carvalho 1          Jan Peters 1 2 3 4



                                              A BSTRACT

          Model-based reinforcement learning is one approach to increase sample effi-
          ciency. However, the accuracy of the dynamics model and the resulting com-
          pounding error over modelled trajectories are commonly regarded as key limita-
          tions. A natural question to ask is: How much more sample efficiency can be
          gained by improving the learned dynamics models? Our paper empirically an-
          swers this question for the class of model-based value expansion methods in con-
          tinuous control problems. Value expansion methods should benefit from increased
          model accuracy by enabling longer rollout horizons and better value function ap-
          proximations. Our empirical study, which leverages oracle dynamics models to
          avoid compounding model errors, shows that (1) longer horizons increase sample
          efficiency, but the gain in improvement decreases with each additional expansion
          step, and (2) the increased model accuracy only marginally increases the sample
          efficiency compared to learned models with identical horizons. Therefore, longer
          horizons and increased model accuracy yield diminishing returns in terms of sam-
          ple efficiency. These improvements in sample efficiency are particularly disap-
          pointing when compared to model-free value expansion methods. Even though
          they introduce no computational overhead, we find their performance to be on-par
          with model-based value expansion methods. Therefore, we conclude that the lim-
          itation of model-based value expansion methods is not the model accuracy of the
          learned models. While higher model accuracy is beneficial, our experiments show
          that even a perfect model will not provide an un-rivalled sample efficiency but that
          the bottleneck lies elsewhere.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Insufficient sample efficiency is a central issue that prevents reinforcement learning (RL) agents
from learning in physical environments. Especially in applications like robotics, samples from the
real system are particularly scarce and expensive to acquire due to the high cost of operating robots.
A technique that has proven to substantially enhance sample efficiency is model-based reinforcement
learning (Deisenroth et al., 2013). In model-based RL, a model of the system dynamics is usually
learned from data, which is subsequently used for planning (Chua et al., 2018; Hafner et al., 2019)
or for policy learning (Sutton, 1990; Janner et al., 2019).
Over the years, the model-based RL community has identified several ways of applying (learned)
dynamics models in the RL framework. Sutton’s (1990) DynaQ framework uses the model for
data augmentation, where model rollouts are started from real environment states coming from a
replay buffer. The collected data is afterwards given to a model-free RL agent. Recently, various
improvements have been proposed to the original DynaQ algorithm, such as using ensemble neural
network models and short rollout horizons (Janner et al., 2019; Lai et al., 2020), and improving the
synthetic data generation with model predictive control (Morgan et al., 2021).
Feinberg et al. (2018) proposed an alternative way of incorporating a dynamics model into the RL
framework. Their model-based value expansion (MVE) algorithm unrolls the dynamics model and
    1
      Intelligent Autonomous Systems, Technical University of Darmstadt, daniel.palenicek@tu-darmstadt.de.
    2
      Hessian.AI, Hochschulstr. 10, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany.
    3
      German Research Center for AI (DFKI), Research Department: Systems AI for Robot Learning.
    4
      Centre for Cognitive Science, Hochschulstr. 10, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany.


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


discounts along the modelled trajectory to approximate better targets for value function learning.
Subsequent works were primarily concerned with adaptively setting the rollout horizon based on
some (indirect) measure of the modelling error, e.g., model uncertainty (Buckman et al., 2018;
Abbas et al., 2020), a reconstruction loss (Wang et al., 2020) or approximating the local model error
through temporal difference learning (Xiao et al., 2019).
Lastly, using backpropagation through time (BPTT) (Werbos, 1990), dynamics models have been
applied to the policy improvement step to assist in computing better policy gradients. Deisenroth
& Rasmussen (2011) use Gaussian process regression (Rasmussen & Williams, 2006) and moment
matching to find a closed-form solution for the gradient of the trajectory loss function. Stochastic
value gradients (SVG) (Heess et al., 2015) uses a model in combination with the reparametrization
trick (Kingma & Welling, 2014) to propagate gradients along real environment trajectories. Others
leverage the model’s differentiability to directly differentiate through model trajectories (Byravan
et al., 2020; Amos et al., 2021). On a more abstract level, MVE- and SVG-type algorithms are very
similar. Both learn a dynamics model and use it for H-step trajectories (where H is the number of
modelled time steps) to better approximate the quantity of interest – the next state Q-function in the
case of SVG and the Q-function for MVE. These value expansion methods all assume that longer
rollout horizons will improve learning if the model is sufficiently accurate.
The common opinion is that learning models with less prediction error may further improve the sam-
ple efficiency of RL. This argument is based on the fact that the single-step approximation error can
become a substantial problem when using learned dynamics models for long trajectory rollouts. Mi-
nor modelling errors can accumulate quickly when multi-step trajectories are built by bootstrapping
successive model predictions. This problem is known as compounding model error. Furthermore,
most bounds in model-based RL are usually dependent on the model error (Feinberg et al., 2018),
and improvement guarantees assume model errors converging to zero. In practice, rollout horizons
are often kept short to avoid significant compounding model error build-up (Janner et al., 2019).
Intuitively, using longer model horizons has the potential to exploit the benefits of the model even
more. For this reason, immense research efforts have been put into building and learning better
dynamics models. We can differentiate between purely engineered (white-box) models and learned
(black-box) models (Nguyen-Tuong & Peters, 2011). White-box models offer many advantages
over black-box models, as they are more interpretable and, thus, more predictable. However, most
real-world robotics problems are too complex to model analytically, and one has to retreat to learn-
ing (black-box) dynamics models (Chua et al., 2018; Janner et al., 2020). Recently, authors have
proposed neural network models that use physics-based inductive biases, also known as grey-box
models (Lutter et al., 2019a;b; Greydanus et al., 2019).
While research has focused on improving model quality, a question that has received little attention
yet is: Is model-based reinforcement learning even limited by the model quality? For Dyna-style
data augmentation algorithms, the answer is yes, as these methods treat model- and real-environment
samples the same. For value expansion methods, i.e., MVE- and SVG-type algorithms, the answer
is unclear. Better models would enable longer horizons due to the reduced compounding model
error and improve the value function approximations. However, the impact of both on the sample
efficiency remains unclear. In this paper, we empirically address this question for value expansion
methods. Using the true dynamics model, we empirically show that the sample efficiency does not
increase significantly even when a perfect model is used. We find that increasing the rollout horizon
with oracle dynamics as well as improving the value function approximation using an oracle model
compared to a learned model at the same rollout horizon yields diminishing returns in improving
sample efficiency. With the phrase diminishing returns, we refer to its definition in economics (Case
& Fair, 1999). In the context of value expansion methods in model-based RL, we mean that the
marginal utility of better models on sample efficiency significantly decreases as the models improve
in accuracy. These gains in sample efficiency of model-based value expansion are especially disap-
pointing compared to model-free value expansion methods, e.g., Retrace (Munos et al., 2016). While
the model-free methods introduce no computational overhead, the performance is on-par compared
to model-based value expansion methods. When comparing the sample efficiency of different hori-
zons for both model-based and model-free value expansion, one can clearly see that improvement
in sample efficiency at best decreases with each additional model step along a modelled trajectory.
Sometimes the overall performance even decreases for longer horizons in some environments.


                                                  2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Contributions. In this paper, we empirically address the question of whether the sample efficiency
of value expansion methods is limited by the dynamics model quality. We summarize our contri-
butions as follows. (1) Using the oracle dynamics model, we empirically show that the sample
efficiency of value expansion methods does not increase significantly over a learned model. (2) We
find that increasing the rollout horizon yields diminishing returns in improving sample efficiency,
even with oracle dynamics. (3) We show that off-policy Retrace is a very strong baseline, which
adds virtually no computational overhead. (4) Our experiments show that for the critic expansion,
the benefits of using a learned model does not appear to justify the added computational complexity.


2    H - STEP P OLICY E VALUATION AND I MPROVEMENT

In this section, we introduce the necessary background and components of value expansion.

Reinforcement Learning. Consider a discrete-time Markov Decision Process (MDP) (Puterman,
2014), defined by the tuple ⟨S, A, P, R, ρ, γ⟩ with state space S, action space A, transition prob-
ability st+1 ∼ P(·|st , at ), reward function rt = R(st , at ), initial state distribution s0 ∼ ρ and
discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1). At each time step t the agent interacts with the environment according to
its policy π. Wherever it is clear, we will make use of the tick notation s′ and a′ to refer to the next
state and action at time t + 1. A trajectory τ = (s0 , a0 , s1 , a1 , . . . , sT ) is a sequence of states and
actions. The objective of an RL agent is to find an Poptimal policy that maximizes the expected sum
                                                       ∞
of discounted rewards π ∗ = arg maxπ Eτ ∼ρ,π,P [ t=0 γ t rt ]. Often π is parametrized and, in the
model-free case, it is common to optimize its parameters with on-policy (Sutton et al., 1999; Peters
& Schaal, 2008; Peters et al., 2010; Schulman et al., 2015; 2017; Palenicek, 2021) or off-policy gra-
dient methods (Degris et al., 2012; Silver et al., 2014; Lillicrap et al., 2016; Fujimoto et al., 2018;
Haarnoja et al., 2018). In model-based RL an approximate model P̂ of the true dynamics is learned,
and optionally an approximate reward function R̂. This model is then used for data generation (Sut-
ton, 1990; Janner et al., 2019; Cowen-Rivers et al., 2022), planning (Chua et al., 2018; Hafner et al.,
2019; Lutter et al., 2021a;b; Schneider et al., 2022) or stochastic optimization (Deisenroth & Ras-
mussen, 2011; Heess et al., 2015; Clavera et al., 2020; Amos et al., 2021).

Maximum-Entropy Reinforcement Learning (MaxEnt RL) augments the MDP’s reward rt with
a policy entropy term, which prevents collapsing to a deterministic policy, thus implicitly enforc-
ing continuing exploration (Ziebart et al., 2008;
                                                P∞ Fox et al., 2016; Haarnoja et al., 2017). The
(soft) action-value function Qπ (s, a) = Eπ,P [ t=0 γ t (rt − α log π(at |st )) | s0 = s, a0 = a] com-
               P∞ sum of discounted soft-rewards following a policy π. The goal is to maximize
putes the expected
Jπ = Es0 ∼ρ [ t=0 γ t (rt − α log π(at |st ))] w.r.t. π. Haarnoja et al. (2018) have proposed the Soft
Actor-Critic (SAC) algorithm to solve this objective. The SAC actor and critic losses are defined as
               Jπ (D) = Es∼D [−V π (s)] = Es∼D, a∼π(·|s) [α log π(a|s) − Qπ (s, a)] ,                          (1)
                                      h                              i
                                                                   2
               JQ (D) = E(s,a,r,s′ )∼D (r + γV π (s′ ) − Qπ (s, a)) ,                                          (2)

where D is a dataset of previously collected transitions (replay buffer), and the next state value target
is V π (s′ ) = Ea′ ∼π(·|s′ ) [Qπ (s′ , a′ ) − α log π(a′ |s′ )]. Note, that rt +γV π (s′ ) is a target value. Thus,
we do not differentiate through it, as is common in deep RL (Riedmiller, 2005; Mnih et al., 2013).

Value Expansion. Through the recursive definition of the value- and action-value functions (Bell-
man, 1957), they can be approximated by rolling out the model for H time steps. We refer to this
(single sample) estimator as the H-step value expansion, defined as
                                      PH−1
               QH (s, a)= R(s, a) + t=1 γ t (rt − α log π(at |st )) + γ H V π (sH )          (3)

with Q0 (s, a) := Qπ (s, a) and V π (s) = Ea∼π(·|s) [Qπ (s, a) − α log π(a|s)]. For H = 0 this
estimator reduces to the function approximation used in SAC. It is important to note that these
trajectories are on-policy. In practice, the SAC implementation uses a double Q-function (Fujimoto
et al., 2018; Haarnoja et al., 2018), but to keep the notation simple we do not include it here. We
further evaluate the expectation for the next state value function with a single sample, i.e. V π (s′ ) =
Qπ (s′ , a′ ) − log π(a′ |s′ ) with a′ ∼ π( · | s′ ), as done in Haarnoja et al. (2018).


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Actor Expansion. The H-step value expansion can now be used in the actor update by incorpo-
rating Equation 3 in the actor loss (Equation 1)
                       JπH (D) = Es∼D, a∼π(·|s) α log π(a|s) − QH (s, a) ,

                                                                                        (4)
which resembles the class of SVG algorithms (Heess et al., 2015; Byravan et al., 2020; Amos et al.,
2021; Clavera et al., 2020). The difference to the original SVG formulation is the addition of the
entropy term. Note that, for H = 0 this definition reduces to the regular SAC actor loss (Equation 1).
We will refer to the H-step value expansion for the actor update as actor expansion (AE).

Critic Expansion. Incorporating value expansion in the policy evaluation step results in TD-λ
style (Sutton & Barto, 2018; Schulman et al., 2016) or Model-Based Value Expansion (MVE) meth-
ods (Wang et al., 2020; Buckman et al., 2018). The corresponding critic loss is defined as
                                          h                                                    2 i
    JQH (D) = E(s,a,r,s′ )∼D, a′ ∼π(·|s′ ) r + γ(QH (s′ , a′ ) − α log π(a′ |s′ )) − Qπ (s, a)     . (5)

Similar to actor expansion, for H = 0 the critic update reduces to the SAC critic update (Equation 2).
We will refer to the H-step value expansion for the critic update as critic expansion (CE).

Extension to Off-Policy Trajectories. We can naturally extend the action-value expansion
in Equation 3 with the Retrace formulation (Munos et al., 2016), which allows to use off-policy
trajectories collected with a policy µ ̸= π (e.g. stored in a replay buffer). The H-step Retrace
state-action value expansion (single sample) estimator is defined as
                                hP                                             i
                                  H−1 t
  QH retrace (s, a) = R(s, a) +
                                                                                   H
                                  t=1 γ (ct rt + ct−1 V (st ) − ct Q(st , at )) + γ cH−1 V (sH ), (6)
                                              Qt
with the importance sampling weight ct = j=1 λ min (1, π(aj |sj )/µ(aj |sj )) and c0 := 1. We set
λ = 1 for the remainder of this paper. And by definition Q0retrace (s, a) := Qπ (s, a). The Retrace
extension has the desirable property that ct = 1 for on-policy trajectories (i.e. µ = π), and in
that case QH retrace reduces to the H-step action-value target Q
                                                                H
                                                                  (Equation 3, see Appendix A.2 for
a detailed derivation). Furthermore, for H = 0, it reduces to the SAC target. The second desirable
property is that trajectories from the real environment or a dynamics model can be used. Hence, we
use the Retrace formulation to evaluate all combinations of CE and AE with on- and off-policy data
and real and model-generated data. Since Retrace encompasses all the variants we introduced, for
readability, we will from now on overload notation and define QH (s, a) := QH  retrace (s, a).

A natural combination is to use actor and critic expansion simultaneously. However, we analyze each
method separately to better understand their issues. Table A.1 provides an overview of related value
expansion literature and displays further information about their usage of actor and critic expansion
and on- and off-policy data.

3       E MPIRICAL S TUDY
In this experimental section, we investigate the initial research question, how much will more ac-
curate dynamics models increase sample efficiency? In our experimental setup we replace the
learned dynamics model with an oracle model – the environment’s simulator – which is the most
accurate model that could be learned. In this scenario, no model error exists, which lets us exam-
ine the impact of the compounding model error — or rather, the lack of it. In these experiments,
we specifically exclude data augmentation methods, where it is trivial to realize that they can arbi-
trarily benefit from a perfect dynamics model. We conduct a series of empirical studies across the
introduced value expansion algorithms on five standard continuous control benchmark tasks: Invert-
edPendulum, Cartpole SwingUp, Hopper, Walker2d, and Halfcheetah.1 These range from simple to
complex, with the latter three including contact forces, often resulting in discontinuous dynamics.
In the following subsections, we first present the premise of this paper — the two types of dimin-
ishing returns of value expansion methods (Section 3.1). Given the oracle model, we rule out the
existence of a compounding model error and, therefore, possible impacts on the learning perfor-
mance. Next, we turn to the generated H-step target values. We show that the increasing target
    1
        The code is available at: https://github.com/danielpalen/value expansion.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   InvertedPendulum                Cartpole                Hopper                      Walker2d                       Halfcheetah
                 1e2                         1e2                1.5 1e3                        1e3                             1e3
             2                           4                                                2
                                                                1.0                                                        5
(oracle)
SAC-CE


                                                                                                                                                     Return
             1                           2                      0.5                       1
             0                           0                      0.0                       0                                0
                                                                1.5
             2                           4                                                2
(NN model)


                                                                1.0                                                        5
  SAC-CE


                                                                                                                                                     Return
             1                           2                      0.5                       1
             0                           0                      0.0                       0                                0
                                                                1.5
             2                           4                                                2
                                                                1.0
RETRACE


                                                                                                                           5


                                                                                                                                                     Return
  SAC


             1                           2                      0.5                       1
             0                           0                      0.0                       0                                0
                                                                1.5
             2                           4                                                2
                                                                1.0                                                        5
(oracle)
SAC-AE


                                                                                                                                                     Return
             1                           2                      0.5                       1
             0                           0                      0.0                       0                                0
                                                                1.5
             2                           4                                                2
(NN model)


                                                                1.0                                                        5
  SAC-AE


                                                                                                                                                     Return
             1                           2                      0.5                       1
             0                            0                     0.0                        0                               0
                       0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.0       0.5      1.0      0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00           0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00             0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           Env Steps 1e4          Env Steps 1e5            Env Steps 1e6                 Env Steps 1e6                   Env Steps 1e6
                                          SAC H=0        H=1       H=3        H=5      H=10              H=20       H=30


Figure 1: Shows the diminishing return of critic expansion and actor expansion methods using mul-
tiple rollout horizons H for a SAC agent. CE does not benefit noticeably from horizons larger than
5 in most cases. There is no clear trend that CE methods benefit from better models since the neural
network model performs mostly on par with the oracle model. Model-free Retrace performances
comparably. For AE (rows 4 & 5), larger horizons can be detrimental, even with an oracle model.
We plot the average episode undiscounted return mean (solid line) and standard deviation (shaded
area) against the number of real environment interaction steps for 9 random seeds. Some AE runs
for larger H terminate early due to exploding gradients (See Section 3.3).


variance caused by longer rollout horizons is not linked to the diminishing returns (Section 3.2). Fi-
nally, in Section 3.3, we look into the critic and actor gradients. We implement the learned model as
a stochastic neural network ensemble, similar to PETS and MBPO (See Appendix A.3 for details).

3.1              D IMINISHING R ETURNS ON C ONTINUOUS C ONTROL TASKS

Figure 1 shows the learning curves of the different value expansion methods for multiple rollout
horizons and model types based on a SAC agent. Each model-based value expansion method, i.e.,
critic expansion (CE) and actor expansion (AE) is shown with an oracle and a learned model. The
rollout horizons range from very short to long H ∈ [0, 1, 3, 5, 10, 20, 30], where H = 0 reduces to
vanilla SAC. Larger horizons H ≫ 30 are not considered as the computational time complexity be-
comes unfeasible (see Table A.3). In addition to comparing model-based value expansion methods,
Figure 1 also shows learning curves of the model-free value expansion method Retrace.

Diminishing Return of Rollout Horizons. Within short horizons, less than 5 steps, we con-
sistently observe that a single increase in the rollout horizon leads to increased performance in
most cases. However, the rate of improvement quickly decreases with each additional expansion
step (see Figure 1). Close to all variants of SAC reach their peak performance for H = 5. For
more than 5 steps, the sample efficiency and obtained reward do not increase anymore and can even
decrease. We refer to this phenomenon as the diminishing return of rollout horizon. SAC-CE (1st
& 2nd rows) performs better than SAC-AE (4th & 5th rows) for both oracle and learned dynamics
models. While for shorter horizons, the performance is comparable, the performance of SAC-AE
degrades significantly for longer horizons. For SAC-AE, learning becomes unstable, and no good
policy can be learned for most systems using longer horizons. Thus, increasing rollout horizons
does not yield unrivalled sample efficiency gains. As diminishing returns w.r.t. rollout horizon are
observed for the oracle and learned dynamics model, the reduced performance of the longer rollout
horizon cannot be explained by the compounding model errors as hypothesised by prior work.


                                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Diminishing Return of Model Accuracy. When directly comparing the performance of the
learned and the oracle dynamics models, the learning curves are very similar. The learning per-
formance of the learned model is only slightly reduced compared to the oracle model, which is
expected. However, the degraded performance is barely visible for most systems when comparing
the learning curves. This trend can be observed across most environments, algorithms and hori-
zons. Therefore, the reduced model accuracy and the subsequent compounding model error do not
appear to significantly impact the sample efficiency of the presented value expansion methods. We
conclude that one cannot expect large gains in sample efficiency with value expansion methods by
further investing in developing more accurate dynamics models. This is not to say that poor dynam-
ics models do not harm the learning performance of value expansion methods. Rather, we observe
that overcoming the small errors of current models towards oracle dynamics will, at best, result in
small improvements for value expansion methods on the continuous control tasks studied.

Model-free Value Expansion. When comparing the model-based value expansion methods to
the model-free value expansion methods (Figure 1 3rd row), the sample efficiency of the model-
based variant is only marginally better. Similar to the model-based variants, the model-free Retrace
algorithm increases the sample efficiency for shorter horizons but decreases in performance for
longer horizons. This minor difference between both approaches becomes especially surprising as
the model-based value expansion methods introduce a large computational overhead. While the
model-free variant only utilizes the collected experience, the model-based variant requires learning
a parametric model and unrolling this model at each update of the critic and the actor. Empirically
the model-free variant is up to 15× faster in wall-clock time compared to the model-based value
expansion at H = 5. Therefore, model-free value expansion methods are a very strong baseline to
model-based value expansion methods, especially when considering the computational overhead.

3.2   I NCREASING VARIANCE OF QH (s, a) DOES NOT E XPLAIN D IMINISHING R ETURNS

One explanation for the diminishing returns could be the increasing variance of the Q-function tar-
gets as SAC estimates QH (s, a) by rolling out a model with a stochastic policy. This unrolling
can be seen as traversing a Markov reward process for H steps, for which it is well known that the
target estimator’s variance increases linearly with H, similar to the REINFORCE policy gradient
algorithm (Pflug, 1996; Carvalho et al., 2021). We also observed the increase in variance of the Q-
function targets empirically when increasing the horizon. The experiments highlighting the increase
in variance are described in Appendix A.4. To test whether the increased variance of the value ex-
pansion targets explains the diminishing returns, we conduct the following two experiments. First,
we perform the same experiments as in Section 3.1 with DDPG. As DDPG uses a deterministic pol-
icy and the oracle dynamics are deterministic, increasing the horizon does not increase the variance
of the Q-function targets. Second, we use variance reduction when computing the targets with SAC
by averaging over multiple particles per target.

Deterministic Policies. Figure 2 shows the learning curves of DDPG for the same systems and
horizons as Figure 1. Since both the oracle dynamics and the policy are deterministic, increasing the
horizon does not increase the variance of the Q-function targets. DDPG shows the same diminishing
returns as SAC. When increasing the horizon, the gain in sample efficiency decreases with each ad-
ditional step. Longer horizons are not consistently better than shorter horizons. For longer horizons,
the obtained reward frequently collapses, similar to SAC. Therefore, the increasing variance in the
Q-function targets cannot explain the diminishing returns.

Variance Reduction through Particles. To reduce the Q-function target variance when using
SAC, we average the computed target QH (s, a) over multiple particles per target estimation. For
SAC-CE, we used 30 particles and 10 particles for SAC-AE. The corresponding learning curves
are shown in Figure 3. Comparing the experiments with variance reduction with the prior results
from Figure 1, there is no qualitative difference in training performance. Increasing the horizons
by one additional step does not necessarily yield better sample efficiency. As in the previous ex-
periments, for longer horizons, the learning curves frequently collapse, and the performance dete-
riorates even with the oracle dynamics model and averaging over multiple particles. Therefore, the
increasing variance of the SAC Q-function targets does not explain the diminishing returns of value
expansion methods.


                                                  6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     InvertedPendulum                   Cartpole              Hopper                      Walker2d                   Halfcheetah
                 1e2                          1e2                  1.5 1e3                      1e3                           1e3
             2                            4                                                 2
                                                                   1.0
DDPG-CE
                                                                                                                          5
(oracle)


                                                                                                                                                    Return
             1                            2                        0.5                      1
             0                            0                        0.0                      0                             0
                                                                   1.5
             2                            4                                                 2
(NN model)


                                                                   1.0
 DDPG-CE



                                                                                                                          5


                                                                                                                                                    Return
             1                            2                        0.5                      1
             0                            0                        0.0                      0                             0
                                                                   1.5
             2                            4                                                 2
                                                                   1.0
RETRACE


                                                                                                                          5


                                                                                                                                                    Return
 DDPG


             1                            2                        0.5                      1
             0                            0                        0.0                      0                             0
                                                                   1.5
             2                            4                                                 2
                                                                   1.0
DDPG-AE


                                                                                                                          5
(oracle)


                                                                                                                                                    Return
             1                            2                        0.5                      1
             0                            0                        0.0                      0                             0
                                                                   1.5
             2                            4                                                 2
(NN model)


                                                                   1.0
 DDPG-AE


                                                                                                                          5


                                                                                                                                                    Return
             1                            2                        0.5                      1
             0                            0                      0.0                         0                            0
                       0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0.0        0.5      1.0       0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00           0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           Env Steps 1e4           Env Steps 1e5             Env Steps 1e6                Env Steps 1e6                 Env Steps 1e6
                                          DDPG H=0         H=1       H=3         H=5      H=10             H=20      H=30


Figure 2: Similar to Figure 1, this plot shows the diminishing return of critic expansion and actor
expansion methods using multiple rollout horizons H but for a DDPG agent. We notice the same
behaviours, where CE does not benefit noticeably from larger horizons in most cases. There is also
no clear trend that CE methods benefit from better models since the neural network model per-
forms mostly on par with the oracle model. Again, model-free Retrace performance is comparable.
Rows 4 & 5 show that for AE, larger horizons can be detrimental for DDPG as well, even with
an oracle model. We plot the average episode undiscounted return mean (solid line) and standard
deviation (shaded area) against the number of real environment interaction steps for 9 random seeds.
Some AE runs for larger H terminate early due to exploding gradients (See Section 3.3).


                     InvertedPendulum                   Cartpole              Hopper                      Walker2d                   Halfcheetah
                     1e2                          1e2               1.5 1e3                         1e3                           1e3
                 2                            4                                                 2
                                                                    1.0                                                       5
(oracle)
SAC-CE


                 1                            2                     0.5                         1
                 0                            0                     0.0                         0                             0
                     1e2                          1e2               1.5 1e3                         1e3                           1e3
                 2                            4                                                 2
                                                                    1.0                                                       5
(oracle)
SAC-AE


                 1                            2                     0.5                         1
                 0                         0                        0.0                       0                           0
                              0.5      1.0 0.0    0.5      1.0                   0.5      1.0                0.5      1.0          0.5      1.0
                           Env Steps 1e4       Env Steps 1e5                  Env Steps 1e6               Env Steps 1e6         Env Steps 1e6
                                    SAC H=0      H=1         H=3                H=5          H=10              H=20        H=30

Figure 3: Variance reduction through particles for SAC-CE and SAC-AE experiments. Each Q-
function target is averaged over multiple particles to reduce the variance (30 particles for SAC-
CE and 10 for SAC-AE). Compared to experiments from Figure 1, we see that variance reduction
gives the same qualitative training performance. Therefore, the increased variance of the Q-function
targets is not the root cause of the diminishing returns in value expansion.



3.3                  I MPACT ON THE G RADIENTS

Lastly, we analyze the gradient statistics during training to observe whether the gradient deteriorates
for longer horizons. The gradient variance for a subset of environments and different horizons is
shown in Figure 4. In the Appendix, the gradient mean and variance is shown for all environments,


                                                                              7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 100
                             Cartpole (oracle)              Cartpole (NN)             Halfcheetah (oracle)     Halfcheetah (NN)

SAC-CE Critic
  Grad Std      10 2


                 100
SAC-AE Actor
  Grad Std


                10 2

                       0.0         0.5            1.0 0.0       0.5          1.0             0.5         1.0         0.5           1.0
                                 Env Steps       1e5          Env Steps     1e5            Env Steps    1e6        Env Steps      1e6

                                   SAC H=0           H=1        H=3             H=5       H=10         H=20     H=30

Figure 4: Critic and actor gradient’s standard deviation for Cartpole and Halfcheetah and different
rollout horizons with both an oracle dynamics model and a learned dynamics model. (a) We observe
that the SAC-CE critic gradients show low variance. (b) We see that the SAC-AE actor gradient
variance explodes for Halfcheetah with longer horizons. In this Figure, we clip values to 100 , which
becomes necessary for visualizing longer horizons on the Halfcheetah due to exploding gradients.


including both SAC and DDPG. See Figure A.3 & A.4 for all SAC experiments and Figure A.5 &
A.6 for the DDPG experiments.

Critic Expansion Gradients. The first row of Figure 4 shows the SAC-CE critic gradient’s stan-
dard deviation (averaged over a replay buffer batch), over all dimensions of the Q-function parame-
ter space, along the training procedure of SAC-CE. For all environments and horizons, the gradient
mean and standard deviation appear within reasonable orders of magnitude (also compare Figure A.3
in the Appendix). Although, as expected, we observe a slight increase in the standard deviation with
an increasing horizon for both the oracle and the learned neural network model. The mean is around
zero (10−5 ) and the standard deviation between 10−3 and 10−1 . Therefore, for both SAC-CE and
DDPG-CE there is no clear signal in the gradient’s mean or standard deviation that links to the di-
minishing returns of CE methods. The little difference w.r.t. horizon length is expected because
the critic gradient ∇Q JQH of the loss (Equation 5) is only differentiating through Qπ in the squared
loss since QH (s′ , a′ ) is assumed to be a fixed target, which is a common assumption in most RL
algorithms (Ernst et al., 2005; Riedmiller, 2005; Mnih et al., 2013).

Actor Expansion Gradients. The second row of Figure 4 shows the actor gradient’s standard
deviation (averaged over a replay buffer batch), over all dimensions of the policy parameter space,
along the training process for SAC-AE. Contrary to CE, AE backpropagates through the whole
rollout trajectory to compute the gradient w.r.t. the policy parameters. This type of recursive com-
putational graph is well known to be susceptible to vanishing or exploding gradients (Pascanu et al.,
2013). Comparing rows four and five of Figure 1, we observe that a better dynamics model does
not directly translate into faster learning or higher rewards since both the oracle and neural network
model show the same effect – lower returns for larger horizons. For SAC-AE we partially corre-
late these results with the actor gradients in Figure 4. For example, the standard deviation of the
Halfcheetah actor gradients explodes for horizons larger or equal to 3 for the oracle and 20 for the
learned models. This problem of exploding gradients can also be seen in the Hopper environment
using learned dynamics (Appendix Figure A.4). This increase in variance can be correlated with
the lower returns as SAC-AE frequently fails to solve the tasks for long horizons. A similar phe-
nomenon can be seen in the DDPG-AE experiments as well, where the policy and oracle dynamics
are deterministic. Therefore, increasing the horizon must be done with care even if a better model
does not suffer from compounding model errors. For AE, building a very accurate differentiable
model that predicts into the future might not be worth it due to gradient instability. For AE, it might
only be possible to expand for a few steps before requiring additional methods to handle gradient
variance (Parmas et al., 2018).


                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4   C ONCLUSION & F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we answer the question of whether dynamics model errors are the main limitation for
improving the sample efficiency of model-based value expansion methods. Our evaluations focus
on value expansion methods as for model-based data augmentation (i.e. Dyna-style RL algorithms)
approaches clearly benefit from a perfect model. By using an oracle dynamics model and thus
avoiding model errors altogether, our experiments show that for infinite horizon, continuous state-
and action space problems with deterministic dynamics, the benefits of better dynamics models for
value-expansion methods yield diminishing returns. More specifically, we observe the diminishing
return of model accuracy and diminishing return of rollout horizon. (1) More accurate dynamics
models do not significantly increase the sample efficiency of model-based value expansion methods,
as the sample efficiency of the oracle dynamics model and learned dynamics models are comparable.
(2) Increasing the rollout horizons by an additional step yields decreasing gains in sample efficiency
at best. The gains in sample efficiency quickly plateau for longer horizons, even for oracle mod-
els, without compounding model error. For some environments, longer horizons even hurt sample
efficiency. Furthermore, we observe that model-free value expansion delivers on-par performance
compared to model-based methods without adding any additional computational overhead. There-
fore making the model-free value expansion methods a very strong baseline. Overall, our results
suggest that the computational overhead of model-based value expansion often outweighs the ben-
efits of model-based value expansion methods, compared to model-free value expansion methods,
especially in cases where computational resources are limited.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by the Hessian Ministry of Science and the Arts (HMWK) through the
projects “The Third Wave of Artificial Intelligence - 3AI” and Hessian.AI. Calculations for this
research were conducted on the Lichtenberg high-performance computer of the TU Darmstadt. João
Carvalho is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (project IKIDA,
01IS20045).

R EFERENCES
Zaheer Abbas, Samuel Sokota, Erin Talvitie, and Martha White. Selective dyna-style planning under
  limited model capacity. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Brandon Amos, Samuel Stanton, Denis Yarats, and Andrew Gordon Wilson. On the model-based
  stochastic value gradient for continuous reinforcement learning. In Learning for Dynamics and
  Control, 2021.
Richard Bellman. Dynamic Programming. Princeton University Press, 1 edition, 1957.
Jacob Buckman, Danijar Hafner, George Tucker, Eugene Brevdo, and Honglak Lee. Sample-
  efficient reinforcement learning with stochastic ensemble value expansion. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Arunkumar Byravan, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Roland Hafner, Michael Ne-
  unert, Thomas Lampe, Noah Siegel, Nicolas Heess, and Martin Riedmiller. Imagined value gra-
  dients: Model-based policy optimization with tranferable latent dynamics models. In Conference
  on Robot Learning, 2020.
João Carvalho, Davide Tateo, Fabio Muratore, and Jan Peters. An empirical analysis of measure-
   valued derivatives for policy gradients. In International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,
   2021.
K.E. Case and R.C. Fair. Principles of Economics. Prentice Hall, 1999.
Kurtland Chua, Roberto Calandra, Rowan McAllister, and Sergey Levine. Deep reinforcement learn-
  ing in a handful of trials using probabilistic dynamics models. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2018.
Ignasi Clavera, Violet Fu, and Pieter Abbeel. Model-augmented actor-critic: Backpropagating
  through paths. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.


                                                  9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alexander I Cowen-Rivers, Daniel Palenicek, Vincent Moens, Mohammed Amin Abdullah, Aivar
  Sootla, Jun Wang, and Haitham Bou-Ammar. Samba: Safe model-based & active reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 111(1):173–203, 2022.
Thomas Degris, Martha White, and Richard S. Sutton. Off-policy actor-critic. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2012.
Marc Deisenroth and Carl E Rasmussen. Pilco: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy
 search. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2011.
Marc Peter Deisenroth, Gerhard Neumann, Jan Peters, et al. A survey on policy search for robotics.
 Foundations and Trends in Robotics, 2(1–2):1–141, 2013.
Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, and Louis Wehenkel. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning.
  Journal of Machine Learning Research, 6:503–556, 2005.
Vladimir Feinberg, Alvin Wan, Ion Stoica, Michael I. Jordan, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Sergey
  Levine. Model-based value estimation for efficient model-free reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Roy Fox, Ari Pakman, and Naftali Tishby. Taming the Noise in Reinforcement Learning via Soft
  Updates. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2016.
C. Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax - a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation, 2021. URL http:
  //github.com/google/brax.
Scott Fujimoto, Herke Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in actor-
  critic methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Sam Greydanus, Misko Dzamba, and Jason Yosinski. Hamiltonian neural networks. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Haoran Tang, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement learning with
  deep energy-based policies. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2017.
Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Kristian Hartikainen, George Tucker, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, Vikash
  Kumar, Henry Zhu, Abhishek Gupta, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic algo-
  rithms and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.05905, 2018.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Ian Fischer, Ruben Villegas, David Ha, Honglak Lee, and James
  Davidson. Learning latent dynamics for planning from pixels. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2019.
Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning
  behaviors by latent imagination. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Nicolas Heess, Gregory Wayne, David Silver, Timothy Lillicrap, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Learn-
  ing continuous control policies by stochastic value gradients. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2015.
Michael Janner, Justin Fu, Marvin Zhang, and Sergey Levine. When to trust your model: Model-
 based policy optimization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Michael Janner, Igor Mordatch, and Sergey Levine. Gamma-models: Generative temporal difference
 learning for infinite-horizon prediction. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 2020.
Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes. In International Confer-
  ence on Learning Representations, 2014.
Hang Lai, Jian Shen, Weinan Zhang, and Yong Yu. Bidirectional model-based policy optimization.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.


                                               10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Timothy P Lillicrap, Jonathan J Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Michael Lutter, Kim Listmann, and Jan Peters. Deep lagrangian networks for end-to-end learning
 of energy-based control for under-actuated systems. In International Conference on Intelligent
 Robots and Systems, 2019a.
Michael Lutter, Christian Ritter, and Jan Peters. Deep lagrangian networks: Using physics as model
 prior for deep learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019b.
Michael Lutter, Leonard Hasenclever, Arunkumar Byravan, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Piotr Trochim,
 Nicolas Heess, Josh Merel, and Yuval Tassa. Learning dynamics models for model predictive
 agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.14311, 2021a.
Michael Lutter, Johannes Silberbauer, Joe Watson, and Jan Peters. Differentiable physics models for
 real-world offline model-based reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Robotics
 and Automation, 2021b.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan Wier-
  stra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Andrew S Morgan, Daljeet Nandha, Georgia Chalvatzaki, Carlo D’Eramo, Aaron M Dollar, and Jan
  Peters. Model predictive actor-critic: Accelerating robot skill acquisition with deep reinforcement
  learning. In International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2021.
Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-policy
   reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2016.
Duy Nguyen-Tuong and Jan Peters. Model learning for robot control: a survey. Cognitive Process-
  ing, 12(4):319–340, 2011.
Daniel Palenicek. A survey on constraining policy updates using the kl divergence. Reinforcement
  Learning Algorithms: Analysis and Applications, pp. 49–57, 2021.
Paavo Parmas, Carl E Rasmussen, Jan Peters, and Kenji Doya. Pipps: Flexible model-based policy
  search robust to the curse of chaos. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2018.
Razvan Pascanu, Tomas Mikolov, and Yoshua Bengio. On the difficulty of training recurrent neural
  networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2013.
Jan Peters and Stefan Schaal. Natural actor-critic. Neurocomputing, 2008.
Jan Peters, Katharina Mulling, and Yasemin Altun. Relative entropy policy search. In AAAI Con-
  ference on Artificial Intelligence, 2010.
Georg Ch. Pflug. Optimization of Stochastic Models. Springer, 1996.
Martin L Puterman. Markov decision processes: discrete stochastic dynamic programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Carl E Rasmussen and Christopher Williams. Gaussian processes for machine learning. The MIT
  Press, 2006.
Martin A. Riedmiller. Neural fitted Q iteration - first experiences with a data efficient neural rein-
 forcement learning method. In European Conference on Machine Learning, 2005.
Tim Schneider, Boris Belousov, Georgia Chalvatzaki, Diego Romeres, Devesh K Jha, and Jan Peters.
  Active exploration for robotic manipulation. In International Conference on Intelligent Robots
  and Systems, 2022.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.

                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2014.
Richard S Sutton. Integrated architectures for learning, planning, and reacting based on approximat-
  ing dynamic programming. Machine Learning, 1990.
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. The MIT Press,
  2018.
Richard S. Sutton, David A. McAllester, Satinder Singh, and Yishay Mansour. Policy gradient meth-
  ods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 1999.
Cédric Villani. Optimal transport: old and new, volume 338. Springer, 2009.
Junjie Wang, Qichao Zhang, Dongbin Zhao, Mengchen Zhao, and Jianye Hao. Dynamic hori-
  zon value estimation for model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09593,
  2020.
P.J. Werbos. Backpropagation through time: what it does and how to do it. Proceedings of the IEEE,
   78(10):1550–1560, 1990. doi: 10.1109/5.58337.
Chenjun Xiao, Yifan Wu, Chen Ma, Dale Schuurmans, and Martin Müller. Learning to combat
  compounding-error in model-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11206,
  2019.
Brian D. Ziebart, Andrew L. Maas, J. Andrew Bagnell, and Anind K. Dey. Maximum entropy
  inverse reinforcement learning. In Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2008.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    R ELATED W ORK


Table A.1: Overview of key related literature. We categorize model-based RL algorithms using value
expansion in the actor and/or critic update, and further note which ones use on-policy trajectories
resulting from a dynamics model and which use off-policy trajectories from a replay buffer.

                                                                       Expansion           Policy
                     Algorithm
                                                                      Actor Critic        On Off
                     SVG (Heess et al., 2015)                          ×                              ×
                     IVG (Byravan et al., 2020)                        ×                  ×
                     SAC-SVG (Amos et al., 2021)                       ×                  ×
                     MAAC (Clavera et al., 2020)                       ×                  ×
                     MVE (Feinberg et al., 2018)                                ×         ×
                     STEVE (Buckman et al., 2018)                               ×         ×
                     Retrace (Munos et al., 2016)                               ×                     ×
                     Dreamer (Hafner et al., 2020)                     ×        ×         ×


A.2    F ROM R ETRACE TO O N -P OLICY H- STEP VALUE E XPANSION

In this section, we show how Retrace reduces to the H-step value expansion target (Equation 3)
in the on-policy case, with λ = 1. First, we perform a simple rewrite from the original Retrace
formulation in Munos et al. (2016) such that it is more in line with the notation in this paper. Note
that in Retrace, the rollouts are generated with a policy µ. While the value function V π corresponds
to the current policy π.
                                              "H                                                                          #
                                               X
QH
 retrace (s0 , a0 ) = Q(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼µ
                                                         t                      π
                                                        γ ct (R(st , at ) + γV (st+1 ) − Q(st , at )) s0 , a0
                                                  t=0
                             "" H                                           #   "H                                 #              #
                               X                                                 X
                                          t                                                   t+1       π
    = Q(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼µ              γ ct (R(st , at ) − Q(st , at )) +                γ         ct V (st+1 )       s0 , a0
                                  t=0                                               t=0
                             "" H                                           #   "H+1                          #               #
                               X                                                 X
                                          t                                                   t           π
    = Q(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼µ              γ ct (R(st , at ) − Q(st , at )) +                γ ct−1 V (st )           s0 , a0
                                  t=0                                               t=1
                             "                                          #
                                 0
    = Q(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼µ γ c0 (R(s0 , a0 ) − Q(s0 , a0 ))
                             "" H                                           #   "H                            ##
                               X                                                 X
                                          t                                                   t         π
                  + Eat ∼µ              γ ct (R(st , at ) − Q(st , at )) +                γ ct−1 V (st )
                                  t=1                                               t=1
                             "                               #
                                 H+1          π
                  + Eat ∼µ γ            cH V (sH+1 )

    = Q(s0 , a0 ) + R(s0 , a0 ) − Q(s0 , a0 )
                           "H                                                                          #
                            X
                                  t                                  t      π          H+1     π
                  + Eat ∼µ       γ ct (R(st , at ) − Q(st , at )) + γ ct−1 V (st ) + γ     cH V (sH+1 )
                                 t=1
                             "H                                                                                                       #
                              X
    = R(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼µ             γ t (ct R(st , at ) + ct−1 V π (st ) − ct Q(st , at )) + γ H+1 cH V π (sH+1 )
                                 t=1


                                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now, when λ = 1 the importance sampling weights all become ct = 1 and we get
                          "H                                                                #
                           X
   = R(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼µ    γ t (R(st , at ) + V π (st ) − Q(st , at )) + γ H+1 V π (sH+1 )
                                     t=1
                                    "H                                                                                  #
                                     X
                                            t
      = R(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼µ               γ (R(st , at ) + Eât ∼π [Q(st , ât ) − α log π(ât |st )] − Q(st , at ))
                           t=1
                      H+1 π
                   +γ    V (sH+1 )
                        H
                        X
      = R(s0 , a0 ) +         γ t (Eat ∼µ [R(st , at )] + Eât ∼π [Q(st , ât )]
                        t=1
                                    − Eât ∼π [α log π(ât |st )] − Eat ∼µ [Q(st , at )]) + γ H+1 V π (sH+1 )
Since µ = π, the expectations over Q are identical and it further reduces to
                           H
                           X
         = R(s0 , a0 ) +            γ t (Eat ∼π [R(st , at )] − Eat ∼π [α log π(at |st )]) + γ H+1 V π (sH+1 )
                              t=1
                                       "H                                                               #
                                        X
         = R(s0 , a0 ) + Eat ∼π                  γ t (R(st , at ) − α log π(at |st )) + γ H+1 V (sH+1 ) .
                                           t=1

Finally, we see that in the on-policy case with λ = 1, the Retrace target reduces to the regular SAC
H-step value expansion target from Equation 3.

A.3    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS

This section provides detailed information regarding policy and Q-function networks, as well as the
learned dynamics model. Further, we include hyperparameters of the training procedure.

Policy Representation. The policy is represented by a neural network. It consists of two hidden
layers with 256 neurons each and ReLU activations. The network outputs a mean vector and a per-
dimension standard deviation vector which are then used to parameterize a diagonal multivariate
Gaussian.

Q-function Representation. To represent the Q-function we use a double Q network. Each net-
work has two hidden layers with 256 neurons each and ReLU activations and outputs a single scalar
Q value. The minimum of the two Q networks is taken in critic and actor targets.

Learned Dynamics Model. The learned dynamics model is a reimplementation of the one intro-
duced in Janner et al. (2019). It is an ensemble of 5 neural networks with 4 hidden layers with 256
neurons each and ReLU activations. To generate a prediction, one of the networks from the ensem-
ble is sampled uniformly at random. The selected network then predicts mean and log variance over
the change in state. This change is added to the current state to get the prediction for the next state.

Hyperparameters for Training. For a fair comparison, hyperparameters are shared across SAC
and DDPG for the different expansion methods. In Table A.2 we report the hyperparameters across
all experiments.

Computation Times. We report some of the computation times for the reader to get a better grasp
of the computational complexity. Even though our GPU-only implementation using Brax (Freeman
et al., 2021) is much more efficient than having a CPU-based simulator and transferring data back
and forth to the GPU, the computational complexity of rolling out the physics simulator in the inner
training loop, is still significant. This relates to complexity in computation time as well as VRAM
requirements. Table A.3 shows the computation times on an NVIDIA A100 GPU.


                                                              14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table A.2: Hyperparameters used for SAC and DDPG training. Note, that DDPG does not use the
α learning rate due to its deterministic policy.

                         Inverted
 Parameter                                Cartpole         Hopper           Walker2d      HalfCheetah
                        Pendulum
 policy learning rate                                        3e−4
 critic learning rate                                        3e−4
 α learning rate                                             5e−5
 target network τ                                            0.005
 Retrace λ                                                       1
 number parallel envs                1                                        128
 min replay size                    512                                       216
 minibatch size                                      256                                    512
 discount γ                0.95                             0.99                            0.95
 action repeat                 4                                 2                           1


Table A.3: Computation times of the training with oracle dynamics. The computational overhead
dominates for short horizons already.

  H                        0         1          3            5         10           20       30
  InvertedPendulum
  SAC-CE                  6m         8m        10m         12m        18m           28m      42m
  SAC-AE                  6m        14m        30m         42m         1h            2h       3h
  Retrace                 6m         6m         7m          8m        10m           14m      18m
  Hopper & Walker2d
  SAC-CE                 20m       1h20m     2h30m         5h30m     10h30m     20h20m     30h20m
  SAC-AE                 20m       9h 40m     35h           55h       114h       167h       278h
  Retrace                20m        20m       22m           23m        27m        30m        40m
  HalfCheetah
  SAC-CE                 40m       3h15m     5h 40m         13h        25h          49h      77h
  SAC-AE                 40m        30h        62h         100h       168h            -       -
  Retrace                40m        41m       45m          50m        52m            1h     1h30m


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.4                  TARGET D ISTRIBUTIONS AND I NCREASING VARIANCE

As mentioned in the main paper, SAC estimates QH (s, a) by rolling out a model with a stochas-
tic policy. This can be seen as traversing a Markov reward process for H steps, for which it
is well known that the target estimator’s variance increases linearly with H. At the same time,
the value expansion targets with oracle dynamics should model the true return distribution bet-
ter. In order to confirm this, we compare the true return distribution, approximated by particles
of infinite horizon Monte   Carlo returns, to the
                                                  targets produced  by different rollout horizons us-
          = Es,a∼D DW Q∞
       H
                                                   H
ing DW                        p  (s, a) p=1...P
                                                 Q p (s, a) p=1...P
                                                                       , where DW is the Wasserstein
distance (Villani, 2009), P = 100 particles per target (to model the distribution over targets).
Q∞ (s, a) is the true Monte Carlo return to compare against (for computational reasons we use
a rollout horizon of 300 steps). Finally, we evaluate the expectation of this estimator over 104
samples (s, a) ∼ D drawn from the replay buffer. We repeat this analysis for all horizons and
25 checkpoints along the vanilla SAC training. Figure A.1 2nd row shows that with increasing
             H
horizons DW    decreases , i.e., as expected, longer rollouts do indeed capture the true return dis-
tribution better. The 3rd and 4th row of Figure A.1 depict the expectation of the target values
particles over a replay buffer batch Es,a∼D [E[{QH p (s, a)}p=1..P ]], and the corresponding variance
Es,a∼D [Var[{Qp (s, a)}p=1..P ]]. The expected values of the target distribution QH are very similar
                 H

for different horizons. This observation means that the approximated Q0 -function already captures
the true return very well and, therefore, a model-based expansion only marginally improves the tar-
gets in expectation. The 4th row shows, however, that the variance over targets increases by orders
of magnitude with the increasing horizon (darker lines have larger variance).

                       InvertedPendulum                    Cartpole                       Hopper                           Walker2d                           Halfcheetah
                     1e2                             1e2                            1e3                            1e3                                 1e4
                                                 4                                                             2                                 1.0
                 2
  Return


                                                                               1
                 1                               2                                                             1                                 0.5

                 0                               0                             0                               0
    (Q |QH)


               100                           101                                                             101
                                                                           101                                                                101

              10 1                           100
 DW
  H


                                             102
                                                                           102                                                                102
 [ [Q H ]]


               101                                                                                           102
                                             101
                                                                           10   1                                                             101
                                                                                                             101
                                             100

               100                                                                                           102                              102
 [V [Q H ]]


                                                                           102
                                             100                                                                                              101
              10 2                                                         100                               100
                                            10 2                                                                                              100

                     0.0       0.5         1.0       0.0       0.5       1.0        0.0       0.5       1.0        0.0         0.5         1.0         0.0        0.5         1.0
                           Env Steps     1e5               Env Steps   1e6                Env Steps   1e7                  Env Steps     1e7                                1e7

                                   SAC           H=0          H=1         H=3             H=5         H=10               H=20          H=30              H=



Figure A.1: Analysis of H-step targets for multiple checkpoints along the training process. The first
row shows the undiscounted episodic return of SAC along training for one seed. The checkpoints
along this single training run are used for the analyses in the following rows. The second row
shows the Wasserstein distance between the sample-based target distribution predicted by the H-
step estimator and the true target distribution represented by Monte Carlo samples. Rows three and
four display the mean and variance over particles of the sample-based target distributions. The mean
targets for different horizons are roughly equal, while the variance increases with the horizon.


                                                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.5          A NALYSIS OF D ISCOUNT FACTOR

Another hypothesis for the source of the diminishing return could be the discount factor γ. Fig-
ure A.2 shows a line of initial experiments with an ablation over different discount factors on the
InvertedPendulum environment. The phenomenon of diminishing returns is obvious in all experi-
ments no matter the discount factor. We also do not see a correlation between the diminishing return
and the discount factor γ in these experiments. This leads us to believe that the discount factor is not
the source of diminishing returns. Further experiments and a formal investigation are left to future
work.

                           = 0.9                    = 0.95                       = 0.99                        = 1.0
                 1e2                          1e2                      1e2                             1e2
           1.5                            2                        2                               2
(oracle)


           1.0
SAC-CE


                                          1                        1                               1
           0.5
           0.0                             0                       0                               0
                       0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00     0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00           0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           Env Steps 1e4           Env Steps 1e4                 Env Steps 1e4                Env Steps 1e4
                                   H=0     H=1       H=3       H=5            H=10         H=20         H=30

Figure A.2: Ablation of different discount factors γ on the InvertedPendulum. The discount factor
does not appear to influence the diminishing returns and, therefore, the discount factor does not seem
to be the source of diminishing returns.


                                                              17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6                                       G RADIENT E XPERIMENTS

Figures A.3, A.4, A.5 and A.6 show critic and actor gradients’ mean and standard deviation for the
different expansion methods of SAC and DDPG, respectively.

A.6.1                                          SAC C RITIC E XPANSION G RADIENTS

                                              1e 3 H=0                   H=1                  H=3                H=5                H=10                 H=20                 H=30        1e 2
                                         0                                                                                                                                                 1.5
Pendulum
 Inverted
  (oracle)


                                         1                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 3          1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                 1e4 1e 2
(NN model)
 Pendulum


                                         0
  Inverted


                                                                                                                                                                                           5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5
                                         2
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 3          1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                 1e4 1.0
                                         0
Pendulum
RETRACE
 Inverted


                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                         1                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 3          1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                 1e4 1e1.5 1
  Cartpole
  (oracle)


                                         0                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                         1                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                              0.0   0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0
                                               1e 3         1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                 1e5 1e 1
                                         1
  (NN model)
   Cartpole


                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                         0
                                         1                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                              0.0   0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0
                                               1e 4         1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                 1e5 1e 2
                                         0                                                                                                                                                 1.5
  RETRACE
  Cartpole


                                         1                                                                                                                                                 1.0
                                              0.0   0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0
                                               1e 3         1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                 1e5 1e 1
                                        0.0
  (oracle)
  Hopper


                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 3          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                 1e6 1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1e
  (NN model)


                                         0                                                                                                                                                 5.0
    Hopper


                                         1                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 4          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                 1e6 1e 1
                                        0.0
  RETRACE


                                                                                                                                                                                           3
   Hopper


                                        2.5                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 2          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                 1e6
  Walker2d


                                         0
  (oracle)


                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                         1                                                                                                                                                 0.5
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 3          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                 1e6 1e 1
                                         0
  (NN model)


                                                                                                                                                                                           7.5
   Walker2d


                                                                                                                                                                                           5.0
                                         2                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 2          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                 1e6 51e1
                                        2.5
  Walker2d
  RETRACE


                                        0.0
                                        2.5                                                                                                                                                0
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 3          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                 1e6 1e 1
                                         0
  Halfcheetah Halfcheetah Halfcheetah


                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                            (oracle)


                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                         5
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0
                                              1e 2          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                 1e6 1e 1
                                                                                                                                                                                           5.0
   RETRACE (NN model)


                                         1
                                         0                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                         1
                                                     0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                              1e 4          1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 2
                                         0                                                                                                                                                  7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                            5.0
                                         2                                                                                                                                                  2.5
                                                    0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0       0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                                  Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6      Env Steps 1e6       Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6
                                                                                                   gradient mean        gradient std

Figure A.3: These plots show the critic’s gradients mean and standard deviation of SAC-CE for
all environments and all rollout horizons. The values are in reasonable orders of magnitude and,
therefore, the diminishing returns in SAC-CE cannot be explained via the critic gradients.


                                                                                                                18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6.2                                         SAC ACTOR E XPANSION G RADIENTS

                                             1e 3 H=0                     H=1                  H=3                 H=5                 H=10                H=20                 H=30         1e 2
Pendulum                                1                                                                                                                                                     2
 Inverted
  (oracle)
                                        0                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                             1e 4            1e4                  1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                  1e4 1e 3
(NN model)



                                                                                                                                                                                              4
 Pendulum
  Inverted


                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                              2
                                        1
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                             1e 4            1e4                  1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                  1e4 1e1.52
                                        2
  Cartpole
  (oracle)


                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                        0                                                                                                                                                     0.5
                                             0.0   0.5        1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0
                                              1e 4           1e5                  1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                  1e5 1e 2
  (NN model)
   Cartpole


                                        5                                                                                                                                                       5
                                        0                                                                                                                                                       0
                                             0.0   0.5        1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0
                                              1e 4           1e5                  1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                  1e5 1e 2
                                       2.5
  (oracle)
  Hopper


                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                       0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       2.5                   1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e2
                                                                                                                                                                                              1
  (NN model)
    Hopper


                                       0.0
                                       2.5                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                             1e 3            1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 2
                                        0                                                                                                                                                     5.0
  Walker2d
  (oracle)


                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                        1
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                             1e 1            1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e1
                          (NN model)
  Halfcheetah Halfcheetah Walker2d


                                        0                                                                                                                                                       2.5
                                        5                                                                                                                                                       0.0
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                             1e2             1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e2
                                        1                                                                                                                                                     1.05
                (oracle)


                                        0                                                                                                                                                     1.00
                                        1                                                                                                                                                     0.95
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                             1e2             1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e2
                                        1                                                                                                                                                     1
  (NN model)


                                        0
                                        1                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                     0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                                   Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6       Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6       Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6
                                                                                                     gradient mean         gradient std


Figure A.4: These plots show the actor’s gradients mean and standard deviation of SAC-AE for all
environments and all rollout horizons. For readability, we clip large gradients to 102 (Halfchee-
tah environment). Even though the gradients’ mean have reasonable values (close to zero), except
for the Halfcheetah environment, the standard deviation shows spikes and abnormal values for in-
creasing rollout horizons, e.g., note the spikes in the standard deviation in the Hopper (NN model)
experiments for horizons 20 and 30 (row 6, last two columns), which go up to the clipped value of
102 . These increase in variance can be correlated with the lower return in Figure 1 (row 5, col 3).


                                                                                                                  19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6.3                                       DDPG C RITIC E XPANSION G RADIENTS

                                                 H=0                H=1                  H=3                H=5                H=10                 H=20                 H=30
Pendulum                                5 1e 5                                                                                                                                        1e 3
                                                                                                                                                                                       7.5
 Inverted
  (oracle)
                                        0                                                                                                                                              5.0
                                        5                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                  1e4 1e 2
(NN model)
 Pendulum
  Inverted


                                        0                                                                                                                                              5
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                  1e4 1e 3
                                                                                                                                                                                       4
Pendulum
RETRACE
 Inverted


                                        0                                                                                                                                              2
                                        5
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                  1e4 1e 2
  Cartpole
  (oracle)


                                        0                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                          0.0  0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                  1e5 1e 2
  (NN model)
   Cartpole


                                        0                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0.0
                                          0.0  0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                  1e5 1e 2
  RETRACE
  Cartpole


                                        0                                                                                                                                              2
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0
                                          0.0  0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                  1e5 1e 1
  (oracle)
  Hopper


                                        0                                                                                                                                              2
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 1
  (NN model)
    Hopper


                                        0                                                                                                                                              2
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0
                                                 0.5    1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e5 1
  RETRACE
   Hopper


                                        0
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 1
                                                                                                                                                                                       2
  Walker2d
  (oracle)


                                        0
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 1
  (NN model)


                                                                                                                                                                                       2
   Walker2d


                                        0
                                        5                                                                                                                                              0
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e1
  Walker2d
  RETRACE


                                        0                                                                                                                                                1
                                        5                                                                                                                                                0
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e1.0 1
  Halfcheetah Halfcheetah Halfcheetah
                            (oracle)


                                        0                                                                                                                                                0.5
                                        5
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 1
   RETRACE (NN model)


                                                                                                                                                                                       1.0
                                        0                                                                                                                                              0.5
                                        5
                                                 0.5    1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0        0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                        5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 2
                                        0                                                                                                                                              5
                                        5                                                                                                                                                0
                                               0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0       0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                             Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6      Env Steps 1e6       Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6
                                                                                              gradient mean        gradient std


Figure A.5: These plots show the critic’s gradients mean and standard deviation of DDPG-CE for
all environments and all rollout horizons. The values are in reasonable orders of magnitude and,
therefore, the diminishing returns in DDPG-CE cannot be explained via the critic gradients.


                                                                                                           20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6.4                                      DDPG ACTOR E XPANSION G RADIENTS

                                                H=0                H=1                  H=3                 H=5                 H=10                H=20                 H=30
Pendulum                               5 1e 5                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                                                                          1e2
 Inverted
  (oracle)
                                       0
                                       5                                                                                                                                               0
                                              0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e4                  1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                  1e4 1e1
                                                                                                                                                                                       5
(NN model)
 Pendulum
  Inverted


                                       0
                                       5                                                                                                                                               0
                                                0.5    1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e4                  1e4                  1e4                 1e4                 1e4                  1e4                  1e4 1e 3
  Cartpole
  (oracle)


                                       0                                                                                                                                               5
                                       5                                                                                                                                               0
                                         0.0  0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e5                  1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                  1e5 1e 1
  (NN model)
   Cartpole


                                       0                                                                                                                                               1
                                       5                                                                                                                                               0
                                         0.0  0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5     1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0 0.0     0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e5                  1e5                  1e5                 1e5                 1e5                  1e5                  1e5 1e 1
  (oracle)
  Hopper


                                       0                                                                                                                                                 5
                                       5                                                                                                                                                 0
                                              0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6
  (NN model)
    Hopper


                                       0                                                                                                                                                 2
                                       5                                                                                                                                               0
                                              0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 2
  Walker2d
  (oracle)


                                       0                                                                                                                                                 2.5
                                       5                                                                                                                                                 0.0
                                              0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e 2
                          (NN model)
  Halfcheetah Halfcheetah Walker2d


                                       0                                                                                                                                               1
                                       5                                                                                                                                               0
                                              0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e2
                                                                                                                                                                                       1.05
                (oracle)


                                       0                                                                                                                                               1.00
                                       5                                                                                                                                               0.95
                                                0.5    1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5     1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                       5 1e 5         1e6                  1e6                  1e6                 1e6                 1e6                  1e6                  1e6 1e1
  (NN model)


                                                                                                                                                                                       1
                                       0
                                       5                                                                                                                                                 0
                                              0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0        0.5      1.0         0.5      1.0
                                            Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6       Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6       Env Steps 1e6        Env Steps 1e6
                                                                                              gradient mean         gradient std


Figure A.6: These plots show the actor’s gradients mean and standard deviation of DDPG-AE for all
environments and all rollout horizons. For readability, we clip large gradients to 102 (Halfcheetah
environment).


                                                                                                           21
