Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A S YSTEM FOR M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G ENERALIZATION
VIA U NIFIED R EPRESENTATION AND B EHAVIOR D IS -
TILLATION

 Hiroki Furuta1,2∗ Yusuke Iwasawa1 Yutaka Matsuo1                     Shixiang Shane Gu2,1
 1
  The University of Tokyo 2 Google Research, Brain Team
 furuta@weblab.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp



                                               A BSTRACT
            The rise of generalist large-scale models in natural language and vision has made
            us expect that a massive data-driven approach could achieve broader generalization
            in other domains such as continuous control. In this work, we explore a method for
            learning a single policy that manipulates various forms of agents to solve various
            tasks by distilling a large amount of proficient behavioral data. In order to align
            input-output (IO) interface among multiple tasks and diverse agent morphologies
            while preserving essential 3D geometric relations, we introduce morphology-task
            graph, which treats observations, actions and goals/task in a unified graph represen-
            tation. We also develop MxT-Bench for fast large-scale behavior generation, which
            supports procedural generation of diverse morphology-task combinations with a
            minimal blueprint and hardware-accelerated simulator. Through efficient represen-
            tation and architecture selection on MxT-Bench, we find out that a morphology-task
            graph representation coupled with Transformer architecture improves the multi-task
            performances compared to other baselines including recent discrete tokenization,
            and provides better prior knowledge for zero-shot transfer or sample efficiency in
            downstream multi-task imitation learning. Our work suggests large diverse offline
            datasets, unified IO representation, and policy representation and architecture se-
            lection through supervised learning form a promising approach for studying and
            advancing morphology-task generalization1 .


1        I NTRODUCTION
The impressive success of large language models (Devlin et al., 2019; Radford et al., 2019; Bom-
masani et al., 2021; Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022) has encouraged the other domains,
such as computer vision (Radford et al., 2021; Gu et al., 2021b; Alayrac et al., 2022; Jaegle et al.,
2021) or robotics (Ahn et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022b), to leverage the large-scale pre-trained
model trained with massive data with unified input-output interface. These large-scale pre-trained
models are innately multi-task learners: they surprisingly work well not only in the fine-tuning or
few-shot transfer but also in the zero-shot transfer settings (Raffel et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2022a).
Learning a “generalist” model seems to be an essential goal in the recent machine learning paradigm
with the same key ingredients: curate massive diverse dataset, define unified IO representation,
and perform efficient representation and architecture selection, altogether for best generalization.
In reinforcement learning (RL) for continuous control, various aspects are important for generalization.
First, we care about “task” generalization. For instance, in robotic manipulation, we care the policy
to generalize for different objects and target goal positions (Kalashnikov et al., 2018; Andrychowicz
et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2019; Lynch et al., 2019). Recent advances in vision and language models
also enable task generalization through compositional natural language instructions (Jiang et al.,
2019; Shridhar et al., 2022a; Ahn et al., 2022; Cui et al., 2022). However, to scale the data, equally
important is “morphology” generalization, where a single policy can control agents of different
embodiment (Wang et al., 2018; Noguchi et al., 2021) and can thereby ingest experiences from as
     ∗
         Work done as Student Researcher at Google.
     1
         https://sites.google.com/view/control-graph


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Behavior distillation pipeline. We first train a single-task policy for each environment on MxT-
Bench, and then collect proficient morphology-task behavior dataset (Section 4.1). To enable a single policy
to learn multiple tasks and morphologies simultaneously, we convert stored transitions to the morphology-task
graphrepresentation to align with unified IO interface (Section 4.3) for multi-task distillation (Section 4.2). After
behavior distillation, the learned policy can be utilized for in-distribution or zero-shot generalization (Section 5.1),
downstream fine-tuning (Section 5.2), and representation and architecture selection (Section 5.3).


many robots in different simulators (Freeman et al., 2021; Todorov et al., 2012; Coumans & Bai,
2016) as possible. Most prior works (Mendonca et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2022) only address either
the task or morphology axis separately, and achieving broad generalization over task and morphology
jointly remains a long-standing problem2 .
This paper first proposes MxT-Bench3 , the first multi-morphology and multi-task benchmarking
environments, as a step toward building the massive diverse dataset for continuous control. MxT-
Bench provides various combinations of different morphologies (ant, centipede, claw, worm, and
unimal (Gupta et al., 2022)) and different tasks (reach, touch, and twisters). MxT-Bench is easily
scalable to additional morphologies and tasks, and is built on top of Brax (Freeman et al., 2021) for
fast behavior generation.
Next, we define unified IO representation for an architecture to ingest all the multi-morphology
multi-task data. Inspired by scene graph (Johnson et al., 2015) in computer vision that represents
the 3D relational information of a scene, and by morphology graph (Wang et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2018; Huang et al., 2020; Gupta et al., 2022) that expresses an agent’s geometry and actions, we
introduce the notion of morphology-task graph (MTG) as a unified interface to encode observations,
actions, and goals (i.e. tasks) as nodes in the shared graph representation. Goals are represented
as sub-nodes, and different tasks correspond to different choices: touching is controlling a torso
node, while reaching is controlling an end-effector node (Figure 3). In contrast to discretizing and
tokenizing every dimension as proposed in recent work (Janner et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022), this
unified IO limits data representation it can ingest, but strongly preserves 3D geometric relationships
that are crucial for any physics control problem (Wang et al., 2018; Ghasemipour et al., 2022), and
we empirically show it outperforms naive tokenization in our control-focused dataset.
Lastly, while conventional multi-task or meta RL studies generalization through on-policy joint
training (Yu et al., 2019; Cobbe et al., 2020), we perform efficient representation and architecture
selection, over 11 combinations of unified IO representation and network architectures, and 8 local
node observations, for optimal generalization through behavior distillation (Figure 1), where RL
is essentially treated as a (single-task, low-dimensional) behavior generator (Gu et al., 2021a) and
multi-task supervised learning (or offline RL (Fujimoto et al., 2019)) is used for imitating all the
behaviors (Singh et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021b; Reed et al., 2022). Through offline distillation, we
controllably and tractably evaluate two variants of MTG representation, along with multiple network
architectures (MLP, GNN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017)), and show
that MTGv2 variant with Transformer improves the multi-task goal-reaching performances compared
to other possible choices by 23% and provides better prior knowledge for zero-shot generalization
(by 14∼18%) and fine-tuning for downstream multi-task imitation learning (by 50 ∼ 55 %).
As the fields of vision and language move toward broad generalization (Chollet, 2019; Bommasani
et al., 2021), we hope our work could encourage RL and continuous control communities to continue

   2
     Here, “task” means what each agent should solve. See Section 3 for the detailed definition. When
considering the models, as slightly overloaded, it may imply morphological diversity as well.
   3
     Pronounced as “mixed”-bench. It stands for “Morphology × Task”.


                                                           2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


growing diverse behavior datasets, designing different IO representations, and iterating more repre-
sentation and architecture selection, and eventually optimize a single policy that can be deployed on
any morphology for any task. In summary, our key contributions are:
        • We develop MxT-Bench4 as a test bed for morphology-task generalization with fast expert
          behavior generator. MxT-Bench supports the scalable procedural generation of both agents
          and tasks with minimal blueprints.
        • We introduce morphology-task graph, a universal IO for control which treats the agent’s
          observations, actions and goals/tasks in a unified graph representation, while preserving the
          task structure.
        • We study generalization through offline supervised behavior distillation, where we can effi-
          ciently try out various design choices; over 11 combinations of unified IO representation and
          network architectures, and 8 local node observations. As a result, we find that Transformer
          with MTGv2 achieves the best multi-task performances among other possible designs (MLP,
          GNN and Transformer with MTGv1, Tokenized-MTGv2, etc.) in both in-distribution and
          downstream tasks, such as zero-shot transfer and fine-tuning for multi-task imitation learning.


2       R ELATED W ORK

Morphology Generalization While, in RL for continuous
control, the policy typically learns to control only a single
morphology (Tassa et al., 2018; Todorov et al., 2012),
several works succeed in generalizing the control problem
for morphologically different agents to solve a locomotion
task by using morphology-aware Graph Neural Network
(GNN) policies (Wang et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020;
Blake et al., 2021). In addition, several work (Kurin et al.,
2021; Gupta et al., 2022; Hong et al., 2022; Trabucco et al., Figure 2: We tackle morphology-task gen-
2022) have investigated the use of Transformer (Vaswani eralization, which requires achieving both
et al., 2017). Other work jointly optimize the morphology- task and morphology generalization simulta-
agnostic policy and morphology itself (Pathak et al., 2019; neously. See Appendix M for the details.
Gupta et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2022; Hejna et al., 2021),
or transfer a controller over different morphologies (Devin et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018; Hejna et al.,
2020; Liu et al., 2022).
While substantial efforts have been investigated to realize morphology generalization, those works
mainly focus on only a single task (e.g. running), and less attention is paid to multi-task settings,
where the agents attempt to control different states of their bodies to desired goals. We believe that
goal-directed control is a key problem for an embodied single controller. Concurrently, Feng et al.
(2022) propose an RL-based single controller that is applied to different quadruped robots and target
poses in the sim-to-real setting. In contrast, our work introduces the notion of morphology-task graph
as a unified IO that represents observations, actions, and goals in a shared graph, and can handle
more diverse morphologies to solve multiple tasks.
Task Generalization In the previous research, task generalization has been explored in multi-task or
meta RL literature (Wang et al., 2016; Duan et al., 2017; Cabi et al., 2017; Teh et al., 2017; Colas
et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020; Kurin et al., 2022). Each task might be defined by
the difference in goals, reward functions, and dynamics (Ghasemipour et al., 2019; Kalashnikov
et al., 2021; Eysenbach et al., 2020), under shared state and action spaces. Some works leverage
graph representation to embed the compositionality of manipulation tasks (Li et al., 2019; Zhou
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022; Ghasemipour et al., 2022), while others use natural
language representation to specify diverse tasks (Jiang et al., 2019; Shridhar et al., 2022a; Ahn et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022a; Cui et al., 2022). Despite the notable success of acquiring various task
generalization, multi-task RL often deals with only a single morphology. We aim to extend the
general behavior policy into the “cartesian product” of tasks and morphologies (as shown in Figure 2)
to realize a more scalable and capable controller.

    4
        https://github.com/frt03/mxt_bench


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: We propose the notion of morphology-task graph, which expresses the agent’s observations, actions,
and goals/tasks in a unified graph representation, while preserving the geometric structure of the task. We develop
two practical implementations; morphology-task graph v1 (left) accepts the morphological graph, encoded
from the agent’s geometric information, as an input-output interface, and merges positional goal information as
a part of corresponding node features. morphology-task graph v2 (right) treats given goals as extra disjoint
nodes of the morphological graph. While most prior morphology-agnostic RL have focused on locomotion (run
task), i.e. a single static goal node controlling (maximizing) the velocity of center of mass, morphology-task
graph could naturally extend morphology-agnostic control to other goal-oriented tasks: single static goal node
for reach, multiple static goal nodes for twisters, and single dynamic goal node tracking a movable ball for an
object interaction task; touch.

Transformer for RL Recently, Chen et al. (2021a) and Janner et al. (2021) consider offline RL as
supervised sequential modeling problem and following works achieve impressive success (Reed et al.,
2022; Lee et al., 2022; Furuta et al., 2022; Xu et al., 2022; Shafiullah et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2022;
Paster et al., 2022). In contrast, our work leverages Transformer to handle topological and geometric
information of the scene, rather than a sequential nature of the agent trajectory.
Behavior Distillation Due to the massive try-and-error and large variance, training a policy from
scratch in online RL is an inefficient process, especially in multi-task setting. It is more efficient to use
RL for generating single-task behaviors (often from low dimensions) (Gu et al., 2021a) and then use
supervised learning to imitate all behaviors with a large single policy (Levine et al., 2016; Rusu et al.,
2016; Parisotto et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2021; Ajay et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021b). Several works
tackle the large-scale behavior distillation with Transformer (Reed et al., 2022; Lee et al., 2022),
or with representation that treats observations and actions in the same vision-language space (Zeng
et al., 2020; Shridhar et al., 2022b). Our work utilizes similar pipeline, but focuses on finding the
good representation and architecture to generalize across morphology and tasks simultaneously with
proposed morphology-task graph. See Appendix M for the connection to policy distillation.

3    P RELIMINARIES
In RL, consider a Markov Decision Process with following tuple (S, A, p, p1 , r, γ), which consists
of state space S, action space A, state transition probability function p : S × A × S → [0, ∞), initial
state distribution p1 : S → [0, ∞), reward function r : S × A → R, and discount factor γ ∈ [0, 1).
The agent follows a Markovian policy π : S × A → [0, ∞), which is often parameterized in Deep
RL, and seeks optimal policy π ∗ that maximizes the discounted cumulative rewards:
                              π ∗ = arg max 1−γ
                                             1
                                                Es∼ρπ (s),a∼π(·|s) [r(s, a)] ,                                 (1)
                                         π

where pπt (st ) = s0:t ,a0:t−1 t p(st |st−1 , at−1 )π(at |st ) and ρπ (s) = (1 − γ) t γ t pπt (st = s)
                  RR          Q                                                    P

represent time-aligned and time-aggregated state marginal distributions following policy π.
Graph Representation for Morphology-Agnostic Control Following prior continuous control
literature (Todorov et al., 2012), we assume the agents have bodies modeled as simplified skeletons
of animals. An agent’s morphology is characterized by the parameter for rigid body module (torso,
limbs), such as radius, length, mass, and inertia, and by the connection among those modules
(joints). In order to handle such geometric and topological information, an agent’s morphology can
be expressed as an acyclic tree graph representation G := (V, E), where V is a set of nodes v i ∈ V
and E is a set of edges eij ∈ E between v i and v j . The node v i corresponds to i-th module of the
agent, and the edge eij corresponds to the hinge joint between the nodes v i and v j . Each joint may


                                                        4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                          Benchmark                      Multi-Task   Multi-Morphology   Scalability
                                                          MuJoCo & DM Control               %               %                %
                                                          Meta-World (Yu et al., 2019)      "               %                %
                                                          Huang et al. (2020)               %               "                %
                                                          Gupta et al. (2022)               %               "                "
                                                          MxT-Bench(Ours)                   "               "                "


Figure 4: The overview of MxT-Bench, which can procedurally generate both various morphologies and tasks
with minimal blueprints. MxT-Bench can not only construct the agents with different number of limbs, but
also randomize missing limbs and size/mass of bodies. We could design the tasks with parameterized goal
distributions. It also supports to import custom complex agents such as unimals (Gupta et al., 2022). Compared
to relevant RL benchmarks in terms of (1) multi-task (task coverage), (2) multi-morphology (morphology
coverage), and (3) scalability, MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) and DM Control (Tassa et al., 2018) only have a
single morphology for a single task. While other existing works (Yu et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2020) partially
cover task-/morphology-axis with some sort of scalability, they do not satisfy all criteria.

have 1-3 actuators corresponding to a degree of freedom. If a joint has several actuators, the graph G
is considered a multipath one. This graph-based factored formulation can describe the various agents’
morphologies in a tractable manner (Wang et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2020; Loynd et al., 2020).
We assume that node v i observes local sensory input sit at time step t, which includes the information
of limb i such as position, velocity, orientation, joint angle, or morphological parameters. To process
these node features and graph structure, a morphology-agnostic policy can be modeled as node-based
GNN (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Battaglia et al., 2018; Cappart et al., 2021), which takes a set of local
                   |V|                                                                        |E|
observations {sit }i=1 as an input and emit the actions for actuators of each joint {aet }e=1 . The
objective of morphology-agnostic RL is the average of Equation 1 among given morphologies.
Goal-conditional RL In goal-conditional RL (Kaelbling, 1993; Schaul et al., 2015), the agent aims
to find an optimal policy π ∗ (a|s, sg ) conditioned on goal sg ∈ G, where G stands for goal space that
is sub-dimension of state space S (e.g. XYZ coordinates, velocity, or quaternion). The desired goal
sg is sampled from the given goal distribution pψ : G → [0, ∞), where ψ stands for task in the task
space Ψ (e.g. reaching the agent’s leg or touching the torso to the ball). The reward function can
include a goal-reaching term, that is often modeled as rψ (st , sg ) = −dψ (st , sg ), where dψ (·, ·) is a
task-dependent distance function, such as Euclidean distance, between the sub-dimension of interest
in current state st and given goal sg . Some task ψ give multiple goals to the agents. In that case, we
                                                 Nψ
overload sg to represent a set of goals; {sig }i=1  , where Nψ is the number of goals that should be
satisfied in the task ψ.
Morphology-Task Generalization This paper aims to achieve morphology-task generalization,
where the learned policy should generalize over tasks and morphologies simultaneously. The optimal
policy should generalize over morphology space M, task Ψ, and minimize the distance to any given
goal sg ∈ G. Mathematically, this objective can be formulated as follows:
   π ∗ = arg max 1−γ1

                       Em,ψ∼M,Ψ Esg ∼pψ (sg ) Esm ,am ∼ρπ (sm ),π(·|sm ,sg ) [−dψ (sm , sg )] , (2)
              π

where the graph representation of morphology m ∈ M is denoted as Gm = (Vm , Em ), and
             |V |                 |Em |
sm := {sit }i=1m and am := {aet }e=1    stand for a set of local observations and actions of morphology
m. While we can use multi-task online RL to maximize Equation 2 in principle, it is often sample
inefficient due to the complexity of task, which requires a policy that can handle the diversity of the
scene among morphology M, task Ψ, and goal space G simultaneously.

4     M ETHOD
4.1   M X T-B ENCH AS A T EST B ED FOR M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G ENERALIZATION

To overcome these shortcomings in the existing RL environments, we develop MxT-Bench, which has
a wide coverage over both tasks and morphologies to test morphology-task generalization, with the


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


functionalities for procedural generation from minimal blueprints (Figure 4). MxT-Bench is built on
top of Brax (Freeman et al., 2021) and Composer (Gu et al., 2021a), for faster iteration of behavior
distillation with hardware-accelerated environments. Beyond supporting multi-morphology and
multi-task settings, the scalability of MxT-Bench helps to test the broader range of morphology-task
generalization since we can easily generate out-of-distribution tasks and morphologies, compared to
manually-designed morphology or task specifications.
In the morphology axis, we prepare 4 types of blueprints (ant, claw, centipede, and worm) as base
morphologies, since they are good at the movement on the XY-plane. Through MxT-Bench, we
can easily spawn agents that have different numbers of bodies, legs, or different sizes, lengths, and
weights. Moreover, we can also import the existing complex morphology used in previous work.
For instance, we include 60+ morphologies that are suitable for goal-reaching, adapted from Gupta
et al. (2022) designed in MuJoCo. In the task axis, we design reach, touch, and twisters 5 as basic
tasks, which could evaluate different aspects of the agents; the simplest one is the reach task, where
the agents aim to put their leg on the XY goal position. In the touch task, agents aim to create and
maintain contact between a specified torso and a movable ball. The touch task requires reaching
behavior, while maintaining a conservative momentum to avoid kicking the ball away from the agent.
Twisters tasks are the multi-goal problems; for instance, the agents should satisfy XY-position for
one leg, and Z height for another leg. We pre-define 4 variants of twisters with max 3 goals (see
Appendix B.2 for the details). Furthermore, we could easily specify both initial and goal position
distribution with parameterized distribution. In total, we prepare 180+ environments combining the
morphology and task axis for the experiments in the later section. See Appendix B for further details.

4.2     B EHAVIOR D ISTILLATION

Toward broader generalization over morphologies and tasks, a single policy should handle the
diversity of the scene among morphology M, task Ψ, and goal space G simultaneously. Multi-
task online RL from scratch, however, is difficult to tune, slow to iterate, and hard to reproduce.
Instead, we employ behavior cloning on RL-generated expert behaviors to study morphology-task
generalization. To obtain rich goal-reaching behaviors, we train a single-morphology single-task
policy using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) with a simple MLP policy, which is significantly more
efficient than multi-morphology training done in prior work (Gupta et al., 2022; Kurin et al., 2021;
Huang et al., 2020). Since MxT-Bench is built on top of Brax (Freeman et al., 2021), a hardware-
accelerated simulator, training PPO policies can be completed in about 5∼30 minutes per environment
(on NVIDIA RTX A6000). We collect many behaviors per morphology-task combination from the
expert policy rollout. We then train a single policy πθ with a supervised learning objective:

                  Lπ = −Em,ψ∼M,Ψ Esm ,am ,sg ∼Dm,ψ [log πθ (am |{sm , sg })] ,
where Dm,ψ is an expert dataset of morphology m and task ψ. Importantly, offline behavior distillation
protocol runs (parallelizable) single-task online RL only once, and allows us to reuse the same fixed
data to try out various design choices, such as model architectures or local features of morphology-task
graph, which is often intractable in multi-task online RL.

4.3     M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G RAPH

To learn a single policy that could solve various morphology-task problems, it is essential to unify the
input-output interface among those. Inspired by the concept of scene graph (Johnson et al., 2015)
and morphological graph (Wang et al., 2018), we introduce the notion of morphology-task graph
(MTG) representation that incorporates goal information while preserving the geometric structure
of the task. Morphology-task graph could express the agent’s observations, actions, and goals/tasks
in a unified graph space. Although most prior morphology-agnostic RL has focused on locomotion
(running) with the reward calculated from the velocity of the center of mass, morphology-task graph
could naturally extend morphology-agnostic RL to multi-task goal-oriented settings: including static
single positional goals (reaching), multiple-goal problems (twister-game) and object interaction tasks
(ball-touching). In practice, we develop two different ways to inform the goals and tasks (Figure 3);
morphology-task graph v1 (MTGv1) accepts the morphological graph, encoded from the agent’s
geometric information, as an input-output interface, and merges positional goal information as a
   5
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twister_(game)


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                Random            MLP         GNN (MTGv1)     Transformer (MTGv1)   Transformer (MTGv2)   Token-MTGv2
 In-Distribution              1.2019 ± 0.41   0.5150 ± 0.01   0.4776 ± 0.01      0.4069 ± 0.02         0.3128 ± 0.02      0.3402 ± 0.01
 In-Distribution (unimal)     0.9090 ± 0.03   0.6703 ± 0.01         –            0.4839 ± 0.02         0.4178 ± 0.01            –
 Compositional (Morphology)   1.1419 ± 0.41   0.7216 ± 0.01        –             0.4940 ± 0.01         0.4066 ± 0.01           –
 Compositional (Task)         0.8932 ± 0.01   0.6849 ± 0.01        –             0.5395 ± 0.04         0.4461 ± 0.05           –
 Out-of-Distribution          0.8979 ± 0.01   0.7821 ± 0.02        –             0.6144 ± 0.04         0.5266 ± 0.04           –


Table 1: The average normalized final distance in various types of morphology-task generalization on MxT-
Bench. We test (1) in-distribution, (2) compositional morphology/task, and (3) out-of-distribution generalization.
(2) and (3) evaluate zero-shot transfer. We compare MLP, GNN and Transformer with MTGv1, Transformer
with MTGv2, and tokenized MTGv2 (Reed et al., 2022). MTGv2 improves multi-task performance to other
choices by 23 % in the in-distribution evaluation, and achieves better zero-shot transfer in the compositional and
out-of-distribution settings by 14 ∼ 18 %.

part of corresponding node features. For instance, in touch task, MTGv1 includes XY position of
the movable ball as an extra node feature of the body node. Moreover, morphology-task graph v2
(MTGv2) considers given goals as additional disjoint nodes of morphological graph representation.
These morphology-task graph strategies enable the policy to handle a lot of combinations of tasks
and morphologies simultaneously.
Transformer for MTG While morphology-task graph could represent the agent and goals in a unified
manner, because the task structure may change over time, the policy should unravel the implicit
relationship between the agent’s modules and goals dynamically. We mainly employ Transformer as a
policy architecture because it can process morphological graph as a fully-connected graph and achieve
notable performance by leveraging the hidden relations between the nodes beyond manually-encoded
geometric structure (Kurin et al., 2021). The combination of morphology-task graph and Transformer
is expected to model the local relations between goals and target nodes explicitly and to embed the
global relations among the modules. See Appendix A for further details.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We first evaluate the multi-task performance of morphology-task graph representation (MTGv1,
MTGv2) in terms of in-distribution (known morphology and task with different initialization),
compositional (known task with unseen morphology or known morphology with unseen task), and
out-of-distribution generalization (either morphology or task is unseen) on MxT-Bench (Section 5.1).
Then, we investigate whether morphology-task graph could contribute to obtaining better control prior
for multi-task fine-tuning (Section 5.2). In addition, we conduct the offline node feature selection to
identify what is the most suitable node feature set for morphology-task generalization (Section 5.3).
The results are averaged among 4 random seeds. See Appendix A for the hyperparameters. We also
investigate the other axis of representations or architectures (Appendix E, F, G) and test the effect of
dataset size, the number of morphology-task combinations, and model size (Appendix H). Lastly, we
examine why morphology-task graph works well by visualizing attention weights (Appendix K).
Evaluation Metric Goal-reaching tasks are evaluated by the distance to the goals at the end of
episode (Pong et al., 2018; 2020; Ghosh et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2021; Eysenbach et al., 2021).
However, this can be problematic in our settings, because the initial distance or the degree of goal-
reaching behaviors might be different among various morphologies and tasks. We measure the
                                                                         ¯
performance of the policy π by using a normalized final distance metric d(M,    Ψ; π) over morphology
M and task space Ψ with pre-defined max/min value of each morphology m and task ψ,
                                                                                i,m,ψ

               ¯                  1
                                       PM PΨ                PNψ dψ (sm     i
                                                                       T ,sg )−dmin
               d(M, Ψ; π) := |M||Ψ| m          ψ Esg ∼pψ      i=1 di,m,ψ −di,m,ψ        ,          (3)
                                                                                             max      min

                                                                        i,m,ψ
where sm                                      i,m,ψ
         T is the last state of the episode, dmax is a maximum, and dmin is a minimum distance
of i-th goal sig with morphology m and task ψ. We use a distance threshold to train the expert PPO
policy as di,m,ψ                                                                    i,m,ψ
           min , and the average distance from an initial position of the scene as dmax . Equation 3
is normalized around the range of [0, 1], and the smaller, the better. See Appendix B for the details.

5.1     B EHAVIOR D ISTILLATION ON M X T-B ENCH

We systematically evaluate three types of morphology-task generalization; in-distribution, composi-
tional, and out-of-distribution generalization through behavior distillation. As baselines, we compare


                                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          $PNQPTJUJPOBM 	.PSQIPMPHZ
                                                     $PNQPTJUJPOBM 	5BTL
                                                      0VU PG %JTUSJCVUJPO
                   .-1 	 L

                   .-1 	 L

                 .-1 	  L

          5' .5(W  	 L

          5' .5(W  	 L

        5' .5(W  	  L

          5' .5(W  	 L

          5' .5(W  	 L

                                                                                                     GJOFUVOJOH                                                                               GJOFUVOJOH                                                                       GJOFUVOJOH
        5' .5(W  	  L
                                                                 SBOEJOJU                                                                                   SBOEJOJU                                                                           SBOEJOJU

                                            "WFSBHF /PSNBMJ[FE %JTUBODF                                            "WFSBHF /PSNBMJ[FE %JTUBODF                                      "WFSBHF /PSNBMJ[FE %JTUBODF
Figure 5: Multi-task goal-reaching performances on fine-tuning (multi-task imitation) for compositional and
out-of-distribution evaluation. These results reveal that fine-tuning outperforms random initialization in all
settings, and fine-tuned MTGv2 outperforms others by 50 ∼ 55 %. See Appendix J for the detailed scores.

MLP, GNN (Wang et al., 2018) with MTGv1, Transformer with MTGv1 or MTGv2, and tokenized
MTGv2, similar to Reed et al. (2022) (see Appendix E for the details).
In in-distribution settings, we prepare 50 environments and 60 unimal environments adapted from
Gupta et al. (2022) (see Appendix B.3 for the details) for both training and evaluation. Compositional
and out-of-distribution settings evaluate zero-shot transfer. In compositional settings, we test morphol-
ogy and task generalization separately; we prepare 38 train environments and 12 test environments
with hold-out morphologies for morphology evaluation, and leverage 50 train environments and
prepare 9 test environments with unseen task for task evaluation. In out-of-distribution settings,
we also leverage 50 environments as a training set, and define 27 environments with diversified
morphologies and unseen task as an evaluation set. The proficient behavioral data contains 12k
transitions per each environment. See Appendix D for the details of environment division.
Table 1 reveals that MTGv2 achieves the best multi-task goal-reaching performances among other
possible combinations in all the aspects of generalization. Comparing average normalized distance,
MTGv2 improves the multi-task performance against the second best, MTGv1, by 23% in in-
distribution evaluation. Following previous works (Kurin et al., 2021; Gupta et al., 2022), Transformer
with MTGv1 achieves better goal-reaching behaviors than GNN. In compositional and out-of-
distribution zero-shot evaluation, MTGv2 outperforms other choices by 14 ∼ 18%. Moreover, the
compositional zero-shot performance of MTGv2 is comparable with the performance of MTGv1 in
in-distribution settings. These results imply MTGv2 might be the better formulation to realize the
morphology-task generalization.

5.2   D OES M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G RAPH O BTAIN B ETTER P RIOR FOR C ONTROL ?

To reveal whether the distilled policy obtains reusable inductive bias for unseen morphology or task,
we test the fine-tuning performance for multi-task imitation learning on MxT-Bench. We adopt the
same morphology-task division for compositional and out-of-distribution evaluation in Section 5.1.
Figure 5 shows that fine-tuning outperforms random initialization in all settings, which suggests
that behavior-distilled policy works as a better prior knowledge for control. The same as zero-shot
transfer results in Section 5.1, MTGv2 outperforms other baselines, and is better than the second best,
MTGv1 by 50 ∼ 55%. Furthermore, MTGv2 could work even with a small amount of dataset (4k,
8k); for instance, in compositional morphology evaluation (left in Figure 5), MTGv2 trained with 8k
transitions still outperforms competitive combinations with 12k transitions, which indicates better
sample efficiency (see Appendix J for the detailed scores). These results suggest MTGv2 significantly
captures the structure of morphology-task graph as prior knowledge for downstream tasks.

5.3   W HAT IS THE BEST NODE FEATURES FOR M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G RAPH ?

In the agent’s system, there are a lot of observable variables per module: such as Cartesian position
(p), Cartesian velocity (v), quaternion (q), angular velocity (a), joint angle (ja), joint range (jr), limb
id (id), joint velocity (jv), relative position (rp), relative rotation (rr), and morphological information
(m). Morphological information contains module’s shape, mass, inertia, actuator’s gear, dof-index,
etc. To shed light on the importance of the local representation for generalization, we execute an
extensive ablation of node feature selections and prepossessing. In prior works, Huang et al. (2020)
and others (Kurin et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2022) used {p, v, q, a, ja, jr, id} and Gupta et al. (2022)
used {p, v, q, a, ja, jr, jv, rp, rr, m}. Considering the intersection of those, we define {p, v, q, a, ja,
jr} as base_set and test the combination to other observations (jv, id, rp, rr, m).


                                                                                                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In the experiments, we evaluate in-distribution generalization, as done in Section 5.1, with MTGv2
representation. Table 2 shows that, while some additional features (id, rp, m) contribute to improving
the performance, the most effective feature can be morphological information (m), which suggests
base_set contains sufficient features for control, and raw morphological properties (m) serves
better task specification than manually-encoded information such as limb id (id). The key observations
are; (1) morphological information is critical for morphology-task generalization, and (2) extra
observation might disrupt the performance, such as relative rotation between parent and child node
(rr). Throughout the paper, we treat base_set-m as node features for morphology-task graph.

                         Node features               +jv   +id   +rp   +rr   +m    Average Dist.
                         base_set                                                  0.4330 ± 0.02
                         base_set-id                       "                       0.4090 ± 0.02
                         base_set-rp                             "                 0.3820 ± 0.01
                         base_set-rr                                    "          0.4543 ± 0.01
                         base_set-m                                           "    0.3128 ± 0.02
                         base_set-rp-rr                          "      "          0.3869 ± 0.01
                         base_set-jv-rp-rr           "           "      "          0.4000 ± 0.01
                         base_set-jv-rp-rr-m         "           "      "     "    0.3323 ± 0.01

Table 2: Offline node feature selection. We compare the combination of Cartesian position (p), Cartesian
velocity (v), quaternion (q), angular velocity (a), joint angle (ja), joint range (jr), limb id (id), joint velocity (jv),
relative position (rp), relative rotation (rr), and morphological information (m). base_set is composed of {p,
v, q, a, ja, jr}. These results suggest base_set contains sufficient features for control, and the most effective
feature seems morphological information (m) for better task specification.


6    D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATION
While the experimental evaluation on MxT-Bench implies that morphology-task graph is a simple
and effective method to distill the diverse proficient behavioral data into a generalizable single policy,
there are some limitations. For instance, we focus on distillation from expert policies only, but it is still
unclear whether morphology-task graph works with moderate or random quality behaviors in offline
RL (Fujimoto et al., 2019; Levine et al., 2020; Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). Combining distillation with
iterative data collection (Ghosh et al., 2021; Matsushima et al., 2021) or online fine-tuning (Li et al.,
2022) would be a promising future work. In addition, we avoided tasks where expert behaviors cannot
be generated easily by single-task RL without fine-scale reward engineering or human demonstrations;
incorporating such datasets or bootstrapping single-task RL from the distilled policy could be critical
for scaling the pipeline to more complex tasks such as open-ended and dexterous manipulation (Lynch
et al., 2019; Ghasemipour et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022b). Since morphology-task graph only uses
readily accessible features in any simulator and could be automatically defined through URDFs or
MuJoCo XMLs, in future work we aim to keep training our best morphology-task graph architecture
policy on additional data from more functional and realistic control behaviors from other simulators
like MuJoCo (Yu et al., 2019; Tassa et al., 2018), PyBullet (Shridhar et al., 2022a), IsaacGym (Chen
et al., 2022b; Peng et al., 2021), and Unity (Juliani et al., 2018), and show it achieves better scaling
laws than other representations (Reed et al., 2022) on broader morphology-task families.

7    C ONCLUSION
The broader range of behavior generalization is a promising paradigm for RL. To achieve morphology-
task generalization, we propose morphology-task graph, which expresses the agent’s modular ob-
servations, actions, and goals as a unified graph representation while preserving the geometric task
structure. As a test bed for morphology-task generalization, we also develop MxT-Bench, which en-
ables the scalable procedural generation of agents and tasks with minimal blueprints. Fast-generated
behavior datasets of MxT-Bench with RL allow efficient representation and architecture selection
through supervised learning, and MTGv2, variant of morphology-task graph, achieves the best
multi-task performances among other possible designs (MLP, GNN and Transformer with MTGv1,
and tokenized-MTGv2, etc), outperforming them in in-distribution evaluation (by 23 %), zero-shot
transfer among compositional or out-of-distribution evaluation (by 14 ∼ 18 %) and fine-tuning for
downstream multi-task imitation (by 50 ∼ 55 %). We hope our work will encourage the community
to explore scalable yet incremental approaches for building a universal controller.


                                                            9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP22J21582. We thank Mitsuhiko
Nakamoto and Daniel C. Freeman for converting several MuJoCo agents to Brax, So Kuroki for the
support on implementations, Yujin Tang, Kamyar Ghasemipour, Yingtao Tian, and Bert Chan for
helpful feedback on this work.

R EFERENCES
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea
 Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine
 Hsu, Julian Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally
 Jesmonth, Nikhil J Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee,
 Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka
 Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes, Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander
 Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy
 Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint
 arxiv:2204.01691, 2022.
Anurag Ajay, Aviral Kumar, Pulkit Agrawal, Sergey Levine, and Ofir Nachum. OPAL: Offline
  primitive discovery for accelerating offline reinforcement learning. In International Conference on
 Learning Representations, 2021.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel
  Lenc, Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan
  Cabi, Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian
  Borgeaud, Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo
  Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language
  model for few-shot learning. arXiv preprint arxiv:2204.14198, 2022.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. In
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 2017.
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1607.06450, 2016.
Peter W. Battaglia, Jessica B. Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi,
  Mateusz Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, Caglar
  Gulcehre, Francis Song, Andrew Ballard, Justin Gilmer, George Dahl, Ashish Vaswani, Kelsey
  Allen, Charles Nash, Victoria Langston, Chris Dyer, Nicolas Heess, Daan Wierstra, Pushmeet
  Kohli, Matt Botvinick, Oriol Vinyals, Yujia Li, and Razvan Pascanu. Relational inductive biases,
  deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
Aditya Bhatt, Max Argus, Artemij Amiranashvili, and Thomas Brox. Crossnorm: Normalization for
  off-policy td reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.05605, 2019.
Charlie Blake, Vitaly Kurin, Maximilian Igl, and Shimon Whiteson. Snowflake: Scaling gnns to
  high-dimensional continuous control via parameter freezing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01009,
  2021.
Rishi Bommasani, Drew A. Hudson, Ehsan Adeli, Russ Altman, Simran Arora, Sydney von Arx,
  Michael S. Bernstein, Jeannette Bohg, Antoine Bosselut, Emma Brunskill, Erik Brynjolfsson,
  Shyamal Buch, Dallas Card, Rodrigo Castellon, Niladri Chatterji, Annie Chen, Kathleen Creel,
  Jared Quincy Davis, Dora Demszky, Chris Donahue, Moussa Doumbouya, Esin Durmus, Stefano
  Ermon, John Etchemendy, Kawin Ethayarajh, Li Fei-Fei, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Gale, Lauren
  Gillespie, Karan Goel, Noah Goodman, Shelby Grossman, Neel Guha, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Peter
  Henderson, John Hewitt, Daniel E. Ho, Jenny Hong, Kyle Hsu, Jing Huang, Thomas Icard, Saahil
  Jain, Dan Jurafsky, Pratyusha Kalluri, Siddharth Karamcheti, Geoff Keeling, Fereshte Khani, Omar
  Khattab, Pang Wei Kohd, Mark Krass, Ranjay Krishna, Rohith Kuditipudi, Ananya Kumar, Faisal
  Ladhak, Mina Lee, Tony Lee, Jure Leskovec, Isabelle Levent, Xiang Lisa Li, Xuechen Li, Tengyu


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Ma, Ali Malik, Christopher D. Manning, Suvir Mirchandani, Eric Mitchell, Zanele Munyikwa,
  Suraj Nair, Avanika Narayan, Deepak Narayanan, Ben Newman, Allen Nie, Juan Carlos Niebles,
  Hamed Nilforoshan, Julian Nyarko, Giray Ogut, Laurel Orr, Isabel Papadimitriou, Joon Sung
  Park, Chris Piech, Eva Portelance, Christopher Potts, Aditi Raghunathan, Rob Reich, Hongyu
  Ren, Frieda Rong, Yusuf Roohani, Camilo Ruiz, Jack Ryan, Christopher Ré, Dorsa Sadigh,
  Shiori Sagawa, Keshav Santhanam, Andy Shih, Krishnan Srinivasan, Alex Tamkin, Rohan Taori,
  Armin W. Thomas, Florian Tramèr, Rose E. Wang, William Wang, Bohan Wu, Jiajun Wu, Yuhuai
  Wu, Sang Michael Xie, Michihiro Yasunaga, Jiaxuan You, Matei Zaharia, Michael Zhang, Tianyi
  Zhang, Xikun Zhang, Yuhui Zhang, Lucia Zheng, Kaitlyn Zhou, and Percy Liang. On the
  opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258, 2021.
James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
  Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and
  Qiao Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
  http://github.com/google/jax.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhari-
  wal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M.
  Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin,
  Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
  Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.
Serkan Cabi, Sergio Gómez Colmenarejo, Matthew W. Hoffman, Misha Denil, Ziyu Wang, and
  Nando de Freitas. The intentional unintentional agent: Learning to solve many continuous control
  tasks simultaneously. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2017.
Quentin Cappart, Didier Chételat, Elias Khalil, Andrea Lodi, Christopher Morris, and Petar
 Veličković. Combinatorial optimization and reasoning with graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2102.09544, 2021.
Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.
Tao Chen, Adithyavairavan Murali, and Abhinav Gupta. Hardware conditioned policies for multi-
  robot transfer learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2018.
Tao Chen, Jie Xu, and Pulkit Agrawal. A system for general in-hand object re-orientation. In
  Conference on Robot Learning, 2021b.
Xi Chen, Xiao Wang, Soravit Changpinyo, AJ Piergiovanni, Piotr Padlewski, Daniel Salz, Sebastian
  Goodman, Adam Grycner, Basil Mustafa, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Joan Puigcerver,
  Nan Ding, Keran Rong, Hassan Akbari, Gaurav Mishra, Linting Xue, Ashish Thapliyal, James
  Bradbury, Weicheng Kuo, Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Chao Jia, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Carlos Riquelme,
  Andreas Steiner, Anelia Angelova, Xiaohua Zhai, Neil Houlsby, and Radu Soricut. Pali: A jointly-
  scaled multilingual language-image model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.06794, 2022a.
Yuanpei Chen, Yaodong Yang, Tianhao Wu, Shengjie Wang, Xidong Feng, Jiechuang Jiang,
  Stephen Marcus McAleer, Hao Dong, Zongqing Lu, and Song-Chun Zhu. Towards human-level
  bimanual dexterous manipulation with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.08686,
  2022b.
Jongwook Choi, Archit Sharma, Honglak Lee, Sergey Levine, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Variational
  empowerment as representation learning for goal-based reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.
François Chollet. On the measure of intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.01547, 2019.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker Schuh,


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes, Yi Tay, Noam
  Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James
  Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Lev-
  skaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin
  Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph,
  Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M.
  Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon
  Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark
  Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean,
  Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.
Karl Cobbe, Chris Hesse, Jacob Hilton, and John Schulman. Leveraging procedural generation to
  benchmark reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Cédric Colas, Pierre Fournier, Olivier Sigaud, Mohamed Chetouani, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer.
  CURIOUS: Intrinsically motivated modular multi-goal reinforcement learning. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2019.
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games, robotics
  and machine learning, 2016.
Yuchen Cui, Scott Niekum, Abhinav Gupta, Vikash Kumar, and Aravind Rajeswaran. Can foundation
  models perform zero-shot task specification for robot manipulation? In Learning for Dynamics
  and Control Conference, 2022.
Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, Razvan Pascanu, Simon Osindero, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Grzegorz
 Swirszcz, and Max Jaderberg. Distilling policy distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.02186,
 2019.
Coline Devin, Abhishek Gupta, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Learning modular
  neural network policies for multi-task and multi-robot transfer. In International Conference on
  Robotics and Automation, 2017.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2019.
Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
  Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et al. An
  image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2010.11929, 2020.
Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L. Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. RL^2: Fast
  reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2017.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Xinyang Geng, Sergey Levine, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Rewriting history
  with inverse rl: Hindsight inference for policy improvement. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2020.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Sergey Levine. C-learning: Learning to achieve
  goals via recursive classification. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Gilbert Feng, Hongbo Zhang, Zhongyu Li, Xue Bin Peng, Bhuvan Basireddy, Linzhu Yue, Zhitao
  Song, Lizhi Yang, Yunhui Liu, Koushil Sreenath, and Sergey Levine. Genloco: Generalized
  locomotion controllers for quadrupedal robots. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.05309, 2022.
C. Daniel Freeman, Erik Frey, Anton Raichuk, Sertan Girgin, Igor Mordatch, and Olivier Bachem.
  Brax - a differentiable physics engine for large scale rigid body simulation, 2021. URL http:
  //github.com/google/brax.
Scott Fujimoto and Shixiang Shane Gu. A minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Scott Fujimoto, David Meger, and Doina Precup. Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without
  exploration. In International conference on machine learning, 2019.
Hiroki Furuta, Tadashi Kozuno, Tatsuya Matsushima, Yutaka Matsuo, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Co-
  adaptation of algorithmic and implementational innovations in inference-based deep reinforcement
  learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021a.
Hiroki Furuta, Tatsuya Matsushima, Tadashi Kozuno, Yutaka Matsuo, Sergey Levine, Ofir Nachum,
  and Shixiang Shane Gu. Policy information capacity: Information-theoretic measure for task
  complexity in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021b.
Hiroki Furuta, Yutaka Matsuo, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Generalized decision transformer for offline
  hindsight information matching. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Shixiang Shane Gu, and Richard Zemel. Smile: Scalable
  meta inverse reinforcement learning through context-conditional policies. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Satoshi Kataoka, Byron David, Daniel Freeman, Shixiang Shane
  Gu, and Igor Mordatch. Blocks assemble! Learning to assemble with large-scale structured
  reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Dibya Ghosh, Abhishek Gupta, Ashwin Reddy, Justin Fu, Coline Manon Devin, Benjamin Eysenbach,
  and Sergey Levine. Learning to reach goals via iterated supervised learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Jonathan Godwin, Thomas Keck, Peter Battaglia, Victor Bapst, Thomas Kipf, Yujia Li, Kimberly
  Stachenfeld, Petar Veličković, and Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez. Jraph: A library for graph neural
  networks in jax., 2020. URL http://github.com/deepmind/jraph.
Shixiang Shane Gu, Manfred Diaz, Daniel C. Freeman, Hiroki Furuta, Seyed Kamyar Seyed
  Ghasemipour, Anton Raichuk, Byron David, Erik Frey, Erwin Coumans, and Olivier Bachem. Brax-
  lines: Fast and interactive toolkit for rl-driven behavior engineering beyond reward maximization.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04686, 2021a.
Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via vision
  and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arxiv:2104.13921, 2021b.
Agrim Gupta, Silvio Savarese, Surya Ganguli, and Li Fei-Fei. Embodied intelligence via learning
  and evolution. Nature Communications, 2021.
Agrim Gupta, Linxi Fan, Surya Ganguli, and Li Fei-Fei. Metamorph: Learning universal controllers
  with transformers. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Assaf Hallak, Dotan Di Castro, and Shie Mannor. Contextual markov decision processes. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1502.02259, 2015.
Jonathan Heek, Anselm Levskaya, Avital Oliver, Marvin Ritter, Bertrand Rondepierre, Andreas
  Steiner, and Marc van Zee. Flax: A neural network library and ecosystem for JAX, 2020. URL
  http://github.com/google/flax.
Donald J. Hejna, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Hierarchically decoupled imitation for morphologi-
  cal transfer. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Donald J. Hejna, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Task-agnostic morphology evolution. In Interna-
  tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Sunghoon Hong, Deunsol Yoon, and Kee-Eung Kim. Structure-aware transformer policy for inhomo-
  geneous multi-task reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, 2022.
Wenlong Huang, Igor Mordatch, and Deepak Pathak. One policy to control them all: Shared modular
 policies for agent-agnostic control. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot
 planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07207,
 2022a.
Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Harris Chan, Jacky Liang, Pete Florence, Andy Zeng, Jonathan
 Tompson, Igor Mordatch, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Sermanet, Noah Brown, Tomas Jackson, Linda
 Luu, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Brian Ichter. Inner monologue: Embodied reasoning
 through planning with language models. arXiv preprint arxiv:2207.05608, 2022b.
Andrew Jaegle, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Carl Doersch, Catalin Ionescu, David
  Ding, Skanda Koppula, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Brock, Evan Shelhamer, Olivier Hénaff, Matthew M.
  Botvinick, Andrew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and Joāo Carreira. Perceiver io: A general architec-
  ture for structured inputs & outputs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.14795, 2021.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning as one big sequence
 modeling problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Yiding Jiang, Shixiang Shane Gu, Kevin P Murphy, and Chelsea Finn. Language as an abstraction
  for hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.
Justin Johnson, Ranjay Krishna, Michael Stark, Li-Jia Li, David A. Shamma, Michael S. Bernstein,
  and Li Fei-Fei. Image retrieval using scene graphs. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition, 2015.
Arthur Juliani, Vincent-Pierre Berges, Ervin Teng, Andrew Cohen, Jonathan Harper, Chris Elion,
  Chris Goy, Yuan Gao, Hunter Henry, Marwan Mattar, et al. Unity: A general platform for intelligent
  agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.02627, 2018.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 1993.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Alex Irpan, Peter Pastor, Julian Ibarz, Alexander Herzog, Eric Jang, Deirdre
 Quillen, Ethan Holly, Mrinal Kalakrishnan, Vincent Vanhoucke, et al. Scalable deep reinforcement
 learning for vision-based robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2018.
Dmitry Kalashnikov, Jacob Varley, Yevgen Chebotar, Benjamin Swanson, Rico Jonschkowski,
 Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Karol Hausman. Mt-opt: Continuous multi-task robotic rein-
 forcement learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08212, 2021.
Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks.
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
Sateesh Kumar, Jonathan Zamora, Nicklas Hansen, Rishabh Jangir, and Xiaolong Wang. Graph
  inverse reinforcement learning from diverse videos. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022.
Vitaly Kurin, Maximilian Igl, Tim Rocktäschel, Wendelin Boehmer, and Shimon Whiteson. My body
  is a cage: the role of morphology in graph-based incompatible control. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Vitaly Kurin, Alessandro De Palma, Ilya Kostrikov, Shimon Whiteson, and M. Pawan Kumar. In
  defense of the unitary scalarization for deep multi-task learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.04122,
  2022.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Winnie Xu, Sergio
  Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-game
  decision transformers. arXiv preprint arxiv:2205.15241, 2022.
Sergey Levine, Chelsea Finn, Trevor Darrell, and Pieter Abbeel. End-to-end training of deep
  visuomotor policies. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(1):1334–1373, 2016.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alexander C. Li, Lerrel Pinto, and Pieter Abbeel. Generalized hindsight for reinforcement learning.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Richard Li, Allan Jabri, Trevor Darrell, and Pulkit Agrawal. Towards practical multi-object ma-
  nipulation using relational reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Robotics and
  Automation, 2019.
Yunfei Li, Yilin Wu, Huazhe Xu, Xiaolong Wang, and Yi Wu. Solving compositional reinforcement
  learning problems via task reduction. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Yunfei Li, Tian Gao, Jiaqi Yang, Huazhe Xu, and Yi Wu. Phasic self-imitative reduction for sparse-
  reward goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2022.
Xingyu Liu, Deepak Pathak, and Kris M. Kitani. Revolver: Continuous evolutionary models for
  robot-to-robot policy transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05244, 2022.
Ricky Loynd, Roland Fernandez, Asli Celikyilmaz, Adith Swaminathan, and Matthew Hausknecht.
  Working memory graphs. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Corey Lynch, Mohi Khansari, Ted Xiao, Vikash Kumar, Jonathan Tompson, Sergey Levine, and
  Pierre Sermanet. Learning latent plans from play. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2019.
Zhao Mandi, Pieter Abbeel, and Stephen James. On the effectiveness of fine-tuning versus meta-
  reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.03271, 2022.
Tatsuya Matsushima, Hiroki Furuta, Yutaka Matsuo, Ofir Nachum, and Shixiang Gu. Deployment-
  efficient reinforcement learning via model-based offline optimization. In International Conference
  on Learning Representations, 2021.
Russell Mendonca, Oleh Rybkin, Kostas Daniilidis, Danijar Hafner, and Deepak Pathak. Discovering
  and achieving goals via world models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2021.
Yuki Noguchi, Tatsuya Matsushima, Yutaka Matsuo, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Tool as embodiment
  for recursive manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.00359, 2021.
Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
  Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw
  audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499, 2016.
Emilio Parisotto, Jimmy Lei Ba, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Actor-mimic: Deep multitask and
 transfer reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.
Emilio Parisotto, H. Francis Song, Jack W. Rae, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Siddhant M.
 Jayakumar, Max Jaderberg, Raphael Lopez Kaufman, Aidan Clark, Seb Noury, Matthew M.
 Botvinick, Nicolas Heess, and Raia Hadsell. Stabilizing transformers for reinforcement learning.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06764, 2019.
Keiran Paster, Sheila McIlraith, and Jimmy Ba. You can’t count on luck: Why decision transformers
  fail in stochastic environments. arXiv preprint arxiv.2205.15967, 2022.
Deepak Pathak, Chris Lu, Trevor Darrell, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. Learning to control
  self-assembling morphologies: A study of generalization via modularity. In Advances in neural
  information processing systems, 2019.
Xue Bin Peng, Ze Ma, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Angjoo Kanazawa. AMP: Adversarial
  motion priors for stylized physics-based character control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.02180, 2021.
Vitchyr Pong, Shixiang Gu, Murtaza Dalal, and Sergey Levine. Temporal difference models: Model-
  free deep rl for model-based control. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.


                                                15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Vitchyr H. Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Steven Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-fit:
  State-covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, 2020.

Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019.

Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agar-
  wal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, Gretchen Krueger, and Ilya
  Sutskever. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2103.00020, 2021.

Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
  Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
  transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(140):1–67, 2020.

Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Deirdre Quillen, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In International Conference on
  Machine Learning, 2019.

Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake
  Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals,
  Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent. arXiv preprint arxiv:2205.06175,
  2022.

Andrei A. Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Caglar Gulcehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirk-
  patrick, Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy
  distillation. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

Tom Schaul, Dan Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal Value Function Approximators.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2015.

John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Zichen Jeff Cui, Ariuntuya Altanzaya, and Lerrel Pinto. Behavior
  transformers: Cloning k modes with one stone. arXiv preprint arxiv.2206.11251, 2022.

Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Cliport: What and where pathways for robotic
 manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022a.

Mohit Shridhar, Lucas Manuelli, and Dieter Fox. Perceiver-actor: A multi-task transformer for
 robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2022b.

Avi Singh, Huihan Liu, Gaoyue Zhou, Albert Yu, Nicholas Rhinehart, and Sergey Levine. Parrot:
  Data-driven behavioral priors for reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.

Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap, and Martin Riedmiller.
  Deepmind control suite. arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.00690, 2018.

Yee Whye Teh, Victor Bapst, Wojciech Marian Czarnecki, John Quan, James Kirkpatrick, Raia
  Hadsell, Nicolas Heess, and Razvan Pascanu. Distral: Robust multitask reinforcement learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.

Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
 In International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.

Brandon Trabucco, Mariano Phielipp, and Glen Berseth. Anymorph: Learning transferable polices
  by inferring agent morphology. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.


                                                  16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 2017.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
  Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.05763, 2016.
Tingwu Wang, Renjie Liao, Jimmy Ba, and Sanja Fidler. Nervenet: Learning structured policy with
  graph neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Mengdi Xu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Yuchen Lu, Ding Zhao, B. Joshua Tenenbaum, and Chuang
 Gan. Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization. In International Confer-
 ence on Machine Learning, 2022.
Ruihan Yang, Huazhe Xu, Yi Wu, and Xiaolong Wang. Multi-task reinforcement learning with soft
  modularization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey
  Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning.
  In Conference on Robot Learning, 2019.
Tianhe Yu, Saurabh Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Sergey Levine, Karol Hausman, and Chelsea Finn.
  Gradient surgery for multi-task learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2020.
Ye Yuan, Yuda Song, Zhengyi Luo, Wen Sun, and Kris M. Kitani. Transform2act: Learning a
  transform-and-control policy for efficient agent design. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2022.
Andy Zeng, Pete Florence, Jonathan Tompson, Stefan Welker, Jonathan Chien, Maria Attarian, Travis
  Armstrong, Ivan Krasin, Dan Duong, Vikas Sindhwani, and Johnny Lee. Transporter networks:
  Rearranging the visual world for robotic manipulation. In Conference on Robot Learning, 2020.
Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Aditya Grover. Online decision transformer. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.
Allan Zhou, Vikash Kumar, Chelsea Finn, and Aravind Rajeswaran. Policy architectures for compo-
  sitional generalization in control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05960, 2022.


                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A    D ETAILS OF I MPLEMENTATION
The hyperparameters we used are listed in Table 3. We implement MLP and Transformer policy with
Jax (Bradbury et al., 2018) and Flax (Heek et al., 2020). For the implementation of GNN policy, we
use a graph neural network library, Jraph (Godwin et al., 2020).

                             Method         Hyperparameter           Value
                             Shared         Learning rate            3e-4
                                            Batch size               256
                                            Gradient clipping        0.1
                                            Activation function      ReLU
                                            Gradient steps           100k
                             MLP            Hidden size              1024
                                            # of layers              2
                             Transformer    Embedding size           256
                                            Attention hidden size    512
                                            # of attention heads     2
                                            # of attention layers    3
                             GNN            Hidden size              256
                                            # of layers (per node)   3


                               Table 3: Hyperparameters for each method.

Transformer for Morphology-Task Graph Transformer first encodes morphology-task graph to
the latent representation vector z0 with shared single-layer MLP and learnable position embedding
(PE) (in case of MTGv1, we omit sg , but include it to corresponding node observation si instead):

                       z0 = [MLP(s1 ), . . . , MLP(s|Vm | ), MLP(sg )] + PE,
then multi-head attention (MHA) (Vaswani et al., 2017) and layer normalization (LayerNorm) (Ba
et al., 2016) are recursively applied to latent representation zl at l-th layer,
                  zl′ = LayerNorm(MHA(zl−1 ) + zl−1 ),
                  zl = LayerNorm(MLP(zl′ ) + zl′ ),                    (l = 1, ..., L).
Before decoding the action per module from the last-layer latent representation zL , we employ the
residual connection of the node features (Kurin et al., 2021),
                                                   |V     |                  |V   |+1
             am = [MLP([zL
                         1
                           , s1 ]), . . . , MLP([zL m , s|Vm | ]), MLP([zL m            , sg ])],
where shared MLP has a single layer and tanh activation to clip the output within the range of [-1, 1].
We mask out the output from the goal modules or modules that have no actuators to ensure action
size as |Em |.
Details of Morphology-Task Graph v1 and v2 Our proposed morphology-task graph expresses the
agent’s observations, actions, and goals or tasks in a unified graph representation, while preserving
the geometric structure of the task. Morphology-task graph v1 accepts the morphological graph,
encoded from the agent’s geometric information, as an input-output interface, and merges positional
goal information as a part of corresponding node features, and morphology-task graph v2 treats given
goals as extra disjoint nodes of morphological graph. In practice, we pad the incompatible parts
of goal information by 0. For both MTGv1 and MTGv2, we prepare the binary vectors that have
indicators to the target (or goal) nodes. MTGv1 obtains the products of the goal information and
binary vectors, then leverages them as extra node features. MTGv2 just takes such binary vectors as
extra node features (and also includes goals as extra nodes).


                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     D ETAILS OF M X T-B ENCH

B.1   M ORPHOLOGY

We prepare 4 base blueprints; ant, centipede, claw, and worm, for procedural scene generation (Fig-
ure 6). Base ant has 1 torso and 2 legs with 2 joints per limb, and we could procedurally generate
the agents with different number of limbs. Base centipede has 2 bodies and 4 legs with 2 joints per
limb, and we could procedurally generate the agents with different number of bodies. Base claw has
1 torso and 2 legs with 4 joints per limb (each leg consists of 3 modules), and we could procedurally
generate the agents with different number of limbs. Base worm has 2 bodies and no legs, and we
could procedurally generate the agents with different number of bodies.


Figure 6: Examples of procedurally-generated morphology from base blueprints in MxT-Bench. From left to
right, each figure shows the example of 5-leg ant, 4-body centipede, 6-leg claw, and 5-body worm.

Furthermore, we develop the functionality for morphology diversification, with missing, mass, and
size parameters (Figure 7). Missing randomization lacks one module at one leg. This might be an
equivalent situation that one leg is broken. Mass randomization changes the default mass of each
module with specified scales. The appearance does not change, but certainly, the dynamics would
differ. Size randomization changes the default length and radius of each module with specified scales.


Figure 7: Examples of diversified morphology from base blueprints in MxT-Bench. From left to right, each
figure shows the example of 5-leg-1-missing ant, 5-leg-size-randomized ant, 4-body-1-missing centipede, and
3-body-size-randomized centipede.


B.2   TASK

We prepare 4 base tasks with parameterized goal distributions; reach, touch, twisters, and push, for
procedural task generation (Figure 8). Reach task requires the agents to put their one leg to the given
goal position (XY). The variant, reach_hard task, represents that the goal distribution is farther than
reach task. Touch task requires the agents to contact their body or torso to the movable ball (i.e.
movable ball is a goal). Twisters is a multi-goal problem; the agents should satisfy given goals at
the same time. There are two basic constraints; reach and handsup. Handsup requires the agents to
raise their one leg to the given goal Z height. Twisters has some combinations like reach_handsup,
reach_hard_handsup, reach2_handsup, or reach_handsup2. For instance, in reach_handsup2, the
agents should put their one leg to the given goal position, and raise their two legs to the given
goal heights simultaneously. The XY position goals are sampled from uniform distribution with a
predefined donut-shape range, and Z height goals are also from uniform distribution with predefined
range. Push task requires the agents to move the box object to the given goal position (XY) sampled


                                                    19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


from uniform distribution with predefined range. Since it has richer interaction with the object, push
might be a more difficult task than those three. We use this task in Appendix L.


Figure 8: Examples of pre-defined task in MxT-Bench. From left to right, each figure shows the example of
reach, touch, twisters, and push task.


B.3   C USTOM M ORPHOLOGY

MxT-Bench also supports custom morphology import used in previous work. For instance, Gupta
et al. (2022) propose unimal agents that are generated via evolutional strategy and designed for
MuJoCo. Since they are not manually designed, their morphologies seem more diverse than our ant,
centipede, claw, and worm. We inspect unimals whether they are suitable for goal-reaching, and
include 72 morphologies from there (and use 60 morphologies for the experiments). Figure 9 shows
some example of unimals.


                  Figure 9: Examples of unimal agents, adapted from Gupta et al. (2022)



B.4   C OMPARISON TO E XISTING B ENCHMARK

Since the current RL community has not paid much attention to embodied control so far, there are
no suitable benchmarks to quantify the generalization over various tasks beyond single locomotion
tasks and morphologies at the same time. In addition, the scalability to various morphologies or tasks
seems to be required for the benchmark, because we should avoid “overfitting” to manually-designed
tasks.
As summarized in Figure 4, MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012) or DM Control (Tassa et al., 2018), the
most popular benchmarks in the continuous control domain, could not evaluate task or morphology
generalization; they only have a single morphology for a single task as a pre-defined environment.
Yu et al. (2019) propose a robot manipulation benchmark for meta RL, but it does not care about the
morphology. Furthermore, while it has quite a diverse set of tasks, the scalability of environments
seems to be limited. In contrast, previous morphology-agnostic RL works (Huang et al., 2020; Kurin
et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2022; Trabucco et al., 2022) have a set of different morphologies adapted
from MuJoCo agents. Gupta et al. (2022) also provide a much larger set of agents that are produced
via joint-optimization of morphology and task rewards by the evolutionary strategy (Gupta et al.,
2021), with kinematics and dynamics randomization. However, those works only aim to solve single
locomotion tasks, i.e. running forward as fast as possible.


                                                   20
             Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               C                                                    D ETAILS OF E XPERT DATA G ENERATION
          We train the single-task PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) at each environment to obtain the expert policy.
          For the reward function, we basically adopt dense reward (except for push task) −dψ (sm , sg ) until
          agents satisfy a given condition, 1[dψ (sm , sg ) ≤ dm,ψ                                        m,ψ
                                                               min ]. See Appendix D for the threshold dmin .
          After convergence, we collect the proficient behaviors. Unless otherwise specified, we use 12k
          transitions per environment. The average normalized final distances of those datasets are mostly less
          than 0.1 (Figure 10).

"WFSBHF /PSNBMJ[FE %JTUBODF


                                                                                                      BOU@SFBDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@SFBDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@SFBDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@SFBDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@SFBDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@UPVDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@UPVDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@UPVDI@
                                                                                                      BOU@UPVDI@
                                                                                BOU@SFBDI @IBOETVQ@
                                                                                BOU@SFBDI @IBOETVQ@
                                                                                BOU@SFBDI @IBOETVQ@
                                                                                BOU@SFBDI@IBOETVQ @
                                                                                BOU@SFBDI@IBOETVQ @
                                                                                BOU@SFBDI@IBOETVQ @
                                                                                BOU@SFBDI@IBOETVQ @
                                                                                   BOU@SFBDI@IBOETVQ@
                                                                                   BOU@SFBDI@IBOETVQ@
                                                                                   BOU@SFBDI@IBOETVQ@
                                                                                                   DMBX@SFBDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@SFBDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@SFBDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@SFBDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@SFBDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@UPVDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@UPVDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@UPVDI@
                                                                                                   DMBX@UPVDI@
                                                                                DMBX@SFBDI@IBOETVQ@
                                                                                DMBX@SFBDI@IBOETVQ@
                                                                                DMBX@SFBDI@IBOETVQ@
                                                                                DMBX@SFBDI@IBOETVQ@
                                                                      DMBX@SFBDI@IBSE@IBOETVQ@
                                                                      DMBX@SFBDI@IBSE@IBOETVQ@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@SFBDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@SFBDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@SFBDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@SFBDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@SFBDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@SFBDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@UPVDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@UPVDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@UPVDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@UPVDI@
                                                                                        DFOUJQFEF@UPVDI@
                                                                                                XPSN@UPVDI@
                                                                                                XPSN@UPVDI@
                                                                                                XPSN@UPVDI@
                                                                                                XPSN@UPVDI@
                                                                                                XPSN@UPVDI@
                                                                            Figure 10: Average normalized final distance in each dataset (Table 4).



               D                                                    E NVIRONMENTS D IVISION
           Throughout the experiments, we test a lot of morphology-task combinations to investigate the
           in-distribution generalization, compositional generalization for morphology and task, and out-of-
           distribution generalization. In this section, we list up the combination of environments used in the
           experiments.
           Table 4 explains the combinations for the experiments of in-distribution generalization, and composi-
           tional generalization for morphology (both zero-shot transfer and fine-tuning) in Table 1 and Figure 5.
           For compositional morphology evaluation, we use Morph-Train division as training dataset and
           Morph-Test division as evaluation environments. For the evaluation of dataset size and the number of
           morphology-task combinations (Appendix H), we use In-Distribution, 12 Env, and 25 Env division as
           train datasets and test environments. Following prior works (Huang et al., 2020; Kurin et al., 2021;
           Gupta et al., 2022), we have chosen Morph-Test division that would not exceed the maximum number
           of nodes in Morph-Train division for convenience. We have checked our trained model could be
           generalized to the agents with an extra number of limbs (e.g. 7-leg ant or 8-body centipede), but have
           not extensively increased the number of limbs until the model could not deal with them. We note that
           this may limit the morphology generalization in the open-ended evaluation.
           Table 6 also explains the combinations for the experiments of in-distribution generalization with
           unimals (Gupta et al., 2022) in Table 1 and Table 12.
          Table 5 provides the combinations for the experiments of compositional generalization for task and
          out-of-distribution generalization (both zero-shot transfer and fine-tuning) in Table 1 and Figure 5.
          We use them as test environments, and for training datasets, we leverage In-Distribution division in
          Table 4.
             In addition, we extensively evaluate the compositional generalization for task and out-of-distribution
             generalization with more different unseen task, such as push (see Appendix L for the details). Table 7
             also shows the environment division for both zero-shot transfer and fine-tuning.


                                                                                                              21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  Sub-domain        Environment                     dψ
                                                     min               dψ
                                                                        max           In-Distribution   Morph-Train   Morph-Test   12 Env   25 Env
                    ant_reach_2                      0.1                8.75                "               "
                    ant_reach_3                      0.1                8.75                "               "
  ant_reach         ant_reach_4                      0.1                8.75                "                             "         "        "
                    ant_reach_5                      0.1                8.75                "               "
                    ant_reach_6                      0.1                8.75                "               "                                "
                    ant_touch_3                      0.5                3.5                 "               "                                "
  ant_touch         ant_touch_4                      0.5                3.5                 "                             "         "        "
                    ant_touch_5                      0.5                3.5                 "               "
                    ant_touch_6                      0.5                3.5                 "               "                                "
                    ant_reach2_handsup_4        {0.1, 0.1, 0.1}   {1.4, 1.4, 0.625}         "                             "
                    ant_reach2_handsup_5        {0.1, 0.1, 0.1}   {1.4, 1.4, 0.625}         "               "                       "        "
                    ant_reach2_handsup_6        {0.1, 0.1, 0.1}   {1.4, 1.4, 0.625}         "               "                                "
                    ant_reach_handsup2_3        {0.1, 0.1, 0.1}   {1.5, 0.55, 0.55}         "               "
  ant_twisters      ant_reach_handsup2_4        {0.1, 0.1, 0.1}   {1.5, 0.55, 0.55}         "                             "                  "
                    ant_reach_handsup2_5        {0.1, 0.1, 0.1}   {1.5, 0.55, 0.55}         "               "                       "        "
                    ant_reach_handsup2_6        {0.1, 0.1, 0.1}   {1.5, 0.55, 0.55}         "               "
                    ant_reach_handsup_4           {0.1, 0.1}         {4.5, 0.55}            "                             "                  "
                    ant_reach_handsup_5           {0.1, 0.1}         {4.5, 0.55}            "               "                       "        "
                    ant_reach_handsup_6           {0.1, 0.1}         {4.5, 0.55}            "               "
                    claw_reach_2                     0.1                8.75                "               "                                "
                    claw_reach_3                     0.1                8.75                "               "
  claw_reach        claw_reach_4                     0.1                8.75                "               "                       "
                    claw_reach_5                     0.1                8.75                "                             "                  "
                    claw_reach_6                     0.1                8.75                "               "
                    claw_touch_3                     0.5                3.5                 "               "
  claw_touch        claw_touch_4                     0.5                3.5                 "               "                       "        "
                    claw_touch_5                     0.5                3.5                 "                             "
                    claw_touch_6                     0.5                3.5                 "               "                                "
                    claw_reach_handsup_3          {0.1, 0.1}        {1.4, 0.625}            "               "                                "
                    claw_reach_handsup_4          {0.1, 0.1}        {1.4, 0.625}            "               "
  claw_twisters     claw_reach_handsup_5          {0.1, 0.1}        {1.4, 0.625}            "                             "         "        "
                    claw_reach_handsup_6          {0.1, 0.1}        {1.4, 0.625}            "               "
                    claw_reach_hard_handsup_5     {0.1, 0.1}         {4.5, 0.55}            "                             "         "        "
                    claw_reach_hard_handsup_6     {0.1, 0.1}         {4.5, 0.55}            "               "
                    centipede_reach_2                0.1                3.0                 "               "
                    centipede_reach_3                0.1                3.0                 "               "                       "        "
  centipede_reach   centipede_reach_4                0.1                3.0                 "               "
                    centipede_reach_5                0.1                3.0                 "               "
                    centipede_reach_6                0.1                3.0                 "                             "
                    centipede_reach_7                0.1                3.0                 "               "                                "
                    centipede_touch_3                0.5                10.5                "               "
                    centipede_touch_4                0.5                10.5                "               "                                "
  centipede_touch   centipede_touch_5                0.5                10.5                "               "                                "
                    centipede_touch_6                0.5                10.5                "                             "         "        "
                    centipede_touch_7                0.5                10.5                "               "
                    worm_touch_3                     0.5                3.5                 "               "
                    worm_touch_4                     0.5                3.5                 "               "                                "
  worm_touch        worm_touch_5                     0.5                3.5                 "                             "         "
                    worm_touch_6                     0.5                3.5                 "               "                                "
                    worm_touch_7                     0.5                3.5                 "               "



Table 4: The combinations of environments used in the experiments of in-distribution generalization, and
compositional generalization for morphology.


                                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Sub-domain                     Environment                               dψ
                                                                             min   dψ
                                                                                    max   Task-Test   OOD-Test
                                  ant_reach_hard_3                          0.1    11.0      "
   ant_reach_hard                 ant_reach_hard_4                          0.1    11.0      "
                                  ant_reach_hard_5                          0.1    11.0      "
                                  ant_reach_hard_6                          0.1    11.0      "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3                    0.1    5.5       "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4                    0.1    5.5       "
   centipede_reach_hard           centipede_reach_hard_5                    0.1    5.5       "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_6                    0.1    5.5       "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_7                    0.1    5.5       "
                                  ant_reach_hard_4_b                        0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_5_b                        0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_4_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0         0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_4_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0         0.1    11.0                  "
   ant_reach_hard_diverse         ant_reach_hard_4_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0         0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_4_size_0.9_1.0_1.1         0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_5_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0         0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_5_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0         0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_5_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0         0.1    11.0                  "
                                  ant_reach_hard_5_size_0.9_1.0_1.1         0.1    11.0                  "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_b_r_0              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_b_l_0              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_b_r_1              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_b_l_1              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_b_r_0              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_b_r_1              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_b_l_1              0.1    5.5                   "
   centipede_reach_hard_diverse   centipede_reach_hard_4_b_r_2              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_b_l_2              0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_size_0.9_1.0_1.1   0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0   0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0   0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_3_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0   0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_size_0.9_1.0_1.1   0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0   0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0   0.1    5.5                   "
                                  centipede_reach_hard_4_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0   0.1    5.5                   "


Table 5: The combinations of environments used in the experiments of compositional generalization for task and
out-of-distribution generalization.


                                                           23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         unimal_id                  dψ
                                                     min            dψ
                                                                     max      reach   touch   twisters
                         5506-0-13-17-12-26-41
                         5506-12-12-01-11-30-00      0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-15-16-01-14-17-18     0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-6-5-01-14-20-42     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-0-2-01-15-36-43     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-12-12-01-15-33-01      0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-15-16-02-22-21-06      0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-6-8-17-09-59-06
                         5506-0-5-01-12-45-36     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-12-14-01-15-22-01      0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-2-0-01-11-27-44     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-7-6-17-12-20-01       0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-0-7-01-15-34-13       0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-12-6-17-08-36-18
                         5506-2-16-01-10-58-23       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-8-11-01-15-28-53      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-1-12-17-11-10-12       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-12-6-17-12-20-06       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-2-17-17-10-16-02       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-8-12-01-13-32-46      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-1-13-17-12-03-16       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-12-8-01-14-50-41    {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-2-9-17-11-10-42
                         5506-8-16-01-13-07-43       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-1-15-17-07-32-47    {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-13-10-17-12-25-45      0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-3-10-01-14-19-06       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-8-16-02-14-47-12    {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-1-2-02-20-28-11     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-13-17-01-16-09-18   {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-3-15-01-14-36-50      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-8-17-17-09-38-29
                         5506-1-5-02-19-23-33     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-13-3-02-21-34-38    {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-3-15-17-12-18-03       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-8-5-02-21-39-20     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-10-0-01-15-43-53      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-13-4-02-21-40-07       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-4-12-01-15-10-52      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-8-6-01-15-22-56     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-10-12-02-12-35-19      0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-13-5-02-21-35-41       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-4-14-01-14-32-47       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-9-12-01-10-32-52       0.1           8.75        "
                         5506-10-13-01-15-03-41     0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-14-11-01-13-58-37   {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-4-16-17-05-46-47
                         5506-9-2-01-14-19-00     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-10-14-17-10-38-34     0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-14-12-01-12-02-42   {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-4-3-01-09-35-18       0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-9-3-01-14-23-39     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-10-3-01-15-22-34      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-14-15-01-15-20-33     0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-5-12-01-15-05-55
                         5506-9-7-01-13-40-02        0.1            8.75       "
                         5506-10-3-17-12-09-26
                         5506-14-2-02-15-14-46       0.1            8.75       "
                         5506-5-16-02-21-15-42
                         5506-9-9-01-13-15-48       0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-11-2-01-14-11-40      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-14-5-01-15-59-52
                         5506-5-3-02-18-52-53     {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-11-4-17-12-33-10    {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-15-11-01-10-04-14     0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-6-11-01-14-16-09      0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-11-6-17-12-43-05
                         5506-15-11-01-12-54-35   {0.1, 0.1}    {1.5, 0.55}                     "
                         5506-6-2-01-09-16-44       0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-12-11-17-05-56-16     0.35            3.5                "
                         5506-15-11-17-12-12-28
                         5506-6-3-01-15-20-20       0.35            3.5                "



Table 6: Unimal IDs we adapted from Gupta et al. (2022). We inspect 100 morphologies and select 72
morphologies that work healthily. In the experiment of Table 1 and Table 12, we select 20 morphologies each
for 3 tasks (reach, touch, twisters) as listed above.


                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Sub-domain               Environment                         dψ
                                                                      min   dψ
                                                                             max   Task-Test   OOD-Test
                                 ant_push_3                          1.0    4.0       "
        ant_push                 ant_push_4                          1.0    4.0       "
                                 ant_push_5                          1.0    4.0       "
                                 ant_push_6                          1.0    4.0       "
                                 centipede_push_3                    1.5    3.75      "
                                 centipede_push_4                    1.5    3.75      "
        centipede_push           centipede_push_5                    1.5    3.75      "
                                 centipede_push_6                    1.5    3.75      "
                                 centipede_push_7                    1.5    3.75      "
                                 ant_push_3                          1.5    3.25      "
        worm_push                worm_push_4                         1.5    3.25      "
                                 worm_push_5                         1.5    3.25      "
                                 ant_push_4_b                        1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_5_b                        1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_4_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0         1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_4_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0         1.0    4.0                   "
        ant_push_diverse         ant_push_4_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0         1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_4_size_0.9_1.0_1.1         1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_5_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0         1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_5_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0         1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_5_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0         1.0    4.0                   "
                                 ant_push_5_size_0.9_1.0_1.1         1.0    4.0                   "
                                 centipede_push_3_b_r_0              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_3_b_l_0              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_3_b_r_1              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_3_b_l_1              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_b_r_0              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_b_r_1              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_b_l_1              1.5    3.75                  "
        centipede_push_diverse   centipede_push_4_b_r_2              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_b_l_2              1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_3_size_0.9_1.0_1.1   1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_3_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0   1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_3_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0   1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_3_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0   1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_size_0.9_1.0_1.1   1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_mass_0.5_1.0_3.0   1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_mass_0.5_1.0_1.0   1.5    3.75                  "
                                 centipede_push_4_mass_1.0_3.0_3.0   1.5    3.75                  "


Table 7: The extra combinations of environments used in the experiments of compositional generalization for
task and out-of-distribution generalization with push task.


                                                       25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E       A RCHITECTURE S ELECTION : T OKENIZED M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G RAPH
In the recent literature, offline RL is considered as supervised sequential modeling problem (Chen
et al., 2021a), and some works (Janner et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022) tokenize the continuous
observations and actions, like an analogy of vision transformer (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020); treating
input modality like a language.
As a part of offline architecture selection, we examine the effectiveness of tokenization. We mainly
follow the protocol in Reed et al. (2022); we first apply mu-law encoding (Oord et al., 2016) to
morphology-task graph representation:
                                                                                      log(|x|µ + 1)
                                                  mu_law(x) := sgn(x)                               ,
                                                                                      log(M µ + 1)
with µ = 100 and M = 256. This pre-processing could normalize the input to the range of [0, 1].
Then, we discretize pre-processed observations and actions with 1024 bins. To examine the broader
range of design choice, we prepare the following 6 variants of tokenized morphology-task graph:
whether layer normalization is added after embedding function (LN) (Bhatt et al., 2019; Parisotto
et al., 2019; Furuta et al., 2021a; Chen et al., 2021a), or outputting discretized action (D), smoothed
action by taking the average of bins (DA), and continuous values directly (C).
As shown in Table 8, predicting continuous value reveals the better performance than discretized
action maybe due to some approximation errors. However, the performance of Token-MTGv2 (C)
or Token-MTGv2 (C, LN) is still lower than MTGv2 itself. This might be because tokenization
looses some morphological invariance among nodes. In Table 1, we adopt Token-MTGv2 (C) for
comparison.

 Sub-domain        Token-MTGv2 (D, LN)   Token-MTGv2 (DA, LN)   Token-MTGv2 (C, LN)   Token-MTGv2 (D)   Token-MTGv2 (DA)   Token-MTGv2 (C)   Transformer (MTGv2)
 ant_reach            0.9256 ± 0.01          0.9252 ± 0.01         0.4394 ± 0.01        0.9210 ± 0.02     0.9215 ± 0.00      0.3846 ± 0.03      0.3206 ± 0.06
 ant_touch            1.0373 ± 0.01          1.0631 ± 0.01         0.4465 ± 0.01        1.0528 ± 0.00     1.0630 ± 0.01      0.3458 ± 0.03      0.2668 ± 0.08
 ant_twisters         0.5581 ± 0.00          0.5655 ± 0.00         0.2090 ± 0.00        0.5587 ± 0.01     0.5655 ± 0.00      0.2487 ± 0.01      0.1039 ± 0.05
 claw_reach           0.9568 ± 0.00          0.9584 ± 0.01         0.3685 ± 0.01        0.9674 ± 0.00     0.9583 ± 0.01      0.2862 ± 0.07      0.3581 ± 0.04
 claw_touch           1.0300 ± 0.01          1.0584 ± 0.01         0.3238 ± 0.07        1.0392 ± 0.03     1.0585 ± 0.01      0.3229 ± 0.07      0.2573 ± 0.08
 claw_twisters        0.6228 ± 0.01          0.6205 ± 0.00         0.4035 ± 0.02        0.6241 ± 0.00     0.6202 ± 0.00      0.3810 ± 0.03      0.3442 ± 0.04
 centipede_reach      0.5692 ± 0.12          0.5784 ± 0.13         0.1166 ± 0.00        0.6373 ± 0.09     0.5780 ± 0.13      0.1132 ± 0.03      0.1057 ± 0.04
 centipede_touch      0.9818 ± 0.01          1.0088 ± 0.00         0.1696 ± 0.00        0.9910 ± 0.01     1.0087 ± 0.00      0.1823 ± 0.03      0.3869 ± 0.04
 worm_touch           1.0596 ± 0.01          1.0731 ± 0.01         0.9357 ± 0.14        1.0639 ± 0.01     1.0706 ± 0.01      0.9235 ± 0.07      0.8952 ± 0.04
 Average Dist.        0.8124 ± 0.01          0.8232 ± 0.02         0.3572 ± 0.02        0.8248 ± 0.01     0.8225 ± 0.02      0.3402 ± 0.01      0.3128 ± 0.02


Table 8: The average normalized final distance in in-distribution evaluation. We extensively evaluate the
tokenized morphology-task graph variants, similar to Reed et al. (2022).


                                                                              26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    A RCHITECTURE S ELECTION : P OSITION E MBEDDING
As a part of architecture selection, we investigate whether position embedding (PE) contributes to the
generalization. Our empirical results in Table 9 suggest that, multi-task goal reaching performance
seems comparable between those. However, in more diverse morphology domains, PE plays an
important role. Therefore, we include PE into a default design.

                   Sub-domain        Transformer (MTGv2) (w/ PE)       Transformer (MTGv2) (w/o PE)
                   ant_reach                    0.3206 ± 0.06                  0.3966 ± 0.08
                   ant_touch                    0.2668 ± 0.08                  0.4573 ± 0.14
                   ant_twisters                 0.1039 ± 0.05                  0.1569 ± 0.02
                   claw_reach                   0.3581 ± 0.04                  0.3508 ± 0.03
                   claw_touch                   0.2573 ± 0.08                  0.3278 ± 0.07
                   claw_twisters                0.3442 ± 0.04                  0.3071 ± 0.04
                   centipede_reach              0.1057 ± 0.04                  0.0610 ± 0.02
                   centipede_touch              0.3869 ± 0.04                  0.1687 ± 0.03
                   worm_touch                   0.8952 ± 0.05                  0.8427 ± 0.03
                   Average Dist.                0.3128 ± 0.02                  0.3142 ± 0.03
                   unimal_reach                 0.4532 ± 0.01                  0.5856 ± 0.02
                   unimal_touch                 0.4461 ± 0.05                  0.3799 ± 0.06
                   unimal_twisters              0.3540 ± 0.02                  0.3236 ± 0.04
                   Average Dist.                0.4178 ± 0.01                  0.4297 ± 0.03


Table 9: The average normalized final distance on in-distribution evaluation. We compare the effect of position
embedding.


G     R EPRESENTATION S ELECTION : M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G RAPH WITH
      H ISTORY
Some meta RL or multi-task RL algorithms take historical observations as inputs, or leverage
recurrent neural networks to encode the temporal information of the tasks (Wang et al., 2016; Teh
et al., 2017; Rakelly et al., 2019). To examine whether morphology-task graph could be augmented
with historical observations, we test the morphology-task graph with history, which concatenates
recent H frames morphology-task graph as inputs while predicting one-step actions, in various types
of morphology-task generalization with ant agents. In all the setting, we choose ant_{reach, touch,
twisters} (in Table 4) for training. In morphology generalization setting, we hold out ant_5 agent
tasks for evaluation. In task generalization setting, we use ant_reach_hard (in Table 5) as a test set. In
out-of-distribution setting, we use ant_reach_hard_diverse (in Table 5) for evaluation. We also set the
history length as H = 3.
Table 10 implies that when the policy faces unseen tasks (i.e. in Compositional (Task) or Out-of-
Distribution settings), morphology-task graph with history may help to improve the performance,
which seems promising results to extend our framework to more complex tasks.

                                     MLP         Transformer (MTGv1)    Transformer (MTGv2)    Transformer (MTGv2-history)
 In-Distribution                0.3035 ± 0.03         0.1364 ± 0.04         0.0961 ± 0.02             0.1015 ± 0.04
 Compositional (Morphology)     0.7480 ± 0.02         0.1477 ± 0.04         0.1010 ± 0.01             0.1070 ± 0.03
 Compositional (Task)           0.4468 ± 0.11         0.2243 ± 0.03         0.2201 ± 0.04             0.2170 ± 0.01
 Out-of-Distribution            0.6788 ± 0.01         0.3663 ± 0.05         0.3370 ± 0.03             0.3316 ± 0.05


Table 10: The average normalized final distance in various types of morphology-task generalization on MxT-
Bench (especially, ant). We concatenate recent three frames morphology-task graph as inputs to Transformer.
The results show that when the policy faces unseen tasks, MTGv2-history may help to improve the performance.


                                                                27
            Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              H                                               D OES T RANSFORMER WITH M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G RAPH SCALE UP WITH
                                                              DATASET / MORPHOLOGY- TASK / MODEL SIZE ?

          The important aspect of the success in large language models is the scalability to the size of training
          data, the number of tasks for joint-training, and the number of parameters (Raffel et al., 2020; Brown
          et al., 2020). One natural question is whether a similar trend holds even in RL.
            Figure 11 suggests that the performance can get better if we increase the number of datasets and the
            number of parameters. The performance of Transformer with 0.4M parameters is equivalent to that
            of MLP with 3.1M. In contrast, when we increase the number of environments, the performance
            degrades while Transformer with MTGv1 and MTGv2 surpasses the degree of degradation, which
            seems inevitable trends in multi-task RL (Yu et al., 2020; Kurin et al., 2022) and an important future
            direction towards generalist controllers.

"WH  /PSNBMJ[FE %JTUBODF


                                                             L                    L                         L                    L                                                                                                       .            .                    .                  .
                                                             /VNCFS PG 5SBOTJUJPOT 	QFS &OWJSPONFOU
                                 /VNCFS PG &OWJSPONFOUT                                        /VNCFS PG .PEFM 1BSBNFUFST
                                                                                                                                    .-1                       5SBOTGPSNFS 	.5(W
                  5SBOTGPSNFS 	.5(W



          Figure 11: The average normalized final distance with different size of datasets (left), morphology-task com-
          binations (middle), and model size (right). The smaller value means the better multi-task performance (see
          Appendix D for environment division). These results suggest that the performance can get better when we
          increase the number of datasets, and morphology-task graph can surpasses the degradation of the performance
          when we increase the number of environments. Transformer is parameter-efficient than MLP, and improves the
          performance as many parameters.


              I                                             P ERCENTAGE OF I MPROVEMENT
            For clarification, we compute the percentage of improvement between two average normalized final
            distances (defined in Equation 3) d¯1 and d¯2 as follows (d¯1 < d¯2 ):
                                                                                                                                                                                          d¯2 − d¯1
                                                                                                                                                                         100 ∗                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                              d¯2


                                                                                                                                                                                          28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J     A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
In this section, we provide the detailed performance of in-distribution generalization (Table 11 and
Table 12), compositional morphology and task generalization (Table 13 and Table 14), and out-of-
distribution generalization (Table 15). For fine-tuning experiments, we summarized the detailed
scores of Figure 5 in Table 16.

    Sub-domain          Random            MLP         GNN (MTGv1)       Transformer (MTGv1)     Transformer (MTGv2)
    ant_reach         0.9637 ± 0.02   0.6426 ± 0.03    0.6240 ± 0.03        0.3657 ± 0.04           0.3206 ± 0.06
    ant_touch         1.0817 ± 0.02   0.3689 ± 0.02    0.4434 ± 0.03        0.1140 ± 0.03           0.2668 ± 0.08
    ant_twisters      0.9113 ± 0.84   0.3708 ± 0.01    0.2513 ± 0.01        0.2517 ± 0.02           0.1039 ± 0.05
    claw_reach        1.0760 ± 0.20   0.6617 ± 0.00    0.6214 ± 0.02        0.7158 ± 0.03           0.3581 ± 0.04
    claw_touch        1.5240 ± 0.88   0.6824 ± 0.06    0.3135 ± 0.06        0.6121 ± 0.04           0.2573 ± 0.08
    claw_twisters     1.3786 ± 1.42   0.4907 ± 0.03    0.6063 ± 0.07        0.4614 ± 0.07           0.3442 ± 0.04
    centipede_reach   0.5843 ± 0.35   0.0803 ± 0.02    0.1088 ± 0.02        0.0981 ± 0.03           0.1057 ± 0.04
    centipede_touch   1.0077 ± 0.01   0.4743 ± 0.03    0.5089 ± 0.01        0.4609 ± 0.07           0.3869 ± 0.04
    worm_touch        2.7087 ± 1.73   1.1034 ± 0.06    1.0559 ± 0.04        0.7708 ± 0.03           0.8952 ± 0.05
    Average Dist.     1.2019 ± 0.41   0.5150 ± 0.01    0.4776 ± 0.01        0.4069 ± 0.02           0.3128 ± 0.02


Table 11: The average normalized final distance for in-distribution evaluation on MxT-Bench (as shown in
Table 1).


             Sub-domain          Random            MLP          Transformer (MTGv1)    Transformer (MTGv2)
             unimal_reach      0.9662 ± 0.01   0.7448 ± 0.02        0.5692 ± 0.01           0.4532 ± 0.01
             unimal_touch      1.1302 ± 0.10   0.7634 ± 0.03        0.5290 ± 0.04           0.4461 ± 0.05
             unimal_twisters   0.6305 ± 0.02   0.5027 ± 0.02        0.3534 ± 0.03           0.3540 ± 0.02
             Average Dist.     0.9090 ± 0.03   0.6703 ± 0.01        0.4839 ± 0.02           0.4178 ± 0.01


Table 12: The average normalized final distance for in-distribution evaluation on MxT-Bench with challenging
morphologies from Gupta et al. (2022) (as shown in Table 1).


             Sub-domain          Random            MLP          Transformer (MTGv1)    Transformer (MTGv2)
             ant_reach         0.9697 ± 0.03   0.8541 ± 0.03        0.5511 ± 0.10           0.4170 ± 0.04
             ant_touch         1.0821 ± 0.00   0.7742 ± 0.07        0.4464 ± 0.07           0.3752 ± 0.12
             ant_twisters      0.9215 ± 0.95   0.5356 ± 0.02        0.2569 ± 0.04           0.2608 ± 0.02
             claw_reach        0.9915 ± 0.04   0.9370 ± 0.01        0.7332 ± 0.03           0.4399 ± 0.06
             claw_touch        1.0695 ± 0.02   1.0283 ± 0.02        0.7074 ± 0.10           0.1375 ± 0.01
             claw_twisters     0.7001 ± 0.17   0.5456 ± 0.02        0.5486 ± 0.02           0.5589 ± 0.05
             centipede_reach   0.7929 ± 0.04   0.4626 ± 0.15        0.2640 ± 0.07           0.2506 ± 0.14
             centipede_touch   1.0121 ± 0.01   0.7632 ± 0.02        0.4971 ± 0.06           0.3474 ± 0.09
             worm_touch        2.7376 ± 2.23   1.1417 ± 0.10        0.8608 ± 0.07           1.0110 ± 0.03
             Average Dist.     1.1419 ± 0.41   0.7216 ± 0.01        0.4940 ± 0.01           0.4066 ± 0.01


Table 13: The average normalized final distance for compositional morphology evaluation on MxT-Bench (as
shown in Table 1).


                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        Sub-domain                  Random           MLP         Transformer (MTGv1)    Transformer (MTGv2)
        ant_reach_hard          0.9542 ± 0.01    0.8299 ± 0.03      0.6176 ± 0.07           0.4522 ± 0.06
        centipede_reach_hard    0.8443 ± 0.02    0.5689 ± 0.03      0.4770 ± 0.05           0.4412 ± 0.05
        Average Dist.           0.8932 ± 0.01    0.6849 ± 0.01      0.5395 ± 0.04           0.4461 ± 0.05


Table 14: The average normalized final distance for compositional task evaluation on MxT-Bench (as shown in
Table 1).


     Sub-domain                       Random            MLP         Transformer (MTGv1)    Transformer (MTGv2)
     ant_reach_hard_diverse         0.9520 ± 0.01   0.8288 ± 0.02       0.6798 ± 0.04           0.5365 ± 0.05
     centipede_reach_hard_diverse   0.8660 ± 0.02   0.7546 ± 0.02       0.6130 ± 0.03           0.5208 ± 0.04
     Average Dist.                  0.8979 ± 0.01   0.7821 ± 0.02       0.6144 ± 0.04           0.5266 ± 0.04


Table 15: The average normalized final distance for out-of-distribution evaluation on MxT-Bench (as shown in
Table 1). The agents are diversified with missing, mass, size randomization.


  Method (data size)                            Compositional (Morphology)     Compositional (Task)     Out-of-Distribution
  MLP (4K, randinit)                                   0.8162 ± 0.02                0.7046 ± 0.01           0.6674 ± 0.03
  MLP (4K, fine-tuning)                                0.6715 ± 0.02                0.5582 ± 0.03           0.5694 ± 0.04
  Transformer (MTGv1) (4K, randinit)                   0.6021 ± 0.03                0.5017 ± 0.04           0.5222 ± 0.06
  Transformer (MTGv1) (4K, fine-tuning)                0.3499 ± 0.04                0.3378 ± 0.08           0.3401 ± 0.08
  Transformer (MTGv2) (4K, randinit)                   0.5504 ± 0.03                0.4894 ± 0.03           0.4980 ± 0.05
  Transformer (MTGv2) (4K, fine-tuning)                0.2863 ± 0.02                0.3180 ± 0.07           0.3115 ± 0.07
  MLP (8K, randinit)                                   0.7044 ± 0.02                0.4818 ± 0.02           0.5247 ± 0.04
  MLP (8K, fine-tuning)                                0.5579 ± 0.06                0.3709 ± 0.01           0.4238 ± 0.05
  Transformer (MTGv1) (8K, randinit)                   0.4001 ± 0.04                0.2791 ± 0.06           0.2762 ± 0.04
  Transformer (MTGv1) (8K, fine-tuning)                0.2600 ± 0.04                0.1926 ± 0.03           0.2089 ± 0.03
  Transformer (MTGv2) (8K, randinit)                   0.3758 ± 0.03                0.1868 ± 0.05           0.1868 ± 0.05
  Transformer (MTGv2) (8K, fine-tuning)                0.1871 ± 0.01                0.1356 ± 0.03           0.1498 ± 0.03
  MLP (12K, randinit)                                  0.5530 ± 0.01                0.4256 ± 0.03           0.4399 ± 0.02
  MLP (12K, fine-tuning)                               0.4312 ± 0.03                0.2982 ± 0.02           0.3358 ± 0.02
  Transformer (MTGv1) (12K, randinit)                  0.2914 ± 0.03                0.1555 ± 0.04           0.1759 ± 0.03
  Transformer (MTGv1) (12K, fine-tuning)               0.2042 ± 0.01                0.0888 ± 0.01           0.0894 ± 0.01
  Transformer (MTGv2) (12K, randinit)                  0.2655 ± 0.03                0.1149 ± 0.02           0.1149 ± 0.02
  Transformer (MTGv2) (12K, fine-tuning)               0.1301 ± 0.02                0.0562 ± 0.02           0.0513 ± 0.01


Table 16: The average normalized final distance among test environments in fine-tuning settings (compositional
morphology/task or out-of-distribution evaluation).


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K    W HY M ORPHOLOGY-TASK G RAPH W ORKS W ELL ?: ATTENTION A NALYSIS
In this section, we provide the attention analysis of Transformer with MTGv1 (Figure 13) and MTGv2
(Figure 12).
The experimental results reveal that despite slight differences, MTGv2 generalizes various morpholo-
gies and tasks better than MTGv1. To find out the difference between those, we qualitatively analyze
the attention weights in Transformer. Figure 12 shows that MTGv2 consistently focuses on goal nodes
over time, and activates important nodes to solve the task; for instance, in centipede_touch (top),
MTGv2 pays attention to corresponding nodes (torso0 and goal0) at the beginning of the episode,
and gradually sees other relevant nodes (torso1 and torso2) to hold the movable ball. Furthermore, in
ant_twisters (bottom), MTGv2 firstly tries to raise the agent’s legs to satisfy goal1 and goal2, and then
focus on reaching a leg (goal0). Temporally-consistent attention to goal nodes and dynamics attention
to relevant nodes can contribute to generalization over goal-directed tasks and morphologies.
Figure 13 implies that MTGv1 does not show such consistent activation to the goal-conditioned
node; for instance, in centipede_touch_3 (above), the goal information is treated as an extra node
feature of torso0, but there are no nodes that consistently activated with torso0. Moreover, in
ant_reach_handsup2_3 (bottom), MTGv1 does not keep focusing on the agent’s limbs during the
episode. Rather, MTGv1 tends to demonstrate some periodic patterns during the rollout as implied in
prior works (Huang et al., 2020; Kurin et al., 2021).


Figure 12: Attention analysis of MTGv2 in centipede_touch_3 (top) and ant_reach_handsup2_5 (bottom; from
twisters). From left to right, we visualize the attention weights of MTGv2 during the rollout. In contrast to
MTGv1, MTGv2 consistently focuses on goal nodes over time, and activates important nodes to solve the task.


                                                     31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: Attention analysis of MTGv1 in centipede_touch_3 and ant_reach_handsup2_5. This tends to
demonstrate some periodic patterns during the rollout as implied in prior works (Huang et al., 2020; Kurin et al.,
2021).


                                                       32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS OF TASK G ENERALIZATION
Although in Table 1 and Figure 5, we examine the compositional task generalization and out-of-
distribution generalization with reach_hard tasks, where the goal distribution is farther than original
reach tasks. While they seem more difficult unseen tasks (Furuta et al., 2021b), they also seem
to have some sort of task similarities between training dataset environments and those evaluation
environments.
Another question might be how morphology-task graph performs in more different unseen tasks. To
evaluate compositional task generalization and out-of-distribution on the environments that have
less similarity to the training datasets, we prepare push task, where the agents try to move the box
objects to the given goal position. See Table 7 for the environment division. For training datasets, we
leverage In-Distribution division in Table 4. Because this task requires the sufficient interaction with
the object, the nature of tasks seem quite different from training dataset environments (reach, touch,
and twisters).
Table 17 shows the results of compositional task evaluation and Table 18 shows those of out-of-
distribution evaluation. In contrast to Table 1, the zero-shot performance seems limited. Transferring
pre-trained control primitives to significantly different tasks still remains as important future work.
However, as shown in Figure 14, morphology-task graph works as better prior knowledge for
downstream multi-task imitation learning, even with the environments that have less similarity to the
pre-training datasets. As prior work suggested (Mandi et al., 2022), these results suggests that, in
RL, jointly-learned multi-task model has a strong inductive bias even for unseen and significantly
different environments.

          Sub-domain            Random          MLP          Transformer (MTGv1)    Transformer (MTGv2)
          ant_push          1.0808 ± 0.02   0.9995 ± 0.00        0.9212 ± 0.14         0.8836 ± 0.09
          centipede_push    1.0816 ± 0.01   0.9942 ± 0.00        0.9557 ± 0.02         0.9377 ± 0.01
          worm_push         1.1026 ± 0.04   0.6300 ± 0.01        0.5579 ± 0.10         0.4091 ± 0.15
          Average Dist.     1.0866 ± 0.02   0.9051 ± 0.00        0.8800 ± 0.02         0.8263 ± 0.04


Table 17: The average normalized final distance for compositional task evaluation on MxT-Bench with unseen
push task. See Table 7 for the environment division.


       Sub-domain                 Random            MLP          Transformer (MTGv1)   Transformer (MTGv2)
       ant_push_diverse         1.0814 ± 0.02   1.0018 ± 0.01       0.9906 ± 0.01          0.8800 ± 0.04
       centipede_push_diverse   1.0848 ± 0.02   1.0031 ± 0.01       0.9997 ± 0.00          0.9355 ± 0.04
       Average Dist.            1.0835 ± 0.02   1.0021 ± 0.02       0.9965 ± 0.01          0.9155 ± 0.03


Table 18: The average normalized final distance for out-of-distribution evaluation on MxT-Bench with unseen
push task. See Table 7 for the environment division.


                                                            33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                       $PNQPTJUJPOBM 	5BTL
                                            0VU PG %JTUSJCVUJPO
           .-1 	 L

           .-1 	 L

         .-1 	  L

  5' .5(W  	 L

  5' .5(W  	 L

5' .5(W  	  L

  5' .5(W  	 L

  5' .5(W  	 L
                                                        GJOFUVOJOH                                                              GJOFUVOJOH
5' .5(W  	  L
                                                        SBOEJOJU                                                                  SBOEJOJU

                                  "WFSBHF /PSNBMJ[FE %JTUBODF                            "WFSBHF /PSNBMJ[FE %JTUBODF
Figure 14: Comparison of multi-task goal-reaching performances on fine-tuning settings in the unseen push
tasks. The results imply that morphology-task graph works as better prior knowledge for downstream multi-task
imitation learning, even with the environments that have less similarity to the pre-training datasets.


                      Method (data size)                                           Compositional (Task)                         Out-of-Distribution
                      MLP (4K, randinit)                                                    0.8042 ± 0.05                           0.8332 ± 0.04
                      MLP (4K, fine-tuning)                                                 0.7818 ± 0.05                           0.8108 ± 0.02
                      Transformer (MTGv1) (4K, randinit)                                    0.6653 ± 0.03                           0.7191 ± 0.02
                      Transformer (MTGv1) (4K, fine-tuning)                                 0.6398 ± 0.05                           0.6893 ± 0.04
                      Transformer (MTGv2) (4K, randinit)                                    0.6276 ± 0.05                           0.6999 ± 0.04
                      Transformer (MTGv2) (4K, fine-tuning)                                 0.5826 ± 0.05                           0.6779 ± 0.03
                      MLP (8K, randinit)                                                    0.7542 ± 0.06                           0.7751 ± 0.03
                      MLP (8K, fine-tuning)                                                 0.6847 ± 0.04                           0.7611 ± 0.03
                      Transformer (MTGv1) (8K, randinit)                                    0.6027 ± 0.03                           0.6613 ± 0.05
                      Transformer (MTGv1) (8K, fine-tuning)                                 0.5448 ± 0.06                           0.6169 ± 0.05
                      Transformer (MTGv2) (8K, randinit)                                    0.5704 ± 0.03                           0.6286 ± 0.05
                      Transformer (MTGv2) (8K, fine-tuning)                                 0.4993 ± 0.06                           0.5772 ± 0.06
                      MLP (12K, randinit)                                                   0.7037 ± 0.03                           0.7452 ± 0.03
                      MLP (12K, fine-tuning)                                                0.6678 ± 0.04                           0.7110 ± 0.06
                      Transformer (MTGv1) (12K, randinit)                                   0.5925 ± 0.04                           0.6203 ± 0.04
                      Transformer (MTGv1) (12K, fine-tuning)                                0.4993 ± 0.06                           0.5158 ± 0.08
                      Transformer (MTGv2) (12K, randinit)                                   0.5510 ± 0.05                           0.5454 ± 0.11
                      Transformer (MTGv2) (12K, fine-tuning)                                0.4132 ± 0.04                           0.4748 ± 0.06


Table 19: The average normalized final distance among test environments in fine-tuning settings (compositional
morphology/task or out-of-distribution evaluation) with unseen push task.



M         E XTENDED R ELATED W ORK
Morphology-Task Generalization In the previous literature, multi-task in RL has arisen from
each MDP component; from different (1) dynamics (Hallak et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2019), (2)
reward (Kaelbling, 1993; Andrychowicz et al., 2017), and (3) state/action space (Wang et al., 2018;
Huang et al., 2020). We think multi-morphology RL covers (1) and (3), and multi-task (or multi-goal)
RL does (2) and (1). Considering morphology-task generalization, we could study the generalization
in RL across all the MDP components (dynamics, reward, state space, action space). While, from
a broader perspective, the notion of multi-task in RL may contain both morphological and goal
diversity, in this paper, we treat them separately, and multi-task just stands for multi-goal settings.
Connection to Policy Distillation Policy distillation has been proposed and studied for a while (Rusu
et al., 2016; Parisotto et al., 2016; Levine et al., 2016; Czarnecki et al., 2019), where a single student
policy distills the knowledge from multiple teacher policies to obtain better multitask learners. In
contrast, we call our protocol behavior distillation, where the single student policy distills the
knowledge from multi-source offline data (e.g. human teleoperation, scripted behavior (Singh et al.,
2021), play data (Lynch et al., 2019)), not limited to RL policy, since recent RL or robotics research
often leverage such a data-driven approach for scalability (Levine et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021b; Gu
et al., 2021a; Lee et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2020; Shridhar et al., 2022b).



                                                                                  34
