T HINK S UM : P ROBABILISTIC REASONING OVER SETS
USING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Large language models (LLMs) have a substantial capacity for high-level ana-
         logical reasoning: reproducing patterns in linear text that occur in their train-
         ing data (zero-shot evaluation) or in the provided context (few-shot in-context
         learning). However, recent studies show that even the largest LLMs fail in sce-
         narios that require reasoning over multiple objects or facts or making sequences
         of logical deductions. We propose a two-stage probabilistic inference paradigm,
         T HINK S UM, that reasons over sets of objects or facts in a structured manner. In the
         first stage (T HINK – ‘fast’ retrieval of associations), a LLM is queried in parallel
         over a set of phrases extracted from the prompt or an auxiliary model call. In
         the second stage (S UM – ‘slow’ probabilistic inference or reasoning), the results
         of these queries are aggregated to make the final prediction. We demonstrate the
         advantages of T HINK S UM on the BIG-bench suite of evaluation tasks, achieving
         improvements over the state of the art using GPT-family models on ten difficult
         tasks, often with far smaller model variants. We compare and contrast T HINK S UM
         with other proposed modifications to direct prompting of LLMs, such as variants
         of chain-of-thought prompting. We argue that because the probabilistic inference
         in T HINK S UM is performed outside of calls to the LLM, T HINK S UM is less sensi-
         tive to prompt design, yields more interpretable predictions, and can be flexibly
         combined with latent variable models to extract structured knowledge from LLMs.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Chowdhery et al., 2022) can
recall a broad range of basic facts, recognize and mimic various forms in language, and efficiently
extrapolate analogies in structure and meaning. These abilities allow LLMs to excel in zero-shot
and few-shot tasks that are formulated as generation or selection of a likely completion of a prompt.
This formulation requires LLMs to perform associative fast thinking, in which each token of text
in the sequence making up the answer is generated or scored in one pass through the model and,
other than that, no intermediate information is created or retained. Fast thinking is made possible
by the compression in the LLM weights of information that is repeated in a variety of ways in large
training datasets.
However, it is increasingly evident that when reasoning, or slow thinking, is required, failure modes
of LLMs are revealed. In our usage, reasoning is sequential manipulation of concepts that can be
expressed in language. Tasks that require iterative retrieval of rarely stated knowledge, uncertain-
ties over multiple objects or facts, or multiple steps of deduction are difficult even for the most
advanced LLMs. In a recently designed suite of evaluations, BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2022),
some of the tasks where the gap between machine and human performance is large involve infer-
ence sequences with nested counterfactuals (L OGICAL DEDUCTION), concepts introduced though
definitions (C ONCEPTUAL COMBINATIONS), etc. (see Fig. A.1). These are tasks where a human
solver’s intuitive feeling of ‘(in)coherence’ is not sufficient to produce the right answer: the solution
is obtained by a sequence of thoughts that can be explained in words and may even require writing
down intermediate results if working memory is insufficient.
We show on several examples in BIG-bench that such problems can be addressed by a two-
component mechanism, which we name T HINK S UM:
• T HINK (fast thinking / association / knowledge retrieval step): creating an association of spans of
  text with sets of strings. This process may involve generation from a language model, as is the case
  in Fig. 1, where the novel word ‘binne’ is associated with the set of strings {‘cat’, ‘mink’, . . . }


                                                   1
D IRECT P ROMPTING
A binne is any furry four-legged creature, and a bam is a simple dwelling.
A binne bam is a place for people (55%) animals (44%) birds (0.87%) researchers (0.022%)

C HAIN OF T HOUGHT / AUXILIARY K NOWLEDGE
A binne is any furry four-legged creature, and a bam is a simple dwelling.
Examples of binnes: cat, mink, ferret, guinea pig, rabbit.
Examples of bams: hut, cabin, cottage, shelter, shack.
A binne bam is a place for people (51%) animals (48%) birds (0.76%) researchers (0.011%)

T HINK S UM
A binne is any furry four-legged creature, and a bam is a simple dwelling.
binne = {cat, mink, ferret, guinea pig, rabbit}
bam = {hut, cabin, cottage, shelter, shack}                   ⌋⌉
                                                            T HINK (auxiliary LM calls to define sets)

                      A cat cottage is a place for
      X                 A rabbit cabin is a place for         ⌉S   UM (aggregate LM likelihoods)
                          A mink shelter is a place for
                            ···                               ⌋
A binne bam is a place for animals (65%) people (34%) birds (1.5%) researchers (0.056%)

Figure 1: An example adapted from the C ONCEPTUAL COMBINATIONS (I NVENTED WORDS ) task,
in which models must select the most likely completion of a phrase that includes nonce words
whose definitions are given. Direct prompting evaluates completion likelihoods normalized over
the four answer choices (‘people’, ‘animals’, ‘birds’, ‘researchers’). Chain-of-thought-like or aux-
iliary knowledge approaches would query a LLM or knowledge base for additional context. Our
T HINK S UM approach to this task queries a LLM (GPT-2 XL) to produce sets of examples defining
the nonce words, then marginalizes over substitutions of these examples into the target phrase.



  by prompting GPT-3 with the definition and asking for examples. However, it may also consist
  of scoring alone, in order to form a matrix of probabilities over which probabilistic inference is
  performed.
• S UM (slow thinking / S UMmarization / reasoning step): probabilistic inference that aggregates
  generated strings or probabilities to produce the final answer. The summarization typically in-
  volves, and often entirely consists of, summing of probabilities of strings (computed in the T HINK
  step), as in Fig. 1, where the final word is assumed to be sampled from a mixture of possible
  substitutions of ‘binne’ and ‘bam’ words into the input.
T HINK S UM is named by analogy with other algorithms with two basic operations that ‘expand’ and
‘aggregate’, like MapReduce in distributed computing and sum-product in graphical models.
We discuss different ways to T HINK and to S UM in section §2, but we start with one example, il-
lustrated in Fig. 1, motivated by the C ONCEPTUAL COMBINATIONS (I NVENTED WORDS ) task in
BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2022). In this task, the LLM is provided with two invented words and
their definitions in the input. The LLM is then asked to infer the most plausible sentence that uses
a combination of the invented words. As the words are invented, they are not common or consis-
tently used in the training set, and the LLM needs to understand and combine the definitions of the
invented words to reason about the meaning of the combination. The LLM is queried to produce
example instances of the invented words with the help of the definitions. These example instances
can be substituted into the query in place of the invented words. In this way, by mapping individual
spans of the text of interest to sets we arrive at a mixture model (in this example, a mixture with 25
components, for 5 possible replacements of each of the words), which can be used in the same man-
ner the original LLM is used, either to score text or to generate it token by token. In this case, when
we score all candidate completions using this mixture model and normalize over the four choices,
the correct answer – that ‘binne bams’ are for animals and not people – becomes most likely.
An important difference between T HINK S UM and existing chain-of-thought-like prompt engineering
methods (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022), is that the reasoning step is not reduced to a gen-
eration problem for the LLM, but is performed as a probabilistic inference external to the LLM.
This reduces its vulnerability to features of the prompt, such as accidental distraction of the LLM by
spurious patterns. Instead, we engineer the slow thinking process to make parallel calls to the LLM
to query for intermediate information, then possibly perform programmatic recombination of strings
(T HINK). The final reasoning step – in which likelihoods obtained from the LLM for the recombina-
tions derived from earlier steps of the reasoning process are combined to make the final prediction


                                                          2
– is left to classical probabilistic reasoning (S UM). In a sense, S UM replaces the self-attention mech-
anism over linear text, which is used as the sole ‘reasoning’ mechanism in chain-of-thought-like
approaches that expect the intermediate ‘thoughts’ to take the form of generated tokens intervening
between the input and output. Fig. 1 shows the potential brittleness of such ‘reasoning’, especially
in smaller models, which have stronger recency bias (Malkin et al., 2022): if we simply list gen-
erated examples as additional context in the prompt, the recency bias causes the LLM to still give
higher probability to ‘people’ than to ‘animals’, simply because ‘bam’ (simple dwelling) examples
are given after the ‘binne’ examples.
Imposing an alternative reasoning system over an associative “knee-jerk reaction” system has an
analogy with models of human cognitive processes (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974; Kahneman, 2011)
that separate System 1 (fast thinking) and System 2 (slow thinking). System 2 acts as a ‘controller’
that can prime System 1 to appropriately bias its fast thinking, and, in the context of reasoning with
deep learning models, has been interpreted as operating with sparse concepts that can be described
in language (Bengio, 2017; Goyal & Bengio, 2020). Through repeated usage, the slow-thinking
functions of System 2 can become efficiently compressed into System 1 intuitions, in the same
manner that iterative ‘reasoning’ functions of which smaller LLMs are not capable become zero-
shot generation capacities for large LLMs.
As is the case with humans, there is always the next frontier of problems where a trained model
with remarkable ‘intuition’ needs to be slowed down. The main claim of this paper is that more is
possible with LLMs of existing scale when they are used in concert with a wise System 2 controller
that allows for probabilistic inference.

2     FAST AND SLOW THINKING WITH LLM S
The example in Fig. 1 falls into a general T HINK S UM paradigm which extends the reasoning capa-
bilities of a given model by explicitly associating certain text spans with sets of other strings, which
may serve as alternatives or elaborations/explanations and can be either defined by the user or in-
ferred by the LLM itself. These associations then provide multiple texts to be evaluated, again by
the LLM itself. The collection of resulting probabilities provides an opportunity to summarize the
text using standard probabilistic inference techniques, which usually include a summation.
2.1   H OW TO T HINK
Here we list examples of the “fast thinking” that precedes the summarization stage.
Elementary string manipulations. Standard ways to turn a question into a prompt that can be
given to a LLM for generation or scoring involve choices (e.g., of the prompt format) that can be
seen as being made by a controlling agent. The standard approach to multiple-choice questions is
to write them as Cloze tasks. However, there are nontrivial operations used in inference procedures
that sometimes work better, such as:
• Order inversion: Exchanging the order of the question and answers, as in Min et al. (2022).
• Premise erasure: Deleting a part of the question. Removing a premise with which the answer
  is expected to have high mutual information is a step in inference procedures that aim to correct
  for bias towards answers with high unconditional likelihood (Zhao et al., 2021; Holtzman et al.,
  2021; Malkin et al., 2022).
Substitution and normalization. An example is shown in Fig. 1. Elements from a set may be
substituted in place of ‘slot’ words in a prompt, such as ‘cat’ substituted for ‘binne’ in the prompt “A
binne bam is a place for”. This operation can be combined with syntax-normalization
steps that are reliably achieved by standard NLP tools, such as ensuring subject-verb agreement.
Example and list generation. A LLM can be prompted to generate or score lists of words or
phrases. We suggest and experiment with three instances of this:
• Example generation: In Fig. 1, the LLM is prompted to turn a definition or characterizing prop-
  erty, such as ‘simple dwelling’, into a list of examples. This can be achieved with a prompt such
  as “A bam is a simple dwelling. Examples: 1.”. The generated completion
  can be parsed into a set to be used later in the inference procedure.
• List extension: A similar approach can also be used to hallucinate additional possible answers to
  questions, as we will show in some of the experiments.
• List of words: Similar prompts provide an even simpler T HINK method that we use for scoring
  – but not generation – in several tasks. Just prompting a LLM with “List of words: 𝐴,


                                                   3
    𝐵”, where 𝐴 and 𝐵 are words or phrases, and computing the likelihood of 𝐵 conditioned on
    “List of words: 𝐴,” is a good measure of semantic relatedness of 𝐴 and 𝐵.
Fact generation. This way of T HINKing associates an input word with a set of phrases, in a similar
manner to generating examples from a definition. It can be achieved with prompts such as “List
facts about cats. 1.” The generated facts are good targets for substitutions of other con-
cepts (‘dogs’, ‘galaxies’) in place of the concept (‘cats’) about which facts are generated. A variation
on this asks the LLM to generate differences between two concepts, as shown in Fig. 2 (right).
Translation. The LLM can be prompted to convert between different forms of representing the
same concept as a sequence of tokens. We use two basic examples of this in experiments:
• Translation between languages by prompting the LLM in formats such as “French:
  J’adore les chats noirs. English:”. A very similar approach can be used to con-
  vert non-alphabetic symbols, such as emoji, into words with a similar meaning.
• Converting text to formal (symbolic) structures, like turning a word problem into a collection of
  mathematical equations.
2.2     H OW TO S UM
Elementary inference. As above, we begin by listing existing standard ways of turning LLM
outputs into answers, which we see as trivial cases of aggregation (S UM).
• Posterior computation by normalizing probabilities over a set.
• Majority/minority vote (argmin/argmax): a component of most answer selection procedures.
• Thresholding: Used when an answer depends on the value of a probability (or a difference or
  ratio of probabilities). This can be used when a discrete answer needs to be produced from a
  real-valued output likelihoods.
• Ratio of likelihoods: Likelihoods from different variants of the same prompt can be combined by
  considering their ratio or more general log-linear or other mixture. For example, this can be done
  to correct the likelihood of an answer conditioned on a question by its unconditional likelihood,
  in combination with the Premise erasure operation described above.
Mixture (average) aggregation. A collection of prompts can be treated as the components of
a mixture model over completions. An example is shown in Fig. 1, where substitutions of a set of
words yield 25 different prompts. Likelihoods of the completion over these 25 prompts are averaged.
Product aggregation. We use products of likelihoods in two different ways:
• In a similar way as mixtures, but when the more natural probabilistic model has all elements of a
  set (of prompts) generating the answer, such as when a description or definition must be satisfied
  by all concepts in a set.
• In a task where we are to determine whether a statement 𝑆 or its negation 𝑆 ′ is true, we can
  compute the likelihood of both 𝑆 and 𝑆 ′ being true (as posterior over the tokens ‘True’ and ‘False’
  in an appropriate prompt), then compare 𝑝(True|𝑆) 𝑝(False|𝑆 ′) (𝑆 is true and 𝑆 ′ is false) with
  𝑝(False|𝑆) 𝑝(True|𝑆 ′) (𝑆 is false and 𝑆 ′ is true).
Fitting latent variable models. See §C for an example of fitting a discrete latent variable (clus-
tering) model over the likelihoods produced by a LLM.

3     E XPERIMENTS
We compare T HINK S UM with the published results for 𝑛-shot GPT-3 175B (davinci) in BIG-bench,
where 𝑛 ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}. Our main results are shown in Table 1. Below, we describe T HINK S UM for
each task. Detailed descriptions are in §B, and examples of each task appear in Table D.1.
3.1     S EMANTIC RELATEDNESS
3.1.1    I NTRODUCTORY EXAMPLES : P HRASE RELATEDNESS AND C ODENAMES
Phrase relatedness. Each question in the multiple-choice P HRASE RELATEDNESS task requires
to determine which of a given set of words or phrases {𝑤 𝑖 } is related to a query phrase 𝑞. We query
the LLM for the likelihood of 𝑞 following a List of words prompt to form a vector of likelihoods:
                           𝑝 𝑖 = 𝑝 LLM (𝑞 | “List of words: 𝑤 𝑖 , ”).
The answer selected is the one with highest likelihood, arg max𝑖 𝑝 𝑖 (a trivial S UM operation). We
note that this is also an instance of Order inversion: the query is scored following a prompt in
which each of the candidate answers is substituted.


                                                   4
                     Table 1: Standard metric (BLEU for C ODENAMES, accuracy for other tasks) for GPT-3 175B
                     (davinci) and T HINK S UM with 175B (davinci), InstructGPT and GPT-2 XL on BIG-bench tasks.
                                                                                                               GPT-3 (davinci) 𝑛-shot                    T HINK S UM
                         Task                                                                       Avg. H    𝑛=0        1    2      3      GPT-3      InstructGPT     GPT-2 XL
                         P HRASE RELATEDNESS (§3.1.1)                                                  0.74   0.37   0.42    0.52   0.59     0.85         0.87           0.79
                         C ODENAMES (§3.1.1)                                                           0.18   0.01   0.11    0.16   0.19     0.37         0.41           0.36
                         O DD ONE OUT (§3.1.2)                                                         0.80   0.27   0.20    0.23   0.23     0.80         0.84           0.71
                         N OVEL CONCEPTS (§3.2.1)                                                      0.67   0.47   0.47    0.56   0.56     0.72         0.75           0.50
                         I NVENTED WORDS (§3.2.2)                                                      N/A    0.29   0.14    0.14   0.21     0.64         0.71           0.29
                         S PORTS UNDERSTANDING (§3.3.1)                                                0.71   0.50   0.50    0.50   0.50     0.71         0.74           0.54
                         K NOWN UNKNOWNS (§3.3.2)                                                      0.80   0.61   0.52    0.48   0.50     0.54         0.76            –
                         M ISCONCEPTIONS RUSSIAN (§3.4.1)                                              0.65   0.33   0.33    0.41   0.35     0.70         0.61            –
                         E MOJI MOVIE (§3.4.1)                                                         0.93   0.12   0.18    0.12   0.19     0.80         0.75            –
                         F IVE OBJECTS (§3.4.2)                                                        N/A    0.23   0.29    0.28   0.32       –          0.77             –

               100
                         0-shot           Aux. knowledge
                         1-shot           ThinkSum
                         2-shot           Average human
                         3-shot
               80

                                                                             text-davinci-002
               60
accuracy (%)


               40



               20



                0
                     S            M       L    XL      Ada Babbage Curie                        da Vinci
                                  GPT-2                                    GPT-3


                     Figure 2: O DD ONE OUT. Left: Performance of GPT-3 (𝑛-shot, 𝑛 = 0, 1, 2, 3), auxiliary knowledge,
                     and T HINK S UM with various model sizes. Middle: Auxiliary knowledge vs. T HINK S UM with varying
                     number of differences. Right: Prompt used to generate knowledge statements.


                     Codenames. Each question in C ODENAMES requires selecting the 𝑘 words from a set {𝑤 𝑖 } that
                     are most closely related to a query word 𝑞. We form a vector 𝑝 𝑖 in the same way as for P HRASE
                     RELATEDNESS, then select the top 𝑘 entries in 𝑝 𝑖 to produce the output.1

                     3.1.2                O DD ONE OUT
                     We examine possible T HINK and S UM approaches in greater depth on the O DD ONE OUT task, in
                     which the word in a set 𝑊 = {𝑤 𝑖 } that is least semantically related to the others must be chosen.
                     List of words. We first consider an approach similar to that used in §3.1.1. We form a matrix 𝑃𝑖 𝑗
                     using a List of words T HINK prompt for each pair of indices 𝑖, 𝑗:
                                                                            𝑃𝑖 𝑗 = 𝑝 LLM (𝑤 𝑗 | “List of words:                            𝑤 𝑖 , ”).
                     This matrix is aggregated by averaging over 𝑗 (in log domain) and selecting the 𝑖 with lowest
                     average, i.e.,Îleast likelihood of being generated by a product mixture of all words in the set:
                     𝑖 = arg min𝑖 𝑗 𝑃𝑖 𝑗 . This is a case of the Product aggregation operation.
                     Because this approach is the most successful with all model sizes we experimented with, its perfor-
                     mance is reported in Table 1. Remarkably, near-average-human accuracy is maintained for all model
                     sizes from GPT-2 Small to the largest GPT-3 model (Fig. 2 (left)).
                     Fact generation. As an alternative approach, we use a Fact generation prompt. An effective way
                     to mine facts for semantic relatedness tasks is to consider two items in the same context in order
                     to get relevant facts regarding how items are related to each other (prompt in Fig. 2 (right)). The
                     demonstration used in the prompt ensures that the LLM generates statements in an expected format,
                     which can be parsed and used for probability computation later. Using this prompt, we obtain a
                     collection of statements 𝑆 = {𝑠𝑖 } about items 𝑤 𝑗 . We treat each generated 𝑠𝑖 as a template into
                             1 Because the task is evaluated by BLEU score against the reference answers listed in alphabetical order, we
                     perform the additional step of converting the top indices to the answer in the right format. Alphabetization of
                     short lists is trivial in code, but can also very reliably be done by prompting GPT-3.


                                                                                                                     5
which different words 𝑤 can be substituted and denote by 𝑠𝑖 ⟨𝑤⟩ the Substitution of word 𝑤 into
template 𝑠𝑖 . We then form a |𝑆| × |𝑊 | matrix 𝑃𝑖 𝑗 , defined by 𝑃𝑖 𝑗 = 𝑝 LLM (𝑠𝑖 ⟨𝑤 𝑗 ⟩). Then, we
can perform Minority voting: we take argmin over 𝑗 and pick as the answer the most frequently
occurring value, i.e., the item that is most often the least likely to fit a generated statement.
Comparison with auxiliary knowledge approaches. We compare our method with a knowledge-
based prompting method, herein referred to as auxiliary knowledge. In auxiliary knowledge, we
prepend generated facts in the prompt before the question. Details of the prompt for auxiliary
knowledge are provided in §D.2. In Figure 2 (middle), we show that the accuracy of Fact gen-
eration-based T HINK S UM rises as the number of generated facts is increased, while the auxiliary
knowledge technique peaks and then degrades as the prompt lengthens.
Fig. 2 (left) shows how performance varies with the size of the LLM used for GPT-3, auxiliary
knowledge and T HINK S UM on O DD ONE OUT. Even with GPT-2 Small, T HINK S UM dramatically
improves over much larger largest zero- or few-shot models with or without auxiliary knowledge.
The latest iteration of the largest GPT-3 model, text-davinci-002, is the only model variant that,
with the help of auxiliary knowledge, achieves competitive performance with T HINK S UM. This
result provides experimental evidence for our claim that while new models may create qualitative
jumps, T HINK S UM can push the performance limits of smaller model variants through slow thinking.
Additional experiments on auxiliary knowledge are provided in §C.
3.2     S UBSTITUTION AND AGGREGATION
3.2.1    N OVEL CONCEPTS
In the multiple-choice N OVEL CONCEPTS task, a set of words or phrases 𝑊 = {𝑤 𝑖 } and a set of
statements 𝑆 = {𝑠 𝑗 } with third-person plural pronoun subjects (‘They all...’) are given, and the
statement which is true for all items in 𝑊 must be determined.
We treat each statement 𝑠 𝑗 as a template, into which words 𝑤 can be substituted by replacing ‘They
all’ with 𝑤. Denoting by 𝑠 𝑗 ⟨𝑤⟩ the substitution of 𝑤 into 𝑠 𝑗 , we form a |𝑊 | × |𝑆| matrix 𝑃𝑖 𝑗 by
scoring the Substitution of each word into each statement and considering the Ratio of likelihoods
                                                 𝑝    (𝑠 𝑗 ⟨𝑤𝑖 ⟩)
with the template without substitution: 𝑃𝑖 𝑗 = LLM 𝑝LLM (𝑠 𝑗 ) .We then perform Product aggregation
to select the statement which is most
                                   Î likely to be generated by all words in the set. To be precise,
the selected statement is arg max 𝑗 𝑖 𝑃𝑖 𝑗 .
3.2.2    I NVENTED WORDS
In I NVENTED WORDS, two nonce words 𝑥 1 , 𝑥2 are defined and the correct statement must be chosen
out of a set of statements 𝑆 = {𝑠 𝑗 } that begin with (possibly inflected forms of) “𝑥1 𝑥2 ” (Fig. 1).
We use an Example generation prompt to obtain a set of example words fitting the definitions of 𝑥1
and 𝑥2 . We thus obtain sets 𝑆1 and 𝑆2 of words that can be substituted for 𝑥1 and 𝑥 2 , respectively.
We treat each statement 𝑠 𝑗 as a template into which words 𝑤 1 ∈ 𝑆1 and 𝑤 2 ∈ 𝑆2 can be substituted
by replacing 𝑥 𝑖 with 𝑤 𝑖 and normalizing the syntax to ensure subject-verb agreement. Denoting
by 𝑠 𝑗 ⟨𝑤 1 , 𝑤 2 ⟩ such a substitution, we form a vector of probabilities 𝑝 𝑗 by scoring the Substitu-
tion of each possible pair of words into each statement and performing Mixture aggregation and
considering the Ratio of likelihoods with the template without substitution:
                                          1       Í
                                      |𝑆1 | |𝑆2 |   𝑤1 ∈𝑆1 ,𝑤2 ∈𝑆2 𝑝 LLM (𝑠 𝑗 ⟨𝑤 1 , 𝑤 2 ⟩)
                               𝑝𝑗 =                                                         .
                                                            𝑝 LLM (𝑠 𝑗 )
The statement 𝑠 𝑗 with highest likelihood under this normalized mixture, arg max 𝑗 𝑝 𝑗 , is selected.
3.3     U NCERTAINTY AND HALLUCINATION DETECTION
LLMs are prone to generating hallucinations that contain incorrect statements. The likelihoods
of these statements are often dominated by short plausible patterns, which also makes it difficult
for LLMs to evaluate their own uncertainty about a fact. Thus, detection (Liu et al., 2021; Zhou
et al., 2021) and reduction of such hallucinations is crucial for widespread use of LLMs in real
applications. (Dziri et al., 2021; Shuster et al., 2021).
3.3.1    S PORTS UNDERSTANDING
Questions in S PORTS UNDERSTANDING ask to determine whether it is ‘plausible’ or ‘implausible’
that a professional sports player 𝑥 (e.g., ‘Draymond Green’, a basketball player) performed an action


                                                  6
𝑎 associated with a sport (e.g., ‘threw a touchdown’, an action in American football). It is implied
that the combination of 𝑥 and 𝑎 is plausible if the sport with which player 𝑥 is associated coincides
with the sport in which action 𝑎 is performed. We consider an approach that does not rely on
identifying the latent variable (sport) as an intermediate step and is thus more generalizable to other
domains.
We use an Example generation T HINK prompt to produce a
set 𝑆 of players who perform action 𝑎, then do Posterior com-
putation by normalizing the likelihood assigned by the LLM
to each player in 𝑆, as well as 𝑥, performing action 𝑎:
                                         𝑝 LLM (“𝑦 𝑎”)
      ∀𝑦 ∈ 𝑆 ∪ {𝑥} 𝑝(𝑦|𝑎) = Í                           ′
                                    𝑦′ ∈𝑆∪{𝑥 } 𝑝 LLM (“𝑦 𝑎”)
The statement is considered to be implausible if the posterior
on 𝑥 is sufficiently low (Thresholding) – see Fig. 3.
3.3.2   K NOWN UNKNOWNS
Questions in the K NOWN UNKNOWNS task ask to determine
whether the answer to a question is a certain precise concept
or ‘unknown’.
Given a question 𝑞 (e.g., “What was the temperature in Cuzco      Figure 3:      Example posterior
on the day of the Emperor Vespasian’s birth”) and the candi-      probabilities generated from text-
date precise answer 𝑎 (e.g., 25◦ C), we use a List extension      davinci-002 for S PORTS UNDER -
prompt to generate a set 𝑆 of other possible answers to 𝑞. We     STANDING with the description
then do a Posterior computation over 𝑆 and the original an-       “threw a touchdown”. The bas-
swer 𝑎, similar to that used for S PORTS UNDERSTANDING:           ketball player given in the ques-
                                                                  tion Draymond Green has a much
                                      𝑝 LLM (“𝑞? 𝑦”)
   ∀𝑦 ∈ 𝑆 ∪ {𝑎} 𝑝(𝑦|𝑞) = Í                                   .    lower posterior probability than the
                                 𝑦′ ∈𝑆∪{𝑎 } 𝑝 LLM (“𝑞? 𝑦 ′”)      generated football players, from
The answer 𝑎 is chosen if the posterior on 𝑎 is sufficiently high which we conclude the sentence
(Thresholding), and otherwise ‘unknown’ is chosen.                “Draymond Green threw a touch-
                                                                  down.” is implausible.
3.4 T RANSLATION
3.4.1   T RANSLATING BETWEEN LANGUAGES AND WRITING SYSTEMS
Russian misconceptions. In the M ISCONCEPTIONS RUSSIAN task, the true statement must be
chosen out of a pair of Russian sentences: a statement 𝑠 and its negation 𝑡.
We first describe an approach that does not use translation and already performs better than random
guessing – and better than baseline methods that simply select the more likely of the two statements
– using the largest GPT-3 model, which has sufficient knowledge of Russian. We compute the
posterior over the two hypotheses “𝑠 is true, 𝑡 is false” and “𝑠 is false, 𝑡 is true”:
        𝑝 LLM ( “T” | “T or F? 𝑠. Answer: ”) 𝑝 LLM ( “F” | “T or F? 𝑡. Answer: ”),
        𝑝 LLM ( “F” | “T or F? 𝑠. Answer: ”) 𝑝 LLM ( “T” | “T or F? 𝑡. Answer: ”).
where T denotes True and F False in the actual prompt. This is a kind of Product aggregation.
If the posterior on the first option is higher, 𝑠 is chosen as the true statement; otherwise, 𝑡 is chosen.
This approach can be combined with a Translation prompt that produces translations of 𝑠 and 𝑡 into
English, then uses these translations in place of 𝑠 and 𝑡 in the above computations. The approach
can be further extended by sampling a set of translations and performing Mixture aggregation over
the translations. Our reported result uses 10 generated translation for each statement, but it is only
2% higher than the result using one generated translation.
Emoji movie. The multiple-choice E MOJI MOVIE task requires selecting the name of a movie
from a list {𝑚 𝑖 } that is best described by a sequence of emoji symbols 𝑠 = (𝑠1 . . . 𝑠 𝑛 ). An Order
inversion prompt performs best on this task using the Davinci variant of GPT-3: choosing the answer
                   arg max 𝑝 LLM (𝑠 | “Emoji describing the movie 𝑚 𝑖 ”).
                      𝑖
We also attempt to use a Translation prompt to obtain a single-word English description 𝑤 𝑗 of each
emoji 𝑠 𝑗 in 𝑠, then score using
              arg max 𝑝 LLM (𝑤 1 . . . 𝑤 𝑛 | “Words describing the movie 𝑚 𝑖 ”).
                 𝑖


                                                    7
Figure 4: Details for L OGICAL DEDUCTION. (a) Example question from the task, (b) demonstration
for the T HINK prompt, (c) example LLM output.


This approach performs slightly better than Order inversion alone using InstructGPT. However, it
does not work with the base GPT-3 models, which do not as reliably translate emoji to English.
3.4.2   L OGICAL DEDUCTION
In the L OGICAL DEDUCTION task, different types of items and clues regarding their placement are
provided, as shown in Fig. 4(a). The goal is to select the correct statement from a set of statements
about their placements. The task creators emphasize that this requires parsing information about
multiple objects and their relationships, understanding rules regarding ordered objects in various
scenarios, and iteratively applying of these rules. The LLM calls in the T HINK stage of T HINK S UM
can perform mappings required to parse information and understand rules, and the S UM stage can
integrate mappings of objects to the placements under these rules. Here, we can use a Translation
prompt to map the given problem into a set of mathematical (in)equalities (Fig. 4(c)).
A Translation prompt as in Fig. 4(b) containing generic ordering statements and object names that
are not used in the task is sufficient to perform the translation from natural language to mathematical
equations, as shown in Fig. 4. To solve the problem, we replace the problem statement with its trans-
lation 𝑇 consisting of (in)equalities, and map each of the objects to the set of strings corresponding
to numbers from 1 to 𝑁, where 𝑁 is the number of objects. This is accomplished by appending a
given problem to the fixed prompt in Fig. 4(b), which acts as a demonstration for one-shot in-context
learning. The ordering problems involve a variety of types of objects (cars, birds, etc.) and types
of orderings (by size, price, contest ranking, etc.). For a particular problem in Fig. 4(a), we show
the returned text from InstructGPT in Fig. 4(c), showing that the demonstration used in the T HINK
prompt generalizes from objects ordered by size to books ordered by position.
Once a translation of the problem into a set of inequalities is obtained, the S UM stage considers all
possible mappings of items to indices to determine the mapping compatible with the discovered set
of (in)equalities. This can be done by an external algorithm or with the LLM itself, as an LLM
may be capable of understanding that, for example, “2>3” is a less likely string than “2>1” (see
Fig. B.1).
The probability of a target statement like “yellow book=2” can thus be obtained by:
                                    ∑︁
   𝑝(“yellow book=2” | 𝑇) ∝                 𝑝 LLM ({𝑇𝑡 ⟨b⟩ : 𝑇𝑡 ∈ 𝑇 } ∪ {“yellow book=2”⟨b⟩})      (1)
                                b∈ {1,..., 𝑁 } 𝑁

where b denotes the vector of placements for the 𝑁 items, 𝑇 = {𝑇𝑡 }𝑡=1 𝑁
                                                                           is obtained from the Trans-
lation prompt as a set of strings, and 𝑠⟨b⟩ denotes the substitution of the corresponding entry in b in
place of the object name in the string 𝑠. The term inside the sum is a case of Product aggregation:
the LLM likelihoods of all strings in the set are multiplied together.
In summary, our solution to this task involves composition of two T HINK operations – a Transla-
tion into a set of equations and then Substitution of numbers in place of item names – and two


                                                   8
S UM operations – a Product aggregation followed by a Mixture aggregation. (Other options are
discussed in §C.)
Results and discussion. For the 500 L OGICAL DEDUCTION problems with 𝑁 = 5 objects,
T HINK S UM yields an accuracy rate of 77% (see Table 1), besting the average human performance.
When the necessary summations become large, it becomes very unlikely that pure prompt engi-
neering can be competitive, as even humans need paper and pencil to create and attend to many
alternative solutions, and would likely translate the premises into a simpler notation using a single
letter (representing a variable to which a numeric value can be assigned) to represent each object,
rather than directly attending to facts in the problem statement.
We also tested an auxiliary knowledge method akin to chain-of-thought reasoning, where the infor-
mation obtained with the prompt in Fig. 4 is appended to the LLM input. In particular, the problem,
together with its translation into inequalities, is used as a prompt to each of the answer options, and
then the option with the highest likelihood is chosen for the answer. This approach does improve
over straightforward zero-shot GPT-3 scoring, but only raises the accuracy to 50% (see Table B.1).

4   R ELATED WORK
Improvements to LLM inference. After the discovery of the in-context learning abilities of
LLMs, there has been an explosion of interest in improving inference with LLMs in the zero-shot
and few-shot setting Brown et al. (2020); Chowdhery et al. (2022); Rae et al. (2021). One approach
to improving the reasoning abilities of LLMs involves appending, or learning to generate, auxil-
iary knowledge within the prompt (Shwartz et al., 2020; Zelikman et al., 2022; Nye et al., 2021a).
Recently, more general auxiliary knowledge or chain-of-thought prompting methods have been pro-
posed (Wei et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022b; Zhou et al., 2022; Creswell et al., 2022; Wang et al.,
2022a; Liu et al., 2022b). Later, Kojima et al. (2022) showed zero-shot chain-of-thought prompting
can improve performance on a variety of reasoning tasks. This method does not require any hand-
crafted few-shot examples, which is a shared property with T HINK S UM. (Nye et al., 2021b) observed
that a dual-system approach where an associative “System 1” and a logical “System 2” can increase
coherence of LLMs in tasks such as robust story generation and grounded instruction following. The
two-step paradigm in T HINK S UM is similar, where “System 1” is the (querying of the LLM for) fast
thinking, and “System 2” is the probabilistic inference step.
Brittleness of chain-of-thought prompting. Despite the recent success of chain-of-thought ap-
proaches, recent studies have raised concerns regarding the limitations of chain-of-thought ap-
proaches. Webson & Pavlick (2022) observed that instructive prompts perform similarly with mis-
leading or intentionally irrelevant prompts. Additionally, Ye & Durrett (2022) showed improvements
due to few-shot chain-of-thought are not observed in question answering, or natural language infer-
ence. More critically, few-shot prompts are highly sensitive to the order in which the samples are
provided, the prompt format, and the selection of in-context examples, (Lu et al., 2022; Zhao et al.,
2021). Thus, it is crucial to design techniques that are robust to such changes in the prompt.
Probabilistic inference. More recent approaches have proposed probabilistic inference ap-
proaches for tackling true/false question answering and commonsense question answering (Jung
et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022a). Xie et al. (2021) presents a Bayesian inference perspective on in-
context learning, and Dohan et al. (2022) formalizes and unifies existing prompting techniques in a
probabilistic framework. Our work generalizes such approaches to perform arbitrary probabilistic
inference outside of the LLM.

5   C ONCLUSION
In this paper we presented T HINK S UM, a two-step probabilistic inference paradigm that reasons
over sets in a structured manner. The fast thinking stage of T HINK S UM allows elementary string
manipulations as well as natural language prompting, which may enable numerous approaches to
solve a natural language task. Even with far smaller model variants, T HINK S UM achieves state-of-
the-art results on ten difficult tasks in BIG-bench using GPT-family models. The two-step paradigm
allows operating over sets instead of manipulating the prompt itself, preventing sensitivity to prompt
format during the probabilistic inference in T HINK S UM, which is performed outside of calls to the
LLM. As a result, T HINK S UM is more robust to prompt design, yields more interpretable predictions,
and can be combined with many probabilistic inference approaches to tackle a diverse set of tasks.


                                                  9
R EFERENCES
Yoshua Bengio. The consciousness prior. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.08568, 2017.

Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel
  Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
  Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray,
  Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever,
  and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners. Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 2020.

Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
  Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. PaLM:
  Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022.

Antonia Creswell, Murray Shanahan, and Irina Higgins. Selection-inference: Exploiting large lan-
  guage models for interpretable logical reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09712, 2022.

A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the
  EM algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B, 39(1):1–38, 1977.

David Dohan, Winnie Xu, Aitor Lewkowycz, Jacob Austin, David Bieber, Raphael Gontijo Lopes,
  Yuhuai Wu, Henryk Michalewski, Rif A Saurous, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, et al. Language model
  cascades. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.10342, 2022.

Nouha Dziri, Andrea Madotto, Osmar Zaı̈ane, and Avishek Joey Bose. Neural path hunter: Re-
  ducing hallucination in dialogue systems via path grounding. In Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
  ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 2197–2214, Online and
  Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.168. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.168.

Anirudh Goyal and Yoshua Bengio. Inductive biases for deep learning of human cognition. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2011.15091, 2020.

Ari Holtzman, Peter West, Vered Shwartz, Yejin Choi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Surface form com-
  petition: Why the highest probability answer isn’t always right. In Proceedings of the 2021
  Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7038–7051, Online
  and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguis-
  tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.564. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.
  emnlp-main.564.

Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
  and Yejin Choi. Maieutic prompting: Logically consistent reasoning with recursive explanations.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11822, 2022.

Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan, 2011.

Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large
  language models are zero-shot reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11916, 2022.

Jiacheng Liu, Alisa Liu, Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Yejin Choi, and
   Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Generated knowledge prompting for commonsense reasoning. In Proceed-
   ings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
   Long Papers), pp. 3154–3169, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022a. Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.225. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
   acl-long.225.

Tianyu Liu, Yizhe Zhang, Chris Brockett, Yi Mao, Zhifang Sui, Weizhu Chen, and Bill Dolan. A
  token-level reference-free hallucination detection benchmark for free-form text generation. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2104.08704, 2021.


                                                10
Zihan Liu, Mostofa Patwary, Ryan Prenger, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Wei Ping, Mohammad Shoeybi,
  and Bryan Catanzaro. Multi-stage prompting for knowledgeable dialogue generation. In Findings
  of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2022, pp. 1317–1337, Dublin, Ireland,
  May 2022b. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.104.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.findings-acl.104.
Yao Lu, Max Bartolo, Alastair Moore, Sebastian Riedel, and Pontus Stenetorp. Fantastically or-
  dered prompts and where to find them: Overcoming few-shot prompt order sensitivity. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
  Long Papers), pp. 8086–8098, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Lin-
  guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.556. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.
  acl-long.556.
Nikolay Malkin, Zhen Wang, and Nebojsa Jojic. Coherence boosting: When your pretrained lan-
  guage model is not paying enough attention. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 8214–8236, Dublin, Ire-
  land, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.565.
  URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.565.
Sewon Min, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Noisy channel language
  model prompting for few-shot text classification. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 5316–5330, Dublin,
  Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.
  365. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.365.
Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin,
 David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show
 your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2112.00114, 2021a.
Maxwell Nye, Michael Tessler, Josh Tenenbaum, and Brenden M Lake. Improving coherence and
 consistency in neural sequence models with dual-system, neuro-symbolic reasoning. Neural In-
 formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021b.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
  Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
  instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155, 2022.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-
  performance deep learning library. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
  Methods, analysis & insights from training Gopher. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.
Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Retrieval augmenta-
  tion reduces hallucination in conversation. In Findings of the Association for Computational
  Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, pp. 3784–3803, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.320. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-emnlp.320.
Vered Shwartz, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Unsupervised
  commonsense question answering with self-talk. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Em-
  pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 4615–4629, Online, November
  2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.373. URL
  https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-main.373.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
  Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al. Beyond the
  imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2206.04615, 2022.


                                                11
Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Biases in
 judgments reveal some heuristics of thinking under uncertainty. Science, 185(4157):1124–1131,
 1974.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Rationale-
  augmented ensembles in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00747, 2022a.

Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency
  improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171,
  2022b.

Albert Webson and Ellie Pavlick. Do prompt-based models really understand the meaning of
  their prompts? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
  Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 2300–2344,
  Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https:
  //aclanthology.org/2022.naacl-main.167.

Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
  Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.

Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context
  learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.

Xi Ye and Greg Durrett. The unreliability of explanations in few-shot in-context learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2205.03401, 2022.

Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, and Noah D Goodman. STaR: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.14465, 2022.

Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improv-
  ing few-shot performance of language models. International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2021.

Chunting Zhou, Graham Neubig, Jiatao Gu, Mona Diab, Francisco Guzmán, Luke Zettlemoyer, and
  Marjan Ghazvininejad. Detecting hallucinated content in conditional neural sequence generation.
  In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pp. 1393–
  1404, Online, August 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.
  findings-acl.120. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.findings-acl.120.

Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schu-
  urmans, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc Le, and Ed Chi. Least-to-most prompting enables complex
  reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625, 2022.

A    BIG- BENCH L ITE
Figure A.1 shows the performance margin between an average human and zero-shot GPT-3 on tasks
in BIG-bench Lite, a select subset of tasks chosen by the authors of the benchmark to showcase
the most important aspects of LLMs that need improvement. The vertical black bar separates the
dataset into tasks where GPT-3 is already within the margin of just 10% compared to the average
human accuracy, and the harder tasks (on the left). We show in the main text that some of these
harder tasks, in particular E MOJI MOVIE, C ONCEPTUAL COMBINATIONS,K NOWN UNKNOWNS,
N OVEL CONCEPTS, M ISCONCEPTIONS RUSSIAN and L OGICAL DEDUCTION, the margins are
shrunk considerably, often exceeding average human performance. Other tasks in BIG-bench lite
such as L OGIC GRID PUZZLE and S YMBOL INTERPRETATION share a similar structure to the ad-
dressed by T HINK S UM, and thus could be investigated as part of future work. Another example
where T HINK S UM can be applied is the C ODE LINE DESCRIPTION task, where we observe in our
preliminary experiments that a simple order inversion can significantly outperform average human
accuracy.


                                               12
Figure A.1: Margin between 0-shot GPT-3 and average human performance for BIG-bench Lite
tasks. Using T HINK S UM, we address many of the tasks that have greater than 10% performance
margin with average human, and significantly reduce and often overturn the margin.


B     A DDITIONAL TASK DESCRIPTIONS
B.1   S EMANTIC RELATEDNESS
Phrase relatedness. In this task, an input phrase, and four target phrases are presented to the
language model. The language model is asked to identify the most related choice from the listed
target options. An example from the task is “For each word or phrase, identify the most related
choice from the listed options. \n Input: home town \n Option: town center \n Option: location \n
Option: native city \n Option: home run”
Codenames. In this task, the language model is asked to identify words associated with a given
word. An example from the task is “Try to identify the 2 words best associated with the word WHITE
from the following list: \n book, anchor, rainbow, shoulder, tunnel, sack, drum, pacific, page, mark,
gear, glacier. Give your answer in alphabetical order.”
Odd one out. This task is aimed at evaluating the capability of LLMs in semantic relatedness. This
task presents the model with four to six words, where all words except one word are semantically
or grammatically related to each other. The goal for the language model is to identify the odd word.
An example question from the task is “Pick the odd word out: glass, head, arm, leg, hand, foot”.
B.2   H ALLUCINATION DETECTION
Known unknowns. In this task, the aim is to measure the ability of LLMs to identify whether
the answer to a question is known, or unknown. If the answer to the question cannot be known,
an imaginary answer is generated, and the model is asked to choose between the imaginary answer
and the word “Unknown”. If the question has a correct answer, the correct answer and “Unknown”
are provided as options. An example question from this task is “How often did Abraham Lincoln
cut his toenails?”, and the options are “Every Saturday night”,“Unknown”. Similar to the sports
understanding task, we can use an LLM to generate other plausible answers with the following
prompt: How often did Abraham Lincoln cut his toenails? A possible answer is: \n 1. Every
Saturday night. List 4 other possible answers in the same format as the first: \n 2. Then, the answer
given in the question is predicted to be “known” if its posterior is higher by the second most likely
option by some margin. In our experiments, we chose this value to be 1/𝑁𝑒 where 𝑁𝑒 is the number
of examples, including the original option.
Sports understanding. In this task, artificial sentences are constructed using the name of profes-
sional sports players and actions from particular sports. The model is then asked to identify whether


                                                 13
                          Table B.1: T HINK S UM vs. auxiliary knowledge.
                          O DD ONE OUT P HRASE RELATEDNESS L OGICAL DEDUCTION (𝑁 = 5)
 T HINK S UM                   0.84                    0.87                            0.77
 Auxiliary knowledge           0.71                    0.75                            0.50



                        i<j                      i=j                      i>j
               1                      1                        1
               2                      2                        2
               3                      3                        3
               4                      4                        4
               5                      5                        5
               6                      6                        6
               7                      7                        7
               8                      8                        8
               9                      9                        9
                   123456789              123456789                123456789

  Figure B.1: Probabilities of different (in)equalities according to GPT-3 text-davinci-002 (logit).


the sentence is plausible, where a sentence is considered plausible if the sport of the player matches
the sport of the action described in the sentence. An example from the task is “Statement: Draymond
Green threw a touchdown. Plausible/implausible?”
For T HINK S UM to be able to parse outputs, GPT-3 generations need to be in a pre-determined format.
While larger models can obey a format without demonstrations, for smaller models it is helpful to
demonstrate the format with an example. Thus, we use the following prompt: “List 4 examples of
players who scored a rabona goal.\n 1. Cristiano Ronaldo\n 2. Erik Lamela\n 3. Mario Balotelli\n
4. Angel Di Maria\n List 4 examples of players who threw a touchdown.\n1.”.
B.3   C ONCEPT UNDERSTANDING
In the following tasks, the shared goal is to test the ability of LLMs on concepts over entities that
have likely not been observed during training.
Conceptual combinations: Invented words. In this task, the LLM is provided with two invented
words, and their definitions in the input. The LLM is then asked to infer the most plausible meaning
resulting from the combination of the invented words. As the words are invented, they are not present
in the training set, and the LLM needs to understand and combine the definitions of the invented
words to reason about the meaning of the combination. An example is: “The word ’binne’ means
any animal that is furry and has four legs, and the word ’bam’ means a simple sort of dwelling.
Question: Which of the following sentences best characterizes binne bams?”. Similar to S PORTS
UNDERSTANDING , we can use the following prompt to force the LLM to obey a fixed format: “List
synonyms of binne, separate synonyms by comma:”
Novel concepts. In this task, the LLM is presented with two to four disparate entities that typically
would not co-occur frequently, but share an underlying conceptual or linguistic concept. The aim
is to test the ability of the LLM to reason about entities that are unlikely to have been observed in
the same context during training. In a multiple-choice setting, the LLM is given concepts relating
to the entities, and is asked to generate the intended concepts against carefully chosen tempting
distractors. The choices are not presented in the prompt. An example question from the task is as
follows: “What do the following have in common? 1) bumble bees 2) 01010101 3) race cars”, and
the answer options are They all make noise, “They all are yellow, They all are binary, They all go
fast, They all have stripes”.
B.4   T RANSLATION
Emoji Movie. In this task, the LLM is presented with emojis that describe the plot of a movie,
and the model is asked to guess the correct movie from the given options. The task evaluates the
LLMs understanding of emojis, and its knowledge of popular movies. An example from the task is


                                                 14
Table C.1: Different alternatives of probabilistic reasoning with T HINK S UM for solving O DD ONE
OUT .
       Model                      List of words Latent variable model Minority voting
       T HINK S UM davinci-002           0.84                  0.67                   0.70
       T HINK S UM davinci-001           0.74                  0.77                   0.70



“What movie does this emoji describe? {lying-face-emoji} \n, pinocchio \n heat \n the big sleep,
\n inception \n lilo & stitch
Misconceptions Russian. In this task, the LLM is presented with sentences in Russian that con-
tain misconceptions, and their true counterparts. The task evaluates if the LLM believes common
misconceptions. One example of a target pair from the task, translated to English is as follows:
“Vaccines do not cause autism. \n Vaccines cause autism.”

C    A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
T HINK S UM vs. auxiliary knowledge. Table B.1 shows the comparison between auxiliary knowl-
edge and T HINK S UM. All methods used text-davinci-002. For P HRASE RELATEDNESS, auxiliary
knowledge was generated using the “list differences” prompt shown in Figure 2 (right). For both
auxiliary knowledge and T HINK S UM, 6 number of differences were used, as that was the best for
auxiliary knowledge, shown in Figure 2 (middle). T HINK S UM O DD ONE OUT and P HRASE RELAT-
EDNESS are solved with the list of words prompt. For L OGICAL DEDUCTION , the T HINK prompt
shown in Fig4 was included before the question in the prompt. In all cases, T HINK S UM outperforms
auxiliary knowledge.
Latent variable models for O DD ONE OUT. While the detection of the odd item can be performed
with simple operations, it is also possible to assume that there is a latent structure consisting of two or
more clusters such that the facts and items belonging to a cluster can be freely interchanged keeping
probability of such combination high. While there are simpler alternative solutions to this task, the
latent variable model enables selecting the facts that characterize the majority class, explaining why
the minority item is ruled as the odd one out. Thus, expanding on the problem and applying a latent
variable model can help interpret the decisions of the system.
More formally, since 𝐼 includes items that are semantically related, and the odd, we can model 𝑖 ∈ 𝐼
and 𝑓 ∈ 𝐹 to be generated from a latent class 𝑐 ∈ {0, 1}. Then, the conditional distribution can be
modeled as:
                                                                ∑︁
                         𝑃(𝑖, 𝑓 |𝑐) = 𝑃(𝑖|𝑐)𝑃( 𝑓 |𝑐) 𝑃(𝑖, 𝑓 ) =    𝑃(𝑖, 𝑓 |𝑐)
                                                                      𝑐


The semantic components, groupings 𝑃(𝑖|𝑐) and 𝑃( 𝑓 |𝑐) can be computed from the matrix using
expectation-maximization (EM; Dempster et al., 1977). Then, the score for an item 𝑖 belonging to
                     Î items 𝑚 ′∈ 𝑆, {𝑚
aÍcluster and all other
                                     ′
                                        ≠ 𝑖} belonging to another cluster can be found as 𝑆𝑖 =
  𝑐,𝑐′ ≠𝑐 𝑃(𝑖|𝑐)𝑃(𝑐)  𝑚≠𝑖 𝑃(𝑚|𝑐 )𝑃(𝑐 ).
We show the effectiveness of the latent variable models in Table C.1, where we analyze differ-
ent methods for solving O DD ONE OUT using the InstructGPT variants text-davinci-001 and text-
davinci-002. For the “latent variable model” and “minority voting” methods, we use number of
differences 𝑁 𝑑 = 5. The latent variable model is run for 200 iterations. All probabilistic reason-
ing methods perform well, outperforming previous baselines reported in Table 1. Each of these
approaches can be applicable in other tasks of similar structure to O DD ONE OUT.
Using GPT-3 or external algorithms to evaluate inequalities in L OGICAL DEDUCTION. Fig.
B.1 shows the matrix of posterior probabilities evaluated using InstructGPT (text-davinci-002) for
strings of form “x=y”, “x<y”, “x>y” for 𝑥, 𝑦 ∈ {1, .., 9}. The probabilities are computed using
prompts of the form “True or false: x<y? The answer is:” where 𝑥 and 𝑦 are substituted with
numbers from {1, .., 9}, and normalizing the probability of the first token over the two options “true”
and “false”. These are the probabilities that statements 𝑇𝑡 would evaluate in (1).
Given the capability of InstructGPT to both translate given logical deduction problems into
(in)equalities (Fig. 4) and to evaluate each of them after replacement of items with placement


                                                    15
numbers (Fig. B.1), we conclude that it is perfectly within its capabilities to parse and understand
the problem, and the S UM stage is there simply to go over all possible mappings, the way a human
might. But, just as a human might use shortcuts in the search, the S UM stage of T HINK S UM could
be implemented in more or less efficient ways. For example, instead of summing over all possible
assignments of the five items, we can avoid the ones that are not permutations of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Fur-
thermore, instead of using 𝑝 LLM from Fig. B.1, we can simply evaluate each inequality externally,
giving a high constant probability for each statement in 𝑇 and the target statement where a con-
figuration of item placements makes the statement correct and low constant probability whenever
the statement is incorrect. Whichever evaluation mechanism we use, the summing can be aborted
whenever an incorrect statement is detected (typically there are four (in)equalities that describe the
problem, and one equality statement that describe the option to be evaluated; we want to find a
configuration of item placements such that all of these are correct, or have high probability under
𝑝 LLM .
The prompt in Fig. 4(b) instructs the LLM to assign positive or negative ordinal numbers depending
on the language used (the smallest object gets placement 1, while the second largest one gets −2,
meaning ‘second from the end’). A negative order number 𝑟 is then turned in our code into 𝑁 + 𝑟 + 1
before evaluating statements. Sometimes, LLM does not follow this instruction, but simply labels
the largest, right-most, most expensive, etc. as 𝑁, instead of −1, which is equivalent. One possible
failure mode of this kind of T HINK S UM is that the LLM may translate inequality statements incon-
sistently with equality statements (e.g., by treating the leftmost item as “1”, and being consistent
with this choice for other equality constraints, but translating inequality constraints consistent with
the reverse order, with ‘left of’ meaning >). This can be dealt with by adding an option to replace
placement numbers 𝑟 in equality statements by 𝑁 − 𝑟 + 1. This doubles the number of evaluations to
be done (as each 𝑇 now has two versions), but allows for an auto-correction in S UM.
C.1   C OMPARISONS WITH CHAIN - OF - THOUGHT APPROACHES
Following Wei et al. (2022), we use “chain-of-thought” to mean LLM scoring approaches that use
insertion of generated tokens between the prompt and the target answer. The model is taught, using
few-shot demonstrations, how to generate these intermediate tokens. Above we have compared
T HINK S UM with approaches that add extracted (from an auxiliary LM call), not generated (within
the LM’s linear workspace) token sequences after the prompt, for the O DD ONE OUT, P HRASE
RELATEDNESS, and L OGICAL DEDUCTION tasks (see Table B.1).

With suitable examples, it may be possible for a chain-of-thought approach to replace the T HINK
phase, by learning from demonstrations to generate the appropriate knowledge, and parts of the
S UM phase, although inference over parallel evaluations of the LLM is no longer possible. Our
auxiliary knowledge baselines make precisely that generous assumption and focus the comparisons
on the need for parallel calls and reasoning over possibilities using probabilistic inference (instead
of leaving it to the LLM to make the right conclusions from the list of extracted alternatives).
Although we expect that appending facts in a standard format to the prompt would help the model
more than teaching the model to generate these facts, we experimented with chain-of-thought ap-
proaches on several tasks. Table C.3 shows example demonstrations and prompt formats used for
each task, and Table C.2 shows the results using two variants of the largest GPT-3 model.


        Table C.2: Comparison of T HINK S UM with chain-of-thought prompting approaches.
                                           GPT-3 (davinci)         GPT-3 (davinci-002)
          Task                         Direct   CoT     T HINK S UM   CoT      T HINK S UM
          O DD ONE OUT                  0.27    0.33       0.80       0.64         0.84
          P HRASE RELATEDNESS           0.59    0.55       0.85       0.79         0.87
          L OGICAL DEDUCTION            0.32    0.25         –        0.39         0.77
          K NOWN UNKNOWNS               0.61    0.70       0.54       0.74         0.76
          I NVENTED WORDS               0.29    0.50       0.64       0.64         0.71

As expected, T HINK S UM outperforms chain-of-thought prompting on all tasks with all variants ex-
cept K NOWN UNKNOWNS with the davinci variant, where direct prompting already performs well.
(We did not evaluate T HINK S UM with davinci on L OGICAL DEDUCTION because prompts like the
one in Figure 4 did not reliably produce outputs in the correct format; notice that chain-of-thought
is barely better than random guessing (20%).)


                                                  16
Figure D.1: Auxiliary knowledge prompting applied to O DD ONE OUT. Facts are generated using
the “list differences” prompt described in Figure 2 (right) and post-processed according to §D.2.


When interpreting these results, it is important to note that only one prompt format was evaluated
for both chain of thought and T HINK S UM, and the format of prompts and demonstrations can have a
strong and often unpredictable effect on the LLM. We observed that chain-of-thought approaches are
highly sensitive to minor changes in the prompt format or the construction of in-context examples,
consistent with the known biases of in-context learning when a potentially lengthy prompt is evalu-
ated (Lu et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2021). On the other hand, using structured, shorter components is
more reliable, as demonstrated by the efficacy of the T HINK prompts used in T HINK S UM.

D     A DDITIONAL EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS
Our experiments are performed using four different sizes of GPT-2 (Small, Medium, Large, and XL)
(Radford et al., 2019), GPT-3 with four different model sizes (ada,babbage,curie,davinci) (Brown
et al., 2020), and InstructGPT (Ouyang et al., 2022). All GPT-3 experiments are run between August
2022 and September 2022 by using the OpenAI API. Our GPT-2 experiments were run in PyTorch
(Paszke et al., 2019) and the Hugging Face Transformers library with a Tesla K80 GPU.
D.1   H YPERPARAMETERS
Maximum generation length. For tasks that require example and list generation, such as
CONCEPTUAL COMBINATIONS , K NOWN UNKNOWNS , and S PORTS UNDERSTANDING , we use
max tokens = 100. For fact generation in O DD ONE OUT with auxiliary knowledge and T HINK S UM,
we use max tokens = 1000.
Temperature. All GPT-2 experiments used temperature = 0.5. For S PORTS UNDERSTANDING and
translation tasks, we used temperature = 0.5 to promote diversity of generated plausible options. All
other experiments used temperature = 0.
Number of examples (𝑁𝑒 ). For C ONCEPTUAL COMBINATIONS we used 𝑁𝑒 = 2, and for K NOWN
UNKNOWNS and S PORTS UNDERSTANDING we used 𝑁 𝑒 = 4.

Threshold. A threshold of 0.01 was used for S PORTS UNDERSTANDING.
D.2   K NOWLEDGE GENERATION DETAILS
Post-processing. In our knowledge generation experiments for both T HINK S UM and the auxiliary
knowledge approach, we post-process the generated knowledge statements, to ensure formatting
does not harm the predictions of each method. We first remove the extra spaces and the numbers
and punctuation generated by the LLM before each fact while enumerating the items of the list.
Later, we only keep sentences that contain only one of the objects of interest from the task, to make
sure each sentence contains a knowledge statement into which any of the objects can be substituted.
Finally, sentences with less than 3 words are removed as these are not likely to contain informative
statements.
Auxiliary knowledge. For auxiliary knowledge experiments, we prepend the generated and post-
processed knowledge statements before the question in the task. An example is illustrated in Figure
D.1.


                                                 17
        Table C.3: Few-shot demonstrations used for chain of thought (Table C.2).
                       Words: blue, pink, magenta, banana
                       All words are colors except banana. The odd one out is banana.
O DD ONE OUT
                       Words: pencil, eraser, baby, rule, notebook
                       All words are office supplies except baby. The odd one out is baby.
                       For each word or phrase, identify the most related choice from the
                       listed options.
                       Input: Ice Cream
                       Option: Antarctica
P HRASE RELATEDNESS    Option: Titanic
                       Option: Dessert
                       Option: Sour Cream
                       Ice cream is a type of dessert. Therefore, ice cream and dessert are the
                       most related.
                       Answer: Dessert
                       What was the population of San Francisco in 2018?
                       Option: 879,676
                       Option: Unknown
                       The question asks the population of San Francisco in 2018, for which
                       data can be collected. Population data for cities on a yearly basis is
                       available, and thus the answer is known, and it is 879,676.
K NOWN UNKNOWNS        Answer: 879,676
                       What was the population of San Francisco yesterday?
                       Option: 891,402
                       Option: Unknown
                       The question asks the population of San Francisco yesterday. As it is
                       not possible to know the exact population of a city on a daily basis,
                       the answer for this question is unknown.
                       Answer: Unknown
                       On a table, there are five plates: a black plate, a white plate, a green
                       plate, a blue plate, and a red plate. The white plate is bigger than the
                       green plate. The red plate is the biggest. The black plate is bigger than
                       the blue plate. The black plate is smaller than the green plate. Which
                       plate is the smallest?
                       Option: The red plate is the smallest.
                       Option: The black plate is the smallest.
                       Option: The white plate is the smallest.
                       Option: The green plate is the smallest.
L OGICAL DEDUCTION
                       Option: The blue plate is the smallest.
                       The black plate is bigger than the blue plate. The black plate is smaller
                       than the green plate, as a result the green plate is bigger than the blue
                       plate as well. The white plate is bigger than the green plate, which is
                       bigger than the blue plate. As a result, the green plate is bigger than
                       the blue plate. The red plate is the biggest, so it is bigger than the blue
                       plate. Since all other plates are bigger than the blue plate, the blue
                       plate is smallest.
                       Answer: The blue plate is the smallest.
                       The word ’borger’ are animals who bite specific things for fun, and
                       the word ’folpt’ is a type of a chewy toy. Question: Which of the
                       following sentences best characterizes borger folpts?
                       Option: Borger folpts are leashes for animals.
                       Option: Borger folpts are toys for infants.
I NVENTED WORDS        Option: Borger folpts are hard to swallow.
                       Option: Borger folpts are pet toys.
                       Borgers are animals, and folpts are chewy toys. Therefore, borger
                       folpts are chewy toys that animals, or pets, can play with. Therefore,
                       the answer is borger folpts are pet toys.
                       Answer: Borger folpts are pet toys.


                                            18
                  Table D.1: List of examples for the studied BIG-bench tasks.
Task: P HRASE RELATEDNESS
Input: For each word or phrase, identify the most related choice from the listed options.
Input: home town
Option: town center
Option: location
Option: native city
Option: home run
Task: O DD ONE OUT
Input: Pick the odd word out: glass, head, arm, leg, hand, foot
Task: C ONCEPTUAL COMBINATIONS : I NVENTED WORDS
Input: The word ‘binne’ means any animal that is furry and has four legs, and the word
‘bam’ means a simple sort of dwelling. Question: Which of the following sentences best
characterizes binne bams?
Option: Binne bams are for pets.
Option: Binne bams are typically furnished with sofas and televisions.
Option: Binne bams are luxurious apartments.
Option: Binne bams are places where people live
Task: N OVEL CONCEPTS
Input: What do the following have in common? 1) bumble bees 2) 01010101 3) race cars
Option: They all make noise.
Option: They all are yellow.
Option: They all are binary.
Option: They all go fast.
Option: They all have stripes.
Task: L OGICAL DEDUCTION : F IVE OBJECTS
Input: On a shelf, there are five books: a gray book, a red book, a purple book, a blue book,
and a black book. The red book is to the right of the gray book. The black book is to the left
of the blue book. The blue book is to the left of the gray book. The purple book is the second
from the right.
Option: The {gray, red, purple, blue, black} book is second from the right.
Task: C ODENAMES
Input: Try to identify the 2 words best associated with the word WHITE from the following list:
book, anchor, rainbow, shoulder, tunnel, sack, drum, pacific, page, mark, gear, glacier. Give your
answer in alphabetical order.
Task: K NOWN UNKNOWNS
Input: How often did Abraham Lincoln cut his toenails?
Option: Every Saturday night
Option: Unknown
Task: S PORTS UNDERSTANDING
Input: Statement: Draymond Green threw a touchdown. Plausible/implausible?
Task: E MOJI MOVIE
Input: What movie does this emoji describe? {lying-face-emoji}
Option: pinocchio
Option: heat
Option: the big sleep
Option: inception
Option: lilo & stitch
Task: M ISCONCEPTIONS RUSSIAN
Input: Vaccines cause autism. / Vaccines do not cause autism. [in Russian]


                                               19
