Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q UERY T HE AGENT: I MPROVING S AMPLE E FFICIENCY
T HROUGH E PISTEMIC U NCERTAINTY E STIMATION
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Curricula for goal-conditioned reinforcement learning agents typically rely on
         poor estimates of the agent’s epistemic uncertainty or fail to consider the agents’
         epistemic uncertainty altogether, resulting in poor sample efficiency. We propose a
         novel algorithm, Query The Agent (QTA), which significantly improves sample
         efficiency by estimating the agent’s epistemic uncertainty throughout the state
         space and setting goals in highly uncertain areas. Encouraging the agent to collect
         data in highly uncertain states allows the agent to improve its estimation of the
         value function rapidly. QTA utilizes a novel technique for estimating epistemic
         uncertainty, Predictive Uncertainty Networks (PUN), to allow QTA to assess the
         agent’s uncertainty in all previously observed states. We demonstrate that QTA
         offers decisive sample efficiency improvements over preexisting methods.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning has been demonstrated to be highly effective in a diverse array of se-
quential decision-making tasks (Silver et al., 2016; Berner et al., 2019). However, deep reinforcement
learning remains challenging to implement in the real world, in part because of the massive amount of
data required for training. This challenge is acute in robotics (Sünderhauf et al., 2018; Dulac-Arnold
et al., 2019), in tasks such as manipulation (Liu et al.), and in self-driving cars (Kothari et al.).
Existing curriculum methods for training goal-conditioned reinforcement learning (RL) agents suffer
from poor sample efficiency (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019) and often fail to consider agents’ specific
deficiencies and epistemic uncertainty when selecting goals. Instead, they rely on poor proxy
estimates of epistemic uncertainty or high-level statistics from rollouts, such as the task success rate.
Without customizing learning according to agents’ epistemic uncertainties, existing methods inhibit
the agent’s learning with three modes of failure. Firstly, a given curriculum may not be sufficiently
challenging for an agent, thus using timesteps inefficiently. Secondly, a given curriculum may be
too challenging to an agent, causing the agent to learn more slowly than it could otherwise. Thirdly,
a curriculum may fail to take into account an agent catastrophically forgetting the value manifold
in a previously learned region of the state space. Curriculum algorithms need a detailed estimate
of the agent’s epistemic uncertainty throughout the state space in order to maximize learning by
encouraging agents to explore the regions of the state space the agent least understands (Kaelbling,
1993; Plappert et al., 2018).
We propose a novel curriculum algorithm, Query The Agent (QTA), to accelerate learning in goal-
conditioned settings. QTA estimates the agent’s epistemic uncertainty in all previously observed
states, then drives the agent to reduce its epistemic uncertainty as quickly as possible by setting
goals in states with high epistemic uncertainty. QTA estimates epistemic uncertainty using a novel
neural architecture, Predictive Uncertainty Networks (PUN). By taking into account the agent’s
epistemic uncertainty throughout the state space, QTA aims to explore neither too quickly nor too
slowly, and revisit previously explored states when catastrophic forgetting occurs. We demonstrate in
a 2D continuous maze environment that QTA is significantly more sample efficient than preexisting
methods. We also provide a detailed analysis of how QTA’s approximation of the optimal value
manifold evolves over time, demonstrating that QTA’s learning dynamics are meaningfully driven by
epistemic uncertainty estimation. An overview of QTA and our maze environments are shown in 1.
We further demonstrate the importance of utilizing the agent’s epistemic uncertainty by extending
QTA with a modified Prioritized Experience Replay (Schaul et al., 2016) (PER) buffer. This modified


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Left: An overview of our goal-selection method. * Threshold filter is only applied when
sampling the first goal of an episode. Right: An example of a 1-period square-wave maze, and an
M-maze. Starting locations are sampled uniformly in the blue regions and goal locations are sampled
uniformly in the green regions. Environment described in detail in section 4


PER buffer assigns sampling priorities to transitions based on states’ estimated epistemic uncertainty.
QTA augmented with our modified PER buffer outperforms QTA, while QTA using a standard
PER buffer does not. This demonstrates the benefits of integrating detailed epistemic uncertainty
estimation into reinforcement learning curricula.
Our contributions are:

      1. Query the Agent (QTA): A novel curriculum algorithm that adapts goals to the agent’s
         epistemic uncertainty and pushes an agent to improve rapidly by collecting data in highly
         uncertainty states in the environment.
      2. Predictive Uncertainty Networks (PUN): A new technique, broadly applicable to all Q
         learning approaches, for measuring an agent’s epistemic uncertainty throughout the state
         space by using the agent’s own latent representation. We demonstrate an implementation
         with DDPG.
      3. An analysis, including ablation experiments, on how QTA estimates epistemic uncertainty
         throughout state space and how QTA evolves an agent’s understanding of its environment
         over time.


2   R ELATED W ORK
Recent advances build upon Hindsight Experience Replay (HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) by
designing curricula that allow the agent to cleverly select goals to accelerate learning. None of
these appropriately take into account the agent’s epistemic uncertainty. We will categorize methods
according to which information about the agent they utilize to select goals, then discuss them.
Pitis et al. (2020) does not directly take into account any information regarding the agent’s epistemic
uncertainty or performance. Their method simply fits a kernel density estimate over the set of
previously visited goals, then draws samples as goal candidates and selects the sample with the
lowest likelihood under the kernel density estimate. This method benefits from reliably producing


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


increasingly difficult goals for the agent and being immune to problems such as a goal generator
network destabilizing. There are multiple drawbacks. Firstly, if an agent suffers from catastrophic
forgetting, the curriculum won’t be able to correct the problem effectively. Secondly, if the incremental
goals are insufficiently/overly challenging for the agent, the curriculum won’t properly adapt. Pitis
et al. (2020) shares some commonalities with pseudocount techniques in setting goals exclusively
based on visitation frequency.
Similarly, count-based and pseudocount-based algorithms (Tang et al.; Bellemare et al.) rely on
counting the number of times that a state or a region of state space has been visited. In high
dimensional or continuous environments, these algorithms rely on various compression or learned
similarity metrics (Machado et al.; Schmidhuber, 2008) or basic statistics in order to identify which
regions of the state space are considered similar and adjacent to one another. Intrinsic exploration
bonuses can be awarded and goals can be set based on visitation frequencies to accelerate exploration.
These methods, taking into account exclusively visitation frequency, do not directly to into account
the agent’s epistemic uncertainty or performance and may set goals too ambitiously or lazily and
won’t account for catastrophic forgetting.
Other techniques, such as Bharadhwaj et al. (2020); Portelas et al. (2019); Florensa et al. (2018),
only indirectly take into account the agent’s understanding of the state space through approximations
based on statistics regarding agents’ historical ability to reach goals. Since such metrics offer
minimal insight into the agent’s understanding of the task, these methods select goals that may not be
maximally informative to the agent. The major weakness of these methods is that the goal-generation
networks can destabilize, and are required to set goals with only very abstract data about the agent’s
understanding of the state space.
Another class of algorithms, such as Pathak et al.; Zhang et al. (2020), rely on an external ensemble
of networks and estimate epistemic uncertainty throughout the state space. Pathak et al. maintains
an external network of forward models, which observe the same data as the agent, and uses the
disagreement among the forward models as an epistemic uncertainty estimate. Zhang et al. (2020)
does the same, but with three external critics. The major problem with these algorithms is that they
are estimating the epistemic uncertainty of other networks, not the agent’s network. Because these
external networks’ understanding of the state space will drift away from the agent’s over time, the
epistemic uncertainty estimate of the external networks is not representative of the agent’s epistemic
uncertainty estimate. Additionally, Zhang et al. (2020) requires privileged access to the entire state
space in order to stabilize.
Other curiosity-related methods, such as random network distillation (Burda et al.), use different
formulations of a similar mechanism; estimating the uncertainty of networks disconnected from the
agent’s computation graph. Random network distillation relies on using the agent’s experiences
to train an external network to predict the output of a frozen, randomly initialized network known
as the target network. As an agent visits a particular state more, the external network improves its
prediction of the output of the target network, making it an effective exploration technique to provide
intrinsic reward bonuses proportionate to the size of the external network’s prediction error. However,
this approach relies on estimating the agent’s error in the random network prediction task to gauge
uncertainty in the Q-learning task. These are two very different tasks with different difficulties and
will learn at different speeds, thus this technique provides a poor estimate of epistemic uncertainty.
A number of techniques (Chane-Sane et al., 2021; Nachum et al., 2018; Christen et al., 2021; OpenAI
et al., 2021) have used multiple reinforcement learning agents in order to solve long-horizon tasks,
by either using the agents in an adversarial fashion or in a hierarchy. Using multiple reinforcement
learning agents incurs a significant computation expense, and comes along with significant technical
challenges such as nonstationarity between agents. Consideration of these techniques is outside the
scope of this work, as this work focuses on maximizing the learning of a single agent.


3    M ETHODS

When learning to navigate a goal-conditioned reinforcement learning environment, we seek to collect
as much useful information as possible with each rollout, based on which areas of the state space
the agent is least certain about. In each episode, QTA measures the agent’s uncertainty and samples
a goal in a highly uncertain region of the state space in order to gather state transitions that will be


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


maximally informative to the agent when performing gradient updates. We can ensure that the most
important transitions are sampled immediately for gradient updates through a modified version of
prioritized experience replay (PER), in which the priorities are determined by the estimated epistemic
uncertainty of a state in the replay buffer.
In this section, we first introduce Predictive Uncertainty Networks (PUN) for predicting epistemic
uncertainty. Next, we introduce QTA’s mechanism for using epistemic uncertainty estimates to select
a goal. Lastly, we introduce an extension of QTA in which our customized PER buffer allows for
further sample efficiency improvements.

3.1   U NCERTAINTY ESTIMATION

Predictive Uncertainty Networks (PUN) PUN utilizes a critic ensemble to enable effective
epistemic uncertainty estimation. PUN uses G critics ϕi∈{1,...,G} , G target critics ϕtarg,i∈{1,...,G} ,
and in this implementations a standard policy πθ . In our PUN implementation we fix G = 3. Having
multiple critics providing estimates is essential for assessing the epistemic uncertainty of the network.
In order to ensure the stability of an ensemble of critics, we train them with a joint loss function.
Given a mini-batch B = {(s, a, r, s′ , g, g ′ )}, inspired by Chen et al. (2021) we sample a set of two
indices M from {1, ..., G} then compute the target:
                        yt = rt + γ(min Qϕtarg,i (s′ , a′ , g ′ )), a′ ∼ πθ (·|s′ )
                                      i∈M

Then update ϕi with gradient descent using
                                  1     X
                              ∇ϕ                     (Qϕi (s, a, g) − y)2
                                 |B|
                                         (s,a,g)∈B

We update target networks using polyak averaging coefficient ρ:
                                    ϕtarg,i ← ρϕtarg,i + (1 − ρ)ϕi
Lastly, the policy is updated as in DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016).
Predictive Network We assign a predictive network Pi to each critic network, where each predictive
network is a single feed-forward layer that takes as input the final latent state of the critic and
predicts the next hidden state the agent will observe. More specifically Qbackbone,i (s, a, g) yields a
final hidden state ξi , and the final layer of Qi maps Qi,f inal (ξi ) → Qi (s, a, g) while the predictive
network maps Pi (ξi ) → s̃′ . We train the predictive network by minimizing the objective:
                                                1 X ′
                                         L=            (s − s̃′ )2
                                               |B| ′
                                                  s ∈B

The critic’s epistemic uncertainty regarding a particular state is simply the standard deviation of the
three predictive heads’ predictions. The small predictive networks are a component of the larger
ensemble of critics and predictive networks that make up the Predictive Uncertainty Networks.
Note that we intentionally use the same ξi as input to both the final head of the critic and as input to
the predictive network so that the quality of the two predictions will be tightly coupled. This allows
the disagreement among the predictive networks to be highly indicative of the critic’s epistemic
uncertainty. When initially the critic backbone’s latent representations are meaningless, the predictive
networks’ outputs will be inconsistent with one another and have a large standard deviation. As the
critic network better learns to approximate the optimal value manifold, the latent representation will
better encode the next state the agent will observe for the final critic layer to predict the next Q value
as Q(st , at ) = rt + γ ∗ Q(st+1 , at+1 ). As the critic improves and the latent representation better
encodes st+1 , the predictive heads’ outputs s′t+1 will improve and become more consistent, having a
smaller standard deviation among each other. Lastly, we intentionally use an identical architecture
for the predictive network as with the critic network to ensure they have the same learning capacity
and remain tightly coupled.

3.2   G OAL S ELECTION

QTA samples previously seen goals from the replay buffer to serve as goal candidates. In order to get
a precise estimate of epistemic uncertainty ϵ for a particular state s, we uniformly sample d random


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


actions from the action space and compute the epistemic uncertainty of a state to be the mean of d
uncertainty estimates for that state. More precisely:
                                    d      G
                                 1X 1 X
                          ϵk =               Pi (Qbackbone,i (s, aj , gdesired ))
                                 d j=0 G i=0

We use the desired goal sampled from the environment for these estimates, though the prediction is
learned to be agnostic to the choice of goal. The distribution of estimated epistemic uncertainties
is normalized between 0 and 1 before proceeding to goal selection. Each goal is sampled with a
probability linearly proportionate to its estimated epistemic uncertainty. This simple linear sampling
approach encourages QTA to sample goals with high epistemic uncertainty, allowing the agent to
gather maximally informative transitions in the regions of the state space where it is least certain.
Given a slope m and y-intercept b, a goal candidate with epistemic uncertainty ϵk is selected as the
agent’s next goal with probability:
                                          max(mϵk + b, 0)
                                          N
                                          P
                                            max(mϵk ∗ b, 0)
                                          k=0


Whenever the agent successfully reaches its goal, a new goal is sampled using this same procedure.
Estimating the agent’s epistemic uncertainty only requires d forward passes through the critic
backbone and predictive head, so QTA is able to efficiently consider an arbitrarily large number of
goal candidates by utilizing batch operations. In practice, d is small.

3.3   P RIORITIZED E XPERIENCE R EPLAY

To demonstrate the importance of learning from state transitions with high epistemic uncertainty, we
implement a modified version of prioritized experience replay (PER). Our implementation ensures
that our agent samples the transitions with greatest epistemic uncertainty when performing gradient
updates. We make two key modifications to PER. Firstly, rather than using temporal difference error
to establish priorities in the replay buffer, we utilize the estimated epistemic uncertainty according to
PUN to provide a more accurate measure of which transitions are most beneficial to sample.
Secondly, once a transition is sampled its goal is probabilistically replaced with the goal of a transition
later in its trajectory and its reward is recomputed, as in the standard hindsight experience replay
(HER) (Andrychowicz et al., 2017) mechanism. That is to say, that in the sparse reward setting we
use the PER mechanism to sample from a HER replay buffer instead of a standard replay buffer. This
maintains the benefits of the HER replay buffer, while allowing us to sample the most important
transitions through the PER mechanism. Similarly to in Schaul et al. (2016), we sample a transition
with priority pj with probability:
                                                    pα
                                                  Pj α
                                                     pj
                                                   j
Schaul et al. (2016) demonstrated that oversampling high-priority transitions introduces a bias that
can destabilize gradient updates. In order to anneal the bias created by oversampling transitions with
high epistemic uncertainty, we multiply by importance sampling weights:
                                                        1 1 β
                                               wj = (        )
                                                        N pj
Where β is initialized to a set value and gradually increased throughout training until β = 1, at which
point the bias is fully compensated for.
Finally, it is important that the goals selected by QTA are achievable. To promote achievability, QTA
eliminates invalid goal candidates from being selected as the first goal in a rollout through a simple
threshold mechanism. Any goal candidates with a mean Q value smaller than cT are eliminated,
where T is the maximum length of the rollout. Similar to as in Pitis et al. (2020), this heuristic is
not core to the algorithm, and could be replaced with, e.g., a generative model designed to generate
achievable goals (Florensa et al., 2018) or a discrminative model to quantify the achievability of
goals.


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Left: M-maze performance. Right: Square-wave performance. Above we plot the number
of timesteps required for various algorithms to attain evaluation performance of 1.0 across 12 seeds
on various environments. Performance omitted for when seeds failed to converge for a particular
environment. Lower on the graph represents better sample efficiency. Confidence intervals represent
one standard deviation.



4    R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS

Environments We utilize custom a suite of procedurally generated 2D mazes for a dot agent with
continuous action and state spaces. In all environments the agent receives a reward of -1 unless it
reaches, the goal to within a small radius, in which case it receives a reward of 0. These mazes are
carefully designed to have a minimum solving time T such that an optimal agent cannot solve the task
in fewer than T timesteps. This reward structure and environment makes it such that the best total for
reaching a goal is -1 * (T - 1), which we use in our analysis below to compute the optimal return.
These environments also allow us to evaluate the performance of QTA compared to baseline methods
in a series of increasingly challenging environments, where each environment is quantifiably more
difficult than the last. Our first set of environments is a set of square-wave mazes, in which the agent
must traverse a long path with a single route forward. The square-wave mazes allow us to directly
evaluate the most critical skills pertaining to sample efficiency: how quickly an agent is able to explore
new regions of the state space and integrate information, while reintegrating information about any
regions of the state space that are catastrophically forgotten. Our second set of environments is an
M-maze, which features a large, useless dead-end that takes up a large fraction of the state space and
is designed to waste that agent’s time. While evaluating many of the same challenges, it additionally
allows us to evaluate agents’ sample efficiency when faced with an artificially enlarged state space.
Baseline algorithms We compare QTA’s performance with two competitive curriculum baselines:
MEGA (Pitis et al., 2020) and VDS (Zhang et al., 2020). HER was not able to reach the goal in
any of our environments within the time allowed. We used the authors’ code and hyperparameters
for MEGA and VDS, and tried to tune the hyperparameters to our environment. We were unable to
improve performance further, likely because both algorithms were originally tuned for very similar
2D navigation environments.
As baselines for comparing PUNs performance, we evaluate QTA with two popular epistemic
uncertainty estimation algorithms: Bootstrapped Q Networks (Osband et al., 2016), and Deep
Ensembles (Lakshminarayanan et al., 2017). We also evaluate PUN using the discrepancy among
Q values as an epistemic uncertainty estimate in order to evaluate the efficacy of predicting next
observed states with PUN.
Main results By accurately estimating the epistemic uncertainty of the agent, QTA is able to
navigate mazes using significantly fewer timesteps faster than MEGA, as shown in figure 2. MEGA,
which ignores the epistemic uncertainty of the model and largely relies on high-level statistics about
visited states, did not induce learning as quickly as QTA’s methodology of taking into account the
epistemic uncertainty. Interestingly, we see that as the time horizon continues to expand to very long
horizons and large state spaces, MEGA begins to approach the performance of QTA, which may be
due to the predictive network overfitting when predicting the agent’s epistemic uncertainties.


                                                    6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Left: QTA with and without our customized PER. Right: QTA vs standard PER. We plot
the number of timesteps needed to attain evaluation performance of 1.0 across 12 seeds in M-mazes
of various lengths.


We find that VDS is competitive at first, but quickly becomes less sample efficient and then fails to
solve many environments. We suspect that VDS is only competitive at the beginning because VDS
has access to privileged information about the entire state space, including states not yet observed.
We also observe that all algorithms perform much worse and scale more poorly on square-wave-
shaped environments, despite having much shorter mazes to solve with much smaller state spaces.
The greater number of sharp turns required to solve the square-wave mazes hurts sample efficiency,
as the optimal value function is harder to approximate.
Epistemic Uncertainty for Sampling Replay Transitions We further demonstrate the importance
of estimating the agent’s epistemic uncertainty by showing that it can be used as a signal to prioritize
certain replay transitions, as shown in figure 3. In the left figure, we show that introducing PER offers
some performance benefits with longer mazes before the predictive network begins to overfit. In
the right figure. We demonstrate that standard PER with temporal-difference error for prioritization
offers no significant performance benefits. Prioritizing based on temporal difference was not helpful
to the agent. Prioritizing with epistemic uncertainty accelerated the agent’s learning, especially in
navigating longer mazes.


Figure 4: We add gaussian noise to PUN’s uncertainty estimates. Blue: no noise. Orange: standard
deviation=0.01. Green: standard deviation=0.03. Red: standard deviation=0.05


Verifying QTA’s Approach Next, we verify that QTA is forcing the agent to minimize uncertainty
and not simply choosing goals that are incrementally further away or following any other strategy. To
demonstrate this, as shown in figure 4, we add small amounts of gaussian noise to PUN’s uncertainty
estimates and find that performance suffers significantly and ultimately collapses with even a tiny
amount of added noise. We demonstrate that the performance of QTA hinges on following highly
precise estimates of epistemic uncertainty and that QTA selects goals strictly based on epistemic
uncertainty.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Analysis of the ensemble of critics for one seed on a 12x5-unit M-maze. From left to right,
in each column we show: 1) the value function for all states averaged across all critics 2) the absolute
value of the error between the average value function and the optimal value function, 3) the optimal
value function 4) the average error among the three predictive heads 5) the probability of a state being
sampled as the agent’s next goal 6) 200 sampled states based on epistemic uncertainty. We emphasize
to the reader that across time all color scales are the same across time except for the predictive head
error, which changes over time to make the contrast more visible.



Analysis of critic networks In figure 5 we visualize the critics of one of our agents learning over
time in an M-maze. The agent starts in the bottom-left inlet, as shown in figure 1. We demonstrate
that our neural networks are performing as we would expect. Firstly, upon the analysis of the value
function, we see that the map generally gets lighter over time, indicating that the estimated Q values
increase over time as the agent’s competency increases. Naturally, some areas of the value manifold
are better learned than others.
Comparing this learned value function with the optimal value function yields the absolute error map
shown in the second column. We show that in general the error starts high and uniform, and decreases


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Left: Performance of QTA using PUN uncertainty vs using disagreement among Q values
for PUN on various M-mazes. Right: QTA with PUN vs other critic ensemble architectures across
M-mazes of varying lengths. All experiments averaged from 12 random seeds. Error bars indicate
one standard deviation.



over time. As expected, the error is greater in states further away from the starting point, as those
states have been visited less frequently and been sampled fewer times in gradient updates than those
closer to the start.
By analyzing the estimated epistemic uncertainty in the fourth column, we gain insight into how
the agent selects goals. The fourth column contains a spatial representation of the agent’s epistemic
uncertainty where brighter colors indicate greater uncertainty. We simultaneously discuss the fifth
column, showing the likelihood of any particular point being sampled as a goal for the agent. We
see from the average predictive head errors that after only five-thousand iterations, the network
already understands and has explored a large region of the maze. We can see that the network least
understands the furthest regions of the maze. This is demonstrated by the network sampling goals
only in the regions of the maze furthest from the start. As time progresses, the network overall
becomes more certain and the magnitude of the average forward error decreases significantly but is
punctuated by occasional catastrophic forgetting events. We point out to the reader that the visual
scale of the fourth column is unique to each image, as indicated to the left of the maze graphic, in
order to make the contrast more visible to the reader. We see that the goal sampling likelihoods in the
fifth column track very closely with the predictive head errors in the fourth column, demonstrating
that QTA samples goals in the most epistemically uncertain locations for the agent.
In the final column we have a representative sampling of 200 goals, and see that they tend to be
targeted toward areas of the maze that are far away from the origin, tracking very closely with the
goal sampling likelihoods.
Q value disagreement PUN utilizes the disagreement among predictive networks’ outputs to
estimate epistemic uncertainty. A more intuitive choice might be to use the disagreement among Q
values. We experimented with using the disagreement among Q values rather than the predicted next
states as in 6, but found it to be an inferior estimator of epistemic uncertainty, leading to dramatically
worse performance. By analyzing the sources of noise, we see that we would anticipate the next state
prediction to be less noisy and thus more stable than the prediction for the Q value. By the definition
of the Q value Q(st ) = rt + γQ(s′t+1 , at+1 ), there are three sources of noise δ in the estimation
of the Q value: δrt , δs′t+1 , and δγQ(s′t+1 ,at+1 ) . When predicting s′ , the predictive network’s output
has only one source of error: δs′ . Naturally, the signal-to-noise ratio will be much higher with the
predictive heads’ output. A very low signal-to-noise ratio is consistent with the analysis in Zhang
et al. (2020). Further, we intuitively anticipate s̃′ to be a good predictor of the quality of the critic’s
latent representation since the accuracy s̃′t+1 is essential for accurately predicting Q(st , at ).
Epistemic Uncertainty Estimation Techniques In figure 6 we compare QTA with PUN to analo-
gous implementations using bootstrapped Q networks and deep ensembles. All are implemented with
three critics. With all algorithms we use next state prediction discrepancies as uncertainty estimates.
QTA performs best when it uses the epistemic uncertainty estimates from PUN, demonstrating that
estimates from PUN are the most accurate of the approaches available.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Reproducibility Statement We take the reproducibility of our work with the utmost seriousness.
For this reason we include all of our code, along with instructions for running our code, in the
supplementary materials submission. All experiments were run with 12 random seeds and all plots
include confidence intervals to make our results clear. We also provide implementation details and
hyperparameter settings in the Methods section and Appendix.

R EFERENCES
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, OpenAI Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay.
 In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. In D. Lee, M. Sugiyama, U. Luxburg,
 I. Guyon, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Christopher Berner, Greg Brockman, Brooke Chan, Vicki Cheung, Przemyslaw Debiak, Christy
  Dennison, David Farhi, Quirin Fischer, Shariq Hashme, Christopher Hesse, Rafal Józefowicz,
  Scott Gray, Catherine Olsson, Jakub Pachocki, Michael Petrov, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto,
  Jonathan Raiman, Tim Salimans, Jeremy Schlatter, Jonas Schneider, Szymon Sidor, Ilya Sutskever,
  Jie Tang, Filip Wolski, and Susan Zhang. Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning.
  CoRR, abs/1912.06680, 2019.
Homanga Bharadhwaj, Animesh Garg, and Florian Shkurti. Leaf: Latent exploration along the
  frontier. CoRR, abs/2005.10934, 2020.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New
  Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019.
Elliot Chane-Sane, Cordelia Schmid, and Ivan Laptev. Goal-conditioned Reinforcement Learning
  with Imagined Subgoals. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  2021.
Xinyue Chen, Che Wang, Zijian Zhou, and Keith W. Ross. Randomized ensembled double q-learning:
  Learning fast without a model. In ICLR, 2021.
Sammy Christen, Lukás Jendele, Emre Aksan, and Otmar Hilliges. Learning functionally decomposed
  hierarchies for continuous control tasks with path planning. IEEE Robotics Autom. Lett., 6(2):
  3623–3630, 2021.
Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel J. Mankowitz, and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement
  learning. CoRR, abs/1904.12901, 2019.
Carlos Florensa, David Held, Xinyang Geng, and Pieter Abbeel. Automatic goal generation for
  reinforcement learning agents. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 1515–1528, 2018.
Leslie Pack Kaelbling. Learning to achieve goals. In Proc. of IJCAI-93, pp. 1094–1098, 1993.
Parth Kothari, Christian Perone, Luca Bergamini, Alexandre Alahi, and Peter Ondruska. Drivergym:
  Democratising reinforcement learning for autonomous driving.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2017/file/9ef2ed4b7fd2c810847ffa5fa85bce38-Paper.pdf.
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In ICLR,
  2016.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rongrong Liu, Florent Nageotte, Philippe Zanne, Michel de Mathelin, and Birgitta Dresp-Langley.
  Deep reinforcement learning for the control of robotic manipulation: A focussed mini-review.

Marlos C. Machado, Marc G. Bellemare, and Michael Bowling. Count-based exploration with the
 successor representation. In The Thirty-Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI
 2020, The Thirty-Second Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, IAAI 2020,
 The Tenth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2020, New
 York, NY, USA, February 7-12, 2020.

Ofir Nachum, Shixiang (Shane) Gu, Honglak Lee, and Sergey Levine. Data-efficient hierarchical
  reinforcement learning. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi,
  and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31. Curran
  Associates, Inc., 2018.

OpenAI OpenAI, Matthias Plappert, Raul Sampedro, Tao Xu, Ilge Akkaya, Vineet Kosaraju, Peter
 Welinder, Ruben D’Sa, Arthur Petron, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Alex Paino, Hyeonwoo
  Noh, Lilian Weng, Qiming Yuan, Casey Chu, and Wojciech Zaremba. Asymmetric self-play for
  automatic goal discovery in robotic manipulation, 2021.

Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped DQN. CoRR, abs/1602.04621, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.
  04621.

Deepak Pathak, Dhiraj Gandhi, and Abhinav Gupta. Self-supervised exploration via disagreement.
  In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA,
  volume 97, pp. 5062–5071. PMLR.

Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, Stephen Zhao, Bradly Stadie, and Jimmy Ba. Maximum Entropy Gain
   Exploration for Long Horizon Multi-goal Reinforcement Learning. In Proceedings of the 37th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.

Matthias Plappert, Marcin Andrychowicz, Alex Ray, Bob McGrew, Bowen Baker, Glenn Powell,
 Jonas Schneider, Josh Tobin, Maciek Chociej, Peter Welinder, Vikash Kumar, and Wojciech
 Zaremba. Multi-goal reinforcement learning: Challenging robotics environments and request for
 research. CoRR, abs/1802.09464, 2018.

Rémy Portelas, Cédric Colas, Katja Hofmann, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Teacher algorithms for
  curriculum learning of deep RL in continuously parameterized environments. In Leslie Pack
  Kaelbling, Danica Kragic, and Komei Sugiura (eds.), 3rd Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
  CoRL 2019, Osaka, Japan, October 30 - November 1, 2019, Proceedings, volume 100, pp. 835–853,
  2019.

Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings, 2016.

Jürgen Schmidhuber. Driven by compression progress: A simple principle explains essential aspects
  of subjective beauty, novelty, surprise, interestingness, attention, curiosity, creativity, art, science,
  music, jokes. CoRR, abs/0812.4360, 2008. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/0812.4360.

David Silver, Aja Huang, Christopher J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den
  Driessche, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Veda Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–503, 2016. URL http:
 //www.nature.com/nature/journal/v529/n7587/full/nature16961.html.

Niko Sünderhauf, Oliver Brock, Walter J. Scheirer, Raia Hadsell, Dieter Fox, Jürgen Leitner, Ben
  Upcroft, Pieter Abbeel, Wolfram Burgard, Michael Milford, and Peter Corke. The limits and
  potentials of deep learning for robotics. CoRR, abs/1804.06557, 2018.


                                                   11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman,
  Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. #exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep
  reinforcement learning. In Isabelle Guyon, Ulrike von Luxburg, Samy Bengio, Hanna M. Wallach,
  Rob Fergus, S. V. N. Vishwanathan, and Roman Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems 30: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017,
  December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA.
Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Lerrel Pinto. Automatic Curriculum Learning through Value
  Disagreement. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020.


A     A PPENDIX
A.1   H YPERPARAMETERS
                 Parameter                                        Value
                 Batch size                                       1024
          Network hidden size                                      256
 HER replay k (Andrychowicz et al., 2017)                           4
              Discount factor                                     0.99
            Actor learning rate                                   1e-3
          Critic Learning Rate                                    2e-3
   Predictive Network Learning Rate                               5e-3
            d (random actions)               8 (16 for deep ensembles and bootstrapped DQN)
           Initial random steps                                    1e3
                      ϵ                                            0.2
               prandomaction                                       0.3
                c (threshold)                                      -1.6
           Linear sampling M                                       626
            Linear Sampling b                                     -591
                      ρ                                           0.95
                PER βinitial                                       0.3
                PER β steps                                        2e5
                    PER α                                          1.0


                                              12
