Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D ISSECTING ADAPTIVE METHODS IN GAN S
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Adaptive methods are a crucial component widely used for training generative
         adversarial networks (GANs). While there has been some work to pinpoint the
         “marginal value of adaptive methods” in standard tasks, it remains unclear why
         they are still critical for GAN training. In this paper, we formally study how
         adaptive methods help train GANs; inspired by the grafting method proposed in
         Agarwal et al. (2020), we separate the magnitude and direction components of the
         Adam updates, and graft them to the direction and magnitude of SGDA updates
         respectively. By considering an update rule with the magnitude of the Adam
         update and the normalized direction of SGD, we empirically show that the adaptive
         magnitude of Adam is key for GAN training. This motivates us to have a closer look
         at the class of normalized stochastic gradient descent ascent (nSGDA) methods
         in the context of GAN training. We propose a synthetic theoretical framework to
         compare the performance of nSGDA and SGDA for GAN training with neural
         networks. We prove that in that setting, GANs trained with nSGDA recover all the
         modes of the true distribution, whereas the same networks trained with SGDA (and
         any learning rate configuration) suffer from mode collapse. The critical insight in
         our analysis is that normalizing the gradients forces the discriminator and generator
         to be updated at the same pace. We also experimentally show that for several
         datasets, Adam’s performance can be recovered with nSGDA methods.

1   I NTRODUCTION
Adaptive algorithms have become a key component in training modern neural network architectures
in various deep learning tasks. Minimization problems that arise in natural language processing
(Vaswani et al., 2017), fMRI (Zbontar et al., 2018), or min-max problems such as generative
adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) almost exclusively use adaptive methods,
and it has been empirically observed that Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) yields a solution with better
generalization than stochastic gradient descent (SGD) in such problems (Choi et al., 2019). Several
works have attempted to explain this phenomenon in the minimization setting. Common explanations
are that adaptive methods train faster (Zhou et al., 2018), escape flat “saddle-point”–like plateaus
faster (Orvieto et al., 2021), or handle heavy-tailed stochastic gradients better (Zhang et al., 2019;
Gorbunov et al., 2022). However, much less is known about why adaptive methods are so critical for
solving min-max problems such as GANs.
Several previous works attribute this performance to the superior convergence speed of adaptive
methods. For instance, Liu et al. (2019) show that an adaptive variant of Optimistic Gradient Descent
(Daskalakis et al., 2017) converges faster than stochastic gradient descent ascent (SGDA) for a class
of non-convex, non-concave min-max problems. However, contrary to the minimization setting,
convergence to a stationary point is not required to obtain satisfactory GAN performance. Mescheder
et al. (2018) empirically shows that popular architectures such as Wasserstein GANs (WGANs)
(Arjovsky et al., 2017) do not always converge, and yet they produce realistic images. We support this
observation with our own experiments in Section 2. Our findings motivate the central question in this
paper: what factors of Adam contribute to better quality solutions over SGDA when training GANs?
In this paper, we investigate why GANs trained with adaptive methods outperform those trained using
SGDA. Directly analyzing Adam is challenging due to the highly non-linear nature of its gradient
oracle and its path-dependent update rule. Inspired by the grafting approach in (Agarwal et al., 2020),
we disentangle the adaptive magnitude and direction of Adam and show evidence that an algorithm
using the adaptive magnitude of Adam and the direction of SGDA (which we call Ada-nSGDA)
recovers the performance of Adam in GANs. Our contributions are as follows:


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


• In Section 2, we present the Ada-nSGDA algorithm.We emprically show that the adaptive magnitude
  in Ada-nSGDA stays within a constant range and does not heavily fluctuate which motivates the
  focus on normalized SGDA (nSGDA) which only contains the direction of SGDA.
• In Section 3, we prove that for a synthetic dataset consisting of two modes, a model trained
  with SGDA suffers from mode collapse (producing only a single type of output), while a model
  trained with nSGDA does not. This provides an explanation for why GANs trained with nSGDA
  outperform those trained with SGDA.
• In Section 4, we empirically confirm that nSGDA mostly recovers the performance of Ada-nSGDA
  when using different GAN architectures on a wide range of datasets.
Our key theoretical insight is that when using SGDA and any step-size configuration, either the
generator G or discriminator D updates much faster than the other. By normalizing the gradients
as done in nSGDA, D and G are forced to update at the same speed throughout training. The
consequence is that whenever D learns a mode of the distribution, G learns it right after, which makes
both of them learn all the modes of the distribution separately at the same pace.

1.1    R ELATED WORK
Adaptive methods in games optimization. Several works designed adaptive algorithms and analyzed
their convergence to show their benefits relative to SGDA e.g. in variational inequality problems,
Gasnikov et al. (2019); Antonakopoulos et al. (2019); Bach & Levy (2019); Antonakopoulos et al.
(2020); Liu et al. (2019); Barazandeh et al. (2021). Heusel et al. (2017) show that Adam locally
converges to a Nash equilibrium in the regime where the step-size of the discriminator is much larger
than the one of the generator. Our work differs as we do not focus on the convergence properties of
Adam, but rather on the fit of the trained model to the true (and not empirical) data distribution.
Statistical results in GANs. Early works studied whether GANs memorize the training data or
actually learn the distribution (Arora et al., 2017; Liang, 2017; Feizi et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017;
Arora et al., 2018; Bai et al., 2018; Dumoulin et al., 2016). Some works explained GAN performance
through the lens of optimization. Lei et al. (2020); Balaji et al. (2021) show that GANs trained with
SGDA converge to a global saddle point when the generator is one-layer neural network and the
discriminator is a specific quadratic/linear function. Our contribution differs as i) we construct a
setting where SGDA converges to a locally optimal min-max equilibrium but still suffers from mode
collapse, and ii) we have a more challenging setting since we need at least a degree-3 discriminator
to learn the distribution, which is discussed in Section 3.
Normalized gradient descent. Introduced by Nesterov (1984), normalized gradient descent has
been widely used in minimization problems. Normalizing the gradient remedies the issue of iterates
being stuck in flat regions such as spurious local minima or saddle points (Hazan et al., 2015; Levy,
2016). Normalized gradient descent methods outperforms their non-normalized counterparts in multi-
agent coordination (Cortés, 2006) and deep learning tasks (Cutkosky & Mehta, 2020). Our work
considers the min-max setting and shows that nSGDA outperforms SGDA as it forces discriminator
and generator to update at same rate.

1.2    BACKGROUND

Generative adversarial networks. Given a training set sampled from some target distribution D, a
GAN learns to generate new data from this distribution. The architecture is comprised of two networks:
a generator that maps points in the latent space Dz to samples of the desired distribution, and a
discriminator which evaluates these samples by comparing them to samples from D. More formally,
the generator is a mapping GV : Rk → Rd and the discriminator is a mapping DW : Rd → R,
where V and W are their corresponding parameter sets. To find the optimal parameters of these two
networks, one must solve a min-max optimization problem of the form

      min max EX∼pdata [log(DW (X))] + Ez∼pz [log(1 − DW (GV (z)))] := f (V, W),                 (GAN)
       V   W

where pdata is the distribution of the training set, pz the latent distribution, GV the generator and
DW the discriminator. Contrary to minimization problems where convergence to a local minimum is
required for high generalization, we empirically verify that most of the well-performing GANs do
not converge to a stationary point.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


    (a) Each circle corresponds to a specific step-size
    configuration ηD /ηG . The best-performing mod-          (b) shows that during training, the gradient ra-
    els have step-size ratios between 10−1 and 1, and        tio of a well-performing GAN approximately
    do not converge. As ηD /ηG increases, the models         stays constant to 1. We also display the im-
    perform worse but get closer to an equilibrium.          ages produced by the model during training.

Figure 1: Gradient ratio against FID score (a) and number of epochs (b) obtained with DCGAN on CIFAR-10.
                               (t)         (0)            (t)         (0)                 (t)            (t)
This ratio is equal to ∥gradG ∥2 /∥gradG ∥2 + ∥gradD ∥2 /∥gradD ∥2 , where gradG (resp. gradD ) and
      (0)            (0)
gradG (resp. gradD ) are the current and initial gradients of G (resp. D). Note that ∥ · ∥2 refers to the sum of
all the parameters norm in a network. For all the plots, the models are trained for 100 epochs using a batch-size
64. For (b), the results are averaged over 5 seeds.

Convergence and performance are decorrelated in GANs. We support this observation through
the following experiment. We train a DCGAN (Radford et al., 2015) using Adam and set up the
step-sizes for G and D as ηD , ηG , respectively. Note that D is usually trained faster than G i.e.
ηD ≥ ηG . Figure 1a displays the GAN convergence measured by the ratio of gradient norms and the
GAN’s performance measured in FID score (Heusel et al., 2017). We observe that when ηD /ηG is
close to 1, the algorithm does not converge, but the model produces high-quality samples. On the
other hand, when ηD /ηG ≫ 1, the model converges to an equilibrium; a similar statement has been
proved by Jin et al. (2020) and Fiez & Ratliff (2020) in the case of SGDA. However, the trained GAN
produces low-quality solutions at this equilibrium, so simply comparing the convergence speed of
adaptive methods and SGDA cannot explain the performance obtained with adaptive methods.
SGDA and adaptive methods. The most simple algorithm to solve the min-max (GAN) is SGDA,
which is defined as follows:
                                          (t)                         (t)
                    W (t+1) = W (t) + ηD MW,1 , V (t+1) = V (t) − ηG MV,1 ,           (1)
          (t)      (t)
where MW,1 , MV,1 are the first-order momentum gradients as defined in Algorithm 1. While this
method has been used in the first GANs (Radford et al., 2015), most modern GANs are trained with
adaptive methods such as Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014). The definition of this algorithm for game
optimizations is given in Algorithm 1. The hyperparameters β1 , β2 ∈ [0, 1) control the weighting
of the exponential moving average of the first and second-order moments. In many deep-learning
tasks, practitioners have found that setting β2 = 0.9 works for most problem settings. Additionally, it
has been empirically observed that having no momentum (i.e., β1 ≈ 0) is optimal for many popular
GAN architectures (Karras et al., 2020; Brock et al., 2018). Therefore, we only consider the case
where β1 = 0.
Optimizers such as Adam (Algorithm 1) are adaptive since they use a step-size for each parameter that
                                                   (t)
is different than the magnitude of the gradient gY for that parameter up to some constant (such as the
global learning rate), and this step-size updates while training the model. There are three components
that makes the adaptive update differ from the standard SGDA update: 1) the adaptive normalization
       (t)                                     (t)     (t)       (t)   (t)
by ∥gY ∥2 , 2) the change of direction from gY /∥gY ∥2 to AY /∥AY ∥2 and 3) adaptive scaling by
   (t)
∥AY ∥2 . In summary, the steps from the standard to the adaptive update, are:
             (t) normalization   (t)   (t)    change of direction    (t)      (t)    adaptive scaling   (t)
           gY −−−−−−−→ gY /∥gY ∥2 −−−−−−−−−−→ AY /∥AY ∥2 −−−−−−−−→ AY                                           (2)
                         (t)                                                                 (t)
                 ×1/∥gY ∥2                                                             ×∥AY ∥2

The three components are entangled and it remains unclear how they contribute to the superior
performance of adaptive methods relative to SGDA in GANs.


                                                         3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) for games. All operations on vectors are element-wise.
                                                                              (t)    (t)
    Input: initial points W (0) , V (0) , step-size schedules {(ηG , ηD )} , hyperparameters {β1 , β2 , ε}.
                 (0)     (0)      (0)             (0)
    Initialize MW,1 , MW,2 , MV,1 and MV,2 to zero.
    for t = 0 . . . T − 1 do
                                     (t)  (t)
       Receive stochastic gradients gW , gV evaluated at W (t) and V (t) .
                                        (t+1)               (t)         (t)            (t+1)              (t)         (t) 2
      Update for Y ∈ {W, V}: MY,1               = β1 MY,1 + gY and MY,2                         = β2 MY,2 + gY .
                                                                                            r
                                                                  (t+1)             (t+1)
      Compute gradient oracles for Y ∈ {V, W }: AY                        = MY,1 / M(t+1)
                                                                                    Y,2
                                                                                          +ε.

                                        (t)     (t+1)                                       (t)   (t+1)
      Update: W (t+1) = W (t) + ηD AW                   ,         V (t+1) = V (t) − ηG AV                 .



2     N SGDA AS A MODEL TO ANALYZE A DAM IN GAN S

In this section, we show that normalized stochastic gradient descent-ascent (nSGDA) is a suitable
proxy to study the learning dynamics of Adam.
To decouple the normalization, change of direction, and adaptive scaling in Adam, we adopt the
grafting approach proposed by Agarwal et al. (2020). At each iteration, we compute stochastic
gradients, pass them to two optimizers A1 , A2 and make a grafted step that combines the magnitude
of A1 ’s step and direction of A2 ’s step. We focus on the optimizer defined by grafting the Adam
magnitude onto the SGDA direction, which corresponds to omitting the change of direction in (2):
                                                      (t)                                                                     (t)
                                  (t)            gW                                                       (t)            gV
    W (t+1) = W (t) + ηD ∥AW ∥2                 (t)
                                                              ,     V (t+1) = V (t) − ηG ∥AV ∥2                        (t)
                                                                                                                                    ,   (3)
                                          ∥gW ∥2 + ε                                                             ∥gV ∥2 + ε
           (t)    (t)                                                                                           (t)      (t)
where AV , AW are the Adam gradient oracles as in Algorithm 1 and gV , gW the stochastic
gradients. We refer to this algorithm as Ada-nSGDA (combining the Adam magnitude and SGDA
direction). There are two natural implementations for nSDGA. In the layer-wise version, Y (t) is a
single parameter group (typically a layer in a neural network), and the updates are applied to each
group. In the global version, Y (t) contains all of the model’s weights.
In Fig. 2a, we see that Ada-nSGDA and Adam appear to have similar learning dynamics in terms
of the FID score. Both Adam and Ada-nSGDA significantly outperform SGDA as well as AdaDir,
which is the alternate case of (3) where we instead graft the magnitude of the SGDA update to the
direction of the Adam update. AdaDir diverged after a single step so we omit it in Fig. 2. These
results show that the adaptive scaling and normalization components are sufficient to recover the
performance of Adam, suggesting that Ada-nSGDA is a valid proxy for Adam
A natural question that arises is how the total adaptive magnitude varies during training. We
empirically investigate this by tracking the layer-wise adaptive magnitudes of the Adam gradient
oracles when training a GAN with Ada-nSGDA, and summarize our key findings here (see Section 4
for complete experimental details). We first train a WGAN-GP (Arjovsky et al., 2017) model, and
find that the adaptive magnitude is bound within a constant range, and that all the layers have
approximately the same adaptive magnitude (Fig. 2 (b,c)). This suggests that the adaptive scaling
component is constant (in expectation) and motivates the use of nSGDA, corresponding to Ada-
nSGDA with a constant adaptive scaling factor. We then train a WGAN-GP model with nSGDA and
we find that nSGDA mostly recovers the FID score obtained by Ada-nSGDA (Fig. 2a).
We also validate this observation for more complicated GAN architectures by repeating this study on
StyleGAN2 (Karras et al., 2019). We find that the adaptive magnitudes also vary within a constant
range, but each layer has its own constant scaling factor. Thus, training StyleGAN2 with nSGDA
and a global normalization fails, but training with nSGDA with a different constant step-size for
each layer yields a performance that mostly recovers that of Ada-nSGDA (Fig 5). These results
suggest that the schedule of the adaptive scaling is not central in the success of Ada-nSGDA in
GANs. Instead, adaptive methods are successful because they normalize the gradients for each layer,
which allows for more balanced updates between G and D as we will show in Section 3. We conduct
more experiments in Section 4 and in Appendix A.


                                                                    4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  (a)                                (b)                                 (c)
Figure 2: (a) shows the FID training curve for a WGAN-GP ResNet, averaged over 5 seeds. We see that Ada-
nSGDA and nSGDA have very similar performance to Adam for a WGAN-GP. (b, c) displays the fluctuations
                                                                (t)       (0)
of Ada-nSGDA adaptive magnitude. We plot the ratio ∥AY ∥2 /∥AY ∥2 for each of the generator’s (b) and
discriminator’s (c) layers. At early stages, this ratio barely increases and remains constant after 10 steps.

3       W HY DOES N SGDA PERFORM BETTER THAN SGDA IN GAN S ?
In Section 2, we empirically showed that the most important component of the adaptive magnitude is
the normalization, and that nSGDA (an algorithm consisting of this component alone) is sufficient
to recover most of the performance of Ada-nSGDA (and by extension, Adam). Our goal is to
construct a dataset and model where we can prove that a model trained with nSGDA generates
samples from the true training distribution while SGDA fails. To this end, we consider a dataset
where the underlying distribution consists of two modes, defined as vectors u1 , u2 , that are slightly
correlated (see Assumption 1) and consider the standard GANs’ training objective. We show that a
GAN trained with SGDA using any reasonable1 step-size configuration suffers from mode collapse
(Theorem 3.1); it only outputs samples from a single mode which is a weighted average of u1 and u2 .
Conversely, nSGDA-trained GANs learn the two modes separately (Theorem 3.2).

                                                    (t)                   (t)                    (t)   (t)
Notation        We set the GAN 1-sample loss LV,W (X, z) = log(DW (X)) + log(1 − DW (GV (z))).
                  (t)          (t)
We denote gY = ∇Y LV,W (X, z) as the 1-sample stochastic gradient. We use the asymptotic
complexity notations when defining the different constants e.g. poly(d) refers to any polynomial in
the dimension d, polylog(d) to any polynomial in log(d), and o(1) to a constant ≪ d. We denote
a ∝ b for vectors a and b in Rd if there is a positive scaling factor c > 0 such that ∥a−cb∥2 = o(∥b∥2 ).

3.1       S ETTING

In this section, we present the setting to sketch our main results in Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2. We
first define the distributions for the training set and latent samples, and specify our GAN model and
the algorithms we analyze to solve (GAN). Note that for many assumptions and theorems below, we
present informal statements which are sufficient to capture the main insights. The precise statements
can be found in Appendix B.
Our synthetic theoretical framework considers a bimodal data distribution with two correlated modes:

                                              1
Assumption 1 (pdata structure). Let γ = polylog(d) . We assume that the modes are correlated. This
means that ⟨u1 , u2 ⟩ = γ > 0 and the generated data point X is either X = u1 or X = u2 .

Next, we define the latent distribution pz that GV samples from and maps to pdata . Each sample
from pz consists of a data-point z that is a binary-valued vector z ∈ {0, 1}mG , where mG is the
number of neurons in GV , and has non-zero support, i.e. ∥z∥0 ≥ 1. Although the typical choice of a
latent distributions in GANs is either Gaussian or uniform, we choose pz to be a binary distribution
because it models the weights’ distribution of a hidden layer of a deep generator; Allen-Zhu & Li
(2021) argue that the distributions of these hidden layers are sparse, non-negative, and non-positively
correlated. We now make the following assumptions on the coefficients of z:
Assumption 2 (pz structure). Let z ∼ pz . We assume that with probability 1 − o(1), there is only one
non-zero entry in z. The probability that the entry i ∈ [mG ] is non-zero is Pr[zi = 1] = Θ(1/mG ).

In Assumption 2, the output of GV is only made of one mode with probability 1 − o(1). This avoids
summing two of the generator’s neurons, which may cause mode collapse.
    1
        Reasonable simply means that the learning rates are bounded to prevent the training from diverging.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To learn the target distribution pdata , we use a linear generator GV with mG neurons and a non-linear
neural network with mD neurons:
                                mG                                  mD
                                X                                  X                 b
             GV (z) = V z =           vi zi ,    DW (X) = sigmoid a     ⟨wi , X⟩3 + √ .                         (4)
                                i=1                                 i=1
                                                                                      d

where V = [v1⊤ , v2⊤ , · · · , vm
                                ⊤
                                  G
                                    ] ∈ RmG ×d , z ∈ {0, 1}mG , W = [w1⊤ , . . . , wm
                                                                                    ⊤
                                                                                      D
                                                                                        ] ∈ RmD ×d , and
a, b ∈ R. Intuitively, GV outputs linear combinations of the modes vi . We choose a cubic activation
as it is the smallest monomial degree for the discriminator’s non-linearity that is sufficient for the
generator to recover the modes u1 , u2 .2
We now state the SGDA and nSGDA algorithms used to solve the GAN training problem (GAN). For
simplicity, we set the batch-size to 1. The resultant update rules for SGDA and nSGDA are:3
SGDA: at each step t > 0, sample X ∼ pdata and z ∼ pz and update as
                                                    (t)                                   (t)
                        W (t+1) = W (t) + ηD gW ,                 V (t+1) = V (t) − ηG gV ,                     (5)

nSGDA: at each step t > 0, sample X ∼ pdata and z ∼ pz and update as
                                                  (t)                                      (t)
                                                 gW                                       gV
                     W (t+1) = W (t) + ηD         (t)     ,       V (t+1) = V (t) − ηG     (t)    .             (6)
                                                ∥gW ∥2                                   ∥gV ∥2


Compared to the versions of SGDA and Ada-nSGDA that we introduced in Section 2, we have the
same algorithms except that we set β1 = 0 and omit ε in (5) and (6). Note that since there is only
one layer in the neural networks we study in this paper, the global-wise and layer-wise versions of
nSGDA are actually the same. Lastly, we detail how to set the optimization parameters for SGDA
and nSGDA in (5) and (6).
Parametrization 3.1 (Informal). When running SGDA and nSGDA on (GAN), we set:
                                                 (0)                        (0)
– Initialization: b(0) = 0, and a(0) , wi (i ∈ [mD ]), vj (j ∈ [mG ]) are initialized with a
Gaussian with small variance.
 – Number of iterations: we run SGDA for t ≤ T0 iterations where T0 is the first iteration such
that the algorithm converges to an approximate first order local minimum. For nSGDA, we run for
T1 = Θ̃(1/ηD ) iterations.
                                          1                                               1
 – Step-sizes: For SGDA, ηD , ηG ∈ (0, poly(d) ) can be arbitrary. For nSGDA, ηD ∈ (0, poly(d) ], and
ηG is slightly smaller than ηD .
 – Over-parametrization: For SGDA, mD , mG = polylog(d) are arbitrarily chosen i.e. mD may be
larger than mG or the opposite. For nSGDA, we set mD = log(d) and mG = 2 log(d).

Our theorem holds when running SGDA for any (polynomially) possible number of iterations; after
T0 steps, the gradient becomes inverse polynomially small and SGDA essentially stops updating the
parameters. Additionally, our setting allows any step-size configuration for SGDA i.e. larger, smaller,
or equal step-size for D compared to G. Note that our choice of step-sizes for nSGDA is the one
used in practice, i.e. ηD slightly larger than ηG .

3.2    M AIN RESULTS

We state our main results on the performance of models trained using SGDA (5) and nSGDA (6). We
show that nSGDA learns the modes of the distribution pdata while SGDA does not.
Theorem 3.1 (Informal). Consider a training dataset and a latent distribution as described above
and let Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 hold. Let T0 , ηG , ηD and the initialization be as defined in
   2
      Li & Dou (2020) show that when using linear or quadratic activations, the generator can fool the discriminator
by only matching the first and second moments of pdata .
    3
      In the nSGDA algorithm defined in (3), the step-sizes were time-dependent. Here, we assume for simplicity
that the step-sizes ηD , ηG > 0 are constant.


                                                              6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                u1 u2 u1 u2 u1 u2 u1 u2 u1 u2
                                                                                                            1
                                                                                                           10                                   0.8
                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                           30


                                                                                              Iterations
                                                                                                                                                0.6
                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                           41                                   0.4
                                                                                                           42
                                                                                                           43                                   0.2
                                                                                                           44
                                                                                                           45
                                                                                                                  V1 V2 V3 V4 V5
                                                                                                                   Generator's neurons
    (a) Relative gradients     (b) D weight correlation             (c) V learned via SGDA             (d) V learned via nSGDA
Figure 3: (a) shows the relative gradient updates for SGDA. D first updates its weights while G does not move
until iteration 20, then G moves its weights. (b) shows the correlation for one neuron of D (with maximal
correlation to u2 at initialization) with the modes u1 , u2 during the learning process of SGDA. (c, d) shows the
correlations of the neurons of G with the modes when trained with SGDA and nSGDA respectively. This shows
that for SGDA (c), the model ultimately learns the weighted average u1 + u2 . For nSGDA, we see from (d) that
one of the neurons (V4 ) is highly correlated with u1 and another one (V3 ) is correlated with u2 .
Parametrization 3.1. Let t be such that t ≤ T0 . Run SGDA on (GAN) for t iterations with step-sizes
ηG , ηD . Then, with probability at least 1 − o(1), the generator outputs for all z ∈ {0, 1}mG :

                                   (t)         u1 + u2 if ηD ≥ ηG
                                 GV (z) ∝                             ,                          (7)
                                               ξ (t) (z)  otherwise
where ξ (t) (z) ∈ Rd is some vector that is not correlated to any of the modes. Formally, ∀ℓ ∈ [2],
cos(ξ (t) (z), uℓ ) = o(1) for all z ∈ {0, 1}mG .

A formal proof can be found in Appendix G. Theorem 3.1 indicates that when training with SGDA and
                                                                                    (t)
any step-size configuration, the generator either does not learn the modes at all (GV (z) = ξ (t) (z))
                                       (t)
or learns an average of the modes (GV (z) ∝ u1 + u2 ). The theorem holds for any time t ≤ T0
which is the iteration where SGDA converges to an approximate first-order locally optimal min-max
equilibrium. Conversely, nSGDA succeeds in learning the two modes separately:
Theorem 3.2 (Informal). Consider a training dataset and a latent distribution as described above
and let Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 hold. Let T1 , ηG , ηD and the initialization as defined in
Parametrization 3.1. Run nSGDA on (GAN) for T1 iterations with step-sizes ηG , ηD . Then, the
generator learns both modes u1 , u2 i.e., for ℓ ∈ {1, 2},
                                             (T )
                             Pr z∼pz [GV 1 (z) ∝ uℓ ] is non-negligible.                           (8)
A formal proof can be found in Appendix I. Theorem 3.2 indicates that when we train a GAN with
nSGDA in the regime where the discriminator updates slightly faster than the generator (as done in
practice), the generator successfully learns the distribution containing the direction of both modes.
We implement the setting introduced in Subsection 3.1 and validate Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2
                                                         (t)
in Fig. 3. Fig. 3a displays the relative update speed η∥gY ∥2 /∥Y (t) ∥2 , where Y corresponds to the
                                                                                 (t)          (t)
parameters of either D or G. Fig. 3b shows the correlation ⟨wi , uℓ ⟩/∥wi ∥2 between one of D’s
                                                        (t)       (t)
neurons and a mode uℓ and Fig. 3c the correlation ⟨vj , uℓ ⟩/∥vj ∥2 between G’s neurons and uℓ .
We discuss the interpretation of these plots to the next section.

W HY DOES SGDA SUFFER FROM MODE COLLAPSE AND N SGDA LEARN THE MODES ?

We now explain why SGDA suffers from mode collapse, which corresponds to the case where
ηD ≥ ηG . Our explanation relies on the interpretation of Figs. 3a, 3b, and 3c, and on the updates
around initialization that are defined as followed. There exists i ∈ [mD ] such that D’s update is
                                                                      2
                                 (t+1)     (t)        (t)                        (t)
                                                                      X
                             E[wi        |wi ] ≈ wi + ηD                    E[⟨wi , ul ⟩2 ]ul .                                                       (9)
                                                                      l=1

Thus, the weights of D receive gradients directed by u1 and u2 . On the other hand, the weights of G
                                               (t)
at early stages receive gradients directed by wj :
                                (t+1)     (t)
                                                   X (t) (t)       (t)
                              vi      ≈ vi + η G     ⟨vi , wj ⟩2 wj .                            (10)
                                                                j



                                                            7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We observe that the learning process in Figs. 3a & 3b has three distinct phases. In the first phase
(iterations 1-20), D learns one of the modes (u1 or u2 ) of pdata (Fig. 3b) and G barely updates its
weights (Fig. 3a). In the second phase (iterations 20-40), D learns the weighted average u1 + u2
(Fig. 3b) while G starts moving its weights (Fig. 3a). In the final phase (iterations 40+), G learns
u1 + u2 (Fig. 3c) from D. In more detail, the learning process is described as follows:
                                   (0)        (0)                                          (0)      (0)
Phase 1 : At initialization, wj          and vj     are small. Assume w.l.o.g. that ⟨wi , u2 ⟩ > ⟨wi , u1 ⟩.
                       (t)                                               (t)
Because of the ⟨wi , ul ⟩2 in front of u2 in (9), the parameter wi gradually grows its correlation
                                                                          (t)
with u2 (Fig. 3b) and D’s gradient norm thus increases (Fig. 3a). While ∥wj ∥ ≪ 1 ∀j, we have that
 (t)      (0)
vi     ≈ vi     (Fig. 3a).
                                                                                     (t)
Phase 2: D has learned u2 . Because of the sigmoid in the gradient of wi (that was negligible during
                                  (t)
Phase 1) and ⟨u1 , u2 ⟩ = γ > 0, wi now mainly receives updates with direction u2 . Since G did not
update its weights yet, the min-max problem (GAN) is approximately just a minimization problem
with respect to D’s parameters. Since the optimum of such a problem is the weighted average u1 + u2 ,
 (t)                                                     (t)
wj slowly converges to this optimum. Meanwhile, vi start to receive some significant signal
                                                                               (t)
(Fig. 3a) but mainly learn the direction u1 + u2 (Fig. 3c), because wj is aligning with this direction.
Phase 3: The parameters of G only receive gradient directed by u1 + u2 . The norm of its relative
updates stay large and D only changes its last layer terms (slope a and bias b).
In contrast to SGDA, nSGDA ensures that G and D always learn at the same speed with the updates:
                            (t)
                                                                  P      (t) (t) 2 (t)
     (t+1)      (t)      ⟨wi , X⟩2 X          (t+1)    (t)           j ⟨wj , vi ⟩ wj
    wi      ≈ wi + ηD      (t)
                                       , and vi     ≈ vi + η G P         (t) (t)   (t)
                                                                                           (11)
                       ∥⟨wi , X⟩2 X∥2                           ∥ j ⟨wj , vi ⟩2 wj ∥2
                             (t)
No matter how large ⟨wi , X⟩ is, G still learns at the same speed with D. There is a tight window
(iteration 25, Fig. 3b) where only one neuron of D is aligned with u1 . This is when G can also learn
to generate u1 by “catching up” to D at that point, which avoids mode collapse.

4      N UMERICAL PERFORMANCE OF N SGDA
In Section 2, we presented the Ada-nSGDA algorithm (3) which corresponds to “grafting” the Adam
magnitude onto the SGDA direction. In Section 3, we construct a dataset and GAN model where
we prove that a GAN trained with nSGDA can generate examples from the true training distribution,
while a GAN trained with SGDA fails due to mode collapse. We now provide more experiments
comparing nSGDA and Ada-nSGDA with Adam on real GANs and datasets.
We train a ResNet WGAN with gradient penalty on CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and STL-10
(Coates et al., 2011) with Adam, Ada-nSDGA, SGDA, and nSGDA with a fixed learning rate as done
in Section 3. We use the default architectures and training parameters specified in Gulrajani et al.
(2017) (λGP = 10, ndis = 5, learning rate decayed linearly to 0 over 100k steps). We also train
a StyleGAN2 model (Karras et al., 2020) on FFHQ (Karras et al., 2019) and LSUN Churches (Yu
et al., 2016) (both resized to 128 × 128 pixels) with Adam, Ada-nSGDA, SGDA, and nSGDA. We
use the recommended StyleGAN2 hyperparameter configuration for this resolution (batch size = 32,
γ = 0.1024, map depth = 2, channel multiplier = 16384). We use the Fréchet Inception distance
(FID) (Heusel et al., 2017) to quantitatively assess the performance of the model. For each optimizer,
we conduct a coarse log-space sweep over step sizes and optimize for FID. We train the WGAN-GP
models for 2880 thousand images (kimgs) on CIFAR-10 and STL-10 (45k steps with a batch size of
64), and the StyleGAN2 models for 2600 kimgs on FFHQ and LSUN Churches. We average our
results over 5 seeds for the WGAN-GP ResNets, and over 3 seeds for the StyleGAN2 models due to
the computational cost associated with training GANs.

WGAN-GP Figures 4a and 4b validates the conclusions on WGAN-GP from Section 2. We find
that both Ada-nSGDA and nSGDA mostly recover the performance of Adam, with nSGDA obtaining
a final FID of ∼2-3 points lower than Ada-nSGDA. As discussed in Section 2, such performance is
possible because the adaptive magnitude stays within a constant range. In contrast, models trained
with SGDA consistently perform significantly worse, with final FID scores 4× larger than Adam.


                                                          8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            (a)                         (b)                         (c)                         (d)
Figure 4: (a, b) are the final FID scores (5 seeds) for a ResNet WGAN-GP model trained for 45k steps on
CIFAR-10 and STL-10 respectively. (c, d) are the final FID scores (3 seeds) for a StyleGAN2 model trained
for 2600kimgs on FFHQ and LSUN Churches respectively. We use the same constant layer scaling in (d) for
nSGDA as that in (c), which was found by tracking the layer-wise adaptive step-sizes.


                  (a)                                                       (b)
Figure 5: (a) shows the FID curve for the StyleGAN2 model trained for 2600 kimgs on FFHQ. (b) shows the
fluctuations of the Ada-nSGDA adaptive magnitude for each layer over an arbitrary slice of 500 training steps
for the Discriminator. The layers are grouped by common types, e.g. Conv weights and biases, etc.). We find
that although the magnitude for each layer fluctuates, the fluctuations are bounded to some fixed range for each
layer. We show similar behaviour for the Generator in the Appendix.

StyleGAN2 Figures 4c and 4d show the final FID scores when training a StyleGAN2. We find
that Ada-nSGDA recovers most of the performance of Adam, but one difference with WGAN-GP
is that nSGDA does not work if we use the same global learning rate for each layer. As discussed
in Section 2, nSGDA with a different (but constant) step-size for each layer does work, and is able
to mostly recover Ada-nSGDA’s performance (Fig. 5a). To choose the scaling for each layer, we
train StyleGAN2 with Ada-nSGDA on FFHQ-128, track the layer-wise adaptive magnitudes, and
take the mean of these magnitudes over the training run (for each layer). Figure 5b shows that the
fluctuations for each layer are bound to a constant range, validating our assumption of constant
step-sizes. Additionally, the same scaling obtained from training FFHQ seems to work for different
datasets; we used it to train StyleGAN2 with nSGDA on LSUN Churches-128 and recovered similar
performance to training on this dataset with Ada-nSGDA (Fig. 4d).
5    C ONCLUSION
Our work addresses the question of which mechanisms in adaptive methods are critical for training
GANs, and why they outperform non-adaptive methods. We empirically show that Ada-nSGDA, an
algorithm composed of the adaptive magnitude of Adam and the direction of SGD, recovers most
of the performance of Adam. We further decompose the adaptive magnitude into two components:
normalization, and adaptive step-size. We then show that the adaptive step size is roughly constant
(bounded fluctuations) for multiple architectures and datasets. This empirically indicates that the
normalization component of the adaptive magnitude is the key mechanism of Ada-nSGDA, and
motivates the study of nSGDA; we verify that it too recovers the performance of Ada-nSGDA. Having
shown that nSGDA is a good proxy for a key mechanism for adaptive methods, we then construct
a setting where we proved that nSGDA –thanks to its balanced updates– recovers the modes of the
true distribution while SGDA fails to do it. The key insight from our theoretical analysis is that the
ratio of the update of D and G must be close to 1 during training in order to recover the modes of the
distribution. This matches the experimental setting with nSGDA, as we find that global norm of the
parameter updates for both D and G are almost equal for optimal choices of learning rates.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Naman Agarwal, Rohan Anil, Elad Hazan, Tomer Koren, and Cyril Zhang. Disentangling adaptive
  gradient methods from learning rates. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.11803, 2020.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and
  self-distillation in deep learning. CoRR, abs/2012.09816, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2012.09816.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Forward super-resolution: How can gans learn hierarchical
  generative models for real-world distributions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02619, 2021.
Kimon Antonakopoulos, Veronica Belmega, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. An adaptive mirror-prox
  method for variational inequalities with singular operators. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 32:8455–8465, 2019.
Kimon Antonakopoulos, E Veronica Belmega, and Panayotis Mertikopoulos. Adaptive extra-gradient
  methods for min-max optimization and games. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12100, 2020.
Martin Arjovsky, Soumith Chintala, and Léon Bottou. Wasserstein generative adversarial networks.
 In International conference on machine learning, pp. 214–223. PMLR, 2017.
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Yingyu Liang, Tengyu Ma, and Yi Zhang. Generalization and equilibrium in
  generative adversarial nets (gans). In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 224–232.
  PMLR, 2017.
Sanjeev Arora, Andrej Risteski, and Yi Zhang. Do gans learn the distribution? some theory and
  empirics. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Francis Bach and Kfir Y Levy. A universal algorithm for variational inequalities adaptive to smooth-
  ness and noise. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 164–194. PMLR, 2019.
Yu Bai, Tengyu Ma, and Andrej Risteski. Approximability of discriminators implies diversity in gans.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10586, 2018.
Yogesh Balaji, Mohammadmahdi Sajedi, Neha Mukund Kalibhat, Mucong Ding, Dominik Stöger,
  Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, and Soheil Feizi. Understanding overparameterization in generative adver-
  sarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.05605, 2021.
Babak Barazandeh, Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh, and George Michailidis. Solving a class of non-convex
  min-max games using adaptive momentum methods. In ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International
  Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 3625–3629. IEEE, 2021.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
Dami Choi, Christopher J Shallue, Zachary Nado, Jaehoon Lee, Chris J Maddison, and George E
  Dahl. On empirical comparisons of optimizers for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.05446,
  2019.
Adam Coates, Andrew Ng, and Honglak Lee. An analysis of single-layer networks in unsupervised
  feature learning. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence
  and statistics, pp. 215–223. JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011.
Jorge Cortés. Finite-time convergent gradient flows with applications to network consensus. Auto-
  matica, 42(11):1993–2000, 2006.
Ashok Cutkosky and Harsh Mehta. Momentum improves normalized sgd. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 2260–2268. PMLR, 2020.
Constantinos Daskalakis, Andrew Ilyas, Vasilis Syrgkanis, and Haoyang Zeng. Training gans with
  optimism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00141, 2017.
Vincent Dumoulin, Ishmael Belghazi, Ben Poole, Olivier Mastropietro, Alex Lamb, Martin Arjovsky,
  and Aaron Courville. Adversarially learned inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.00704, 2016.


                                                  10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Soheil Feizi, Farzan Farnia, Tony Ginart, and David Tse. Understanding gans: the lqg setting. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1710.10793, 2017.
Tanner Fiez and Lillian Ratliff. Gradient descent-ascent provably converges to strict local minmax
  equilibria with a finite timescale separation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14820, 2020.
AV Gasnikov, PE Dvurechensky, FS Stonyakin, and AA Titov. An adaptive proximal method for
  variational inequalities. Computational Mathematics and Mathematical Physics, 59(5):836–841,
  2019.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Eduard Gorbunov, Marina Danilova, David Dobre, Pavel Dvurechensky, Alexander Gasnikov, and
  Gauthier Gidel. Clipped stochastic methods for variational inequalities with heavy-tailed noise.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.01095, 2022.
Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Improved
   training of wasserstein gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.00028, 2017.
Elad Hazan, Kfir Y Levy, and Shai Shalev-Shwartz. Beyond convexity: Stochastic quasi-convex
  optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.02030, 2015.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans
 trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural
 information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Chi Jin, Praneeth Netrapalli, and Michael Jordan. What is local optimality in nonconvex-nonconcave
  minimax optimization? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4880–4889. PMLR,
  2020.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based generator architecture for generative
  adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition, pp. 4401–4410, 2019.
Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing
  and improving the image quality of stylegan. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
  computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 8110–8119, 2020.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Qi Lei, Jason Lee, Alex Dimakis, and Constantinos Daskalakis. Sgd learns one-layer networks in
  wgans. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5799–5808. PMLR, 2020.
Kfir Y Levy. The power of normalization: Faster evasion of saddle points. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1611.04831, 2016.
Yuanzhi Li and Zehao Dou. Making method of moments great again?–how can gans learn distributions.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04033, 2020.
Tengyuan Liang. How well can generative adversarial networks learn densities: A nonparametric
  view. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.08244, 2017.
Mingrui Liu, Youssef Mroueh, Jerret Ross, Wei Zhang, Xiaodong Cui, Payel Das, and Tianbao Yang.
 Towards better understanding of adaptive gradient algorithms in generative adversarial nets. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1912.11940, 2019.
Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, and Sebastian Nowozin. Which training methods for gans do
  actually converge? In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3481–3490. PMLR,
  2018.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Y.E. Nesterov. Minimization methods for nonsmooth convex and quasiconvex functions. Econ. Mat.
  Met., 20:519–531, 01 1984.
Antonio Orvieto, Jonas Kohler, Dario Pavllo, Thomas Hofmann, and Aurelien Lucchi. Vanishing
  curvature and the power of adaptive methods in randomly initialized deep networks, 2021.
Alec Radford, Luke Metz, and Soumith Chintala. Unsupervised representation learning with deep
  convolutional generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06434, 2015.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information
  processing systems, pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
Fisher Yu, Ari Seff, Yinda Zhang, Shuran Song, Thomas Funkhouser, and Jianxiong Xiao. Lsun:
  Construction of a large-scale image dataset using deep learning with humans in the loop, 2016.
Jure Zbontar, Florian Knoll, Anuroop Sriram, Tullie Murrell, Zhengnan Huang, Matthew J Muckley,
  Aaron Defazio, Ruben Stern, Patricia Johnson, Mary Bruno, et al. fastmri: An open dataset and
  benchmarks for accelerated mri. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.08839, 2018.
Jingzhao Zhang, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Andreas Veit, Seungyeon Kim, Sashank J Reddi, Sanjiv
   Kumar, and Suvrit Sra. Why are adaptive methods good for attention models? arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1912.03194, 2019.
Pengchuan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Dengyong Zhou, Tao Xu, and Xiaodong He. On the discrimination-
  generalization tradeoff in gans. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.02771, 2017.
Dongruo Zhou, Jinghui Chen, Yuan Cao, Yiqi Tang, Ziyan Yang, and Quanquan Gu. On the conver-
  gence of adaptive gradient methods for nonconvex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05671,
  2018.


                                              12
