Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I NTERNET- AUGMENTED LANGUAGE MODELS THROUGH
FEW- SHOT PROMPTING
FOR OPEN - DOMAIN QUESTION ANSWERING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         In this work, we aim to capitalize on the unique few-shot capabilities of large-scale
         language models (LLMs) to overcome some of their challenges with respect to
         grounding to factual and up-to-date information. Motivated by semi-parametric lan-
         guage models (LMs), which ground their decisions in external retrieved evidence,
         we use few-shot prompting to learn to condition LMs on information returned from
         the web using Google Search, a broad and constantly updated knowledge source.
         Our approach does not involve fine-tuning or learning additional parameters, thus
         making it applicable to any LM, offering therefore a strong baseline. Indeed, we
         find that LMs conditioned on the web surpass performance of closed-book models
         of similar, or even larger, model sizes in open-domain question answering. Finally,
         we find that increasing the inference-time compute of models, achieved via using
         multiple retrieved evidences to generate multiple answers followed by a reranking
         stage that uses scores generated by the same LMs, leads to better performance and
         alleviates lower performance of smaller few-shot LMs. All in all, our findings sug-
         gest that it might be beneficial to slow down the race towards the biggest model and
         instead shift attention towards finding more effective ways to use models, including
         but not limited to, better prompting or increasing inference-time compute.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Undoubtedly, large-scale language models (LLMs) present a breakthrough for language research,
particularly for their state-of-the-art language modeling results (Radford et al., 2019; Rae et al., 2021)
and impressive generative capabilities. Above all, increasing scale has made few-shot learning a
defining new paradigm for language models (LMs). Due to the versatility of prompting, these models
can now be quickly adapted using only a handful of examples to perform tasks ranging from question
answering and numeric reasoning to creative writing (Brown et al., 2020). All these considerations
place few-shot LLMs at an excellent position to be used as building blocks for open-ended and “in
the wild” user interactions.
Despite these successes, few-shot LLMs still lack a key ingredient; they are susceptible to hallu-
cinations (Maynez et al., 2020) caused by incorrect retrieval of knowledge stored in their weights
or due to the model having incomplete or outdated knowledge. As for many user interactions we
expect factuality to play an important role, it is imperative to find ways to keep LLMs up-to-date
and grounded to factual and new information as it becomes available. As the current trend sees the
size of these models to continually grow, mitigating those issues should rely on flexible and robust
approaches that can be easily transferred to different domains and tasks.
Here, we aim to capitalize on the unique benefits offered by pre-trained LLMs and propose to
overcome some of their limitations by drawing ideas from semi-parametric models (Khandelwal
et al., 2019; Guu et al., 2020; Lewis et al., 2020; Izacard & Grave, 2020) that ground their decisions
in external retrieved evidence to reduce hallucinations and improve factuality (Shuster et al., 2021).
Specifically, we use the Internet as a source of up-to-date knowledge, and rely on the powerful
few-shot capabilities of these LLMs to learn how to use it effectively for answering questions. Taking
open-domain question answering as a task where factual correctness is vital, we design a system
that given a question uses a retrieval model to retrieve relevant documents from the Internet. Then,


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


using few-shot learning we prompt the model to answer the question via conditioning on the retrieved
documents, without the need to fine-tune or learn extra parameters.
As a retrieval system we use a search engine – in particular Google Search – allowing us to treat the
whole web as a knowledge source. While Wikipedia has been the dominant knowledge source driving
progress on a multitude of tasks, given the current progress and the quest towards more complex
interactions, there has never been a better time to widen their scope, embracing the opportunities
working with the whole web, such as considering a wider range of topics and views, as well
as the many challenges, such as working with more noisy and potentially uncurated and unsafe
text in the wild. Indeed, there is momentum building up in breaking away from Wikipedia-only
research (Komeili et al., 2021; Nakano et al., 2021; Piktus et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022).
To test the effectiveness of equipping LLMs with Internet search on open-domain question answering,
we use a mix of single-hop and multi-hop, language generation and classification tasks. We find
that our biggest LLMs benefit from conditioning on the web through few-shot prompting. For the
language generation tasks, we see a relative performance increase of 15%-30% over the commonly
used closed-book few-shot approach, while also making up performance-wise for LLMs with smaller
size. Surprisingly, we find that our method achieves gains, albeit smaller, even on complex multi-hop
questions, despite the fact that these questions suffer from higher retrieval errors. While perhaps the
mainstream view places scaling models’ parameters as the primary way to increase their few-shot
performance, our results add to the stream of work that emphasizes instead better use of the models’
powerful prompting abilities (Rubin et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2021a). As such, our approach presents
a lightweight method applicable to virtually any pre-trained LM without the need for fine-tuning
or adding extra learnable parameters. Finally, increasing the inference-time compute of models via
sampling multiple answers and reranking using scores computed from the same LLMs not only adds
further performance gains, but also alleviates generally decreased performance of smaller few-shot
LMs, partly closing their performance gap with larger models.
All in all, our findings hint at the possibility of slowing down the race towards the biggest model and
instead shifting the attention to more targeted and effective use of models’ few-shot capabilities in
combination with increasing inference-time compute, a generally more scalable approach.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Semi-parametric language models have been recently gaining momentum (Khandelwal et al.,
2019; Guu et al., 2020; Yogatama et al., 2021; Borgeaud et al., 2021), extending monolithic parametric
models with information from a knowledge source. This process facilitates overcoming distribution
shift (e.g., domain or temporal) in a flexible way by simply updating the external knowledge. When
applied to question answering tasks (Lewis et al., 2020; Izacard & Grave, 2020; Sachan et al., 2021),
they surpass performance of parametric-only models – they are able to efficiently handle an increasing
number of retrieved passages and ground their predictions into additional information, thus reducing
hallucinations and improving factuality. However, to be faithful to their input, these models need to
be trained (or fine-tuned) to attend to the additional input. In contrast, our work pushes the limits of
few-shot prompting as a way to learn to condition on external evidence with no additional training
required, thus making it applicable to virtually any pre-trained LM.

Web as knowledge source Open-domain question answering traditionally has been studying care-
fully constructed benchmarks, where answerability of questions from Wikipedia has been confirmed
through annotations. Recently a new trend emerged — using the whole web as knowledge source to
support more varied and rich interactions. Augenstein et al. (2019) and Fan et al. (2020) make use
of web data through commercial search engines as a part of building more diverse datasets for fact-
checking. On the other hand, Piktus et al. (2021) find that considering the web as a retrieval source
brings material gains to knowledge intensive tasks, despite any difficulties with building a search
index from an order of magnitude more (noisy) data than Wikipedia. To avoid similar challenges
with building and maintaining a search index, recent work that aims in improving factuality in user
interactions adopts the use of commercial search engines as building block for their systems (Komeili
et al., 2021; Nakano et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Menick et al., 2022). Similar to us, Nakano
et al. (2021) analyze benefits of increasing compute at inference time. However, unlike us, they either
target open-ended dialogue interactions (Komeili et al., 2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022) or focus on


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


optimizing performance using more intensive techniques like fine-tuning and reinforcement learn-
ing (Nakano et al., 2021; Menick et al., 2022). In our work, we take a more light-weight approach
without introducing learnable parameters. We push the limits of few-shot prompting and emphasize
the need to establish strong baselines, aiming at gaining insights into the strengths and weaknesses of
this generally applicable, due to its simplicity, approach.


3     F EW- SHOT PROMPTING FOR I NTERNET- AUGMENTED L ANGUAGE M ODELS

In this section, we describe our approach for improving the performance of pre-trained LMs in the
task of open-domain question answering. Specifically, we propose to use few-shot prompting as a
flexible and robust way to condition any pre-trained LSLM on external evidence, allowing for better
grounding to factual and up-to-date information. Our approach consists of 3 steps (see Appendix A.1
for an illustration of the method). First, given a question we retrieve a set of relevant documents from
the web using a search engine (§3.1). We then use the retrieved evidence to condition the LM through
few-shot prompting (§3.2). Finally, we generate multiple candidate answers from each evidence and,
to select the best answer, rerank them using scores computed using the same LM (§3.3).

3.1   R ETRIEVE : G OOGLE S EARCH FOR DOCUMENT RETRIEVAL

For a question q, we need a set of relevant documents D which would allow us to extend the model’s
knowledge to factual and (potentially) new information not already present in its weights. Towards
more realistic and open-ended user interactions, we retrieve documents using an off-the-shelf search
engine, i.e., Google Search. Specifically, we use each question q verbatim as a query and issue a call
to Google Search via the Google Search API.1 For each question, we retrieve the top-20 urls and
parse their HTML content2 to extract clean text, resulting in a set of documents D per question q.3
As documents in D can originate from news or Wikipedia articles to whole books, they tend to be
long, with an average length of 2,056 words. As this exceeds the input sequence length of models,
we condition the model on shorter excerpts extracted from the documents in D. Specifically, we first
chunk all documents into paragraphs of 6 sentences. We then embed q and the paragraphs using
TF-IDF and using cosine similarity we produce a (ranked) list of evidence paragraphs P, thus only
using in the prompt smaller, more relevant parts of the full documents.
Overall, using Google Search allows us to tap into the diverse and ever-growing content on the web,
instead of being confined on the information found in the static snapshots of the curated content
on Wikipedia, a commonly used knowledge source in question answering tasks. In addition, we
found that Google Search and the web offers also practical performance gains and is on-par (even
sometimes outperforming) current Wikipedia-based state-of-the art dense retrievers (see Section 5
and comparisons on the BEIR benchmark in Appendix A.3). We discuss broader limitations and
opportunities of using search engines in Section 6.

3.2   P ROMPT: F EW- SHOT PROMPTING FOR CONDITIONING ON EVIDENCE

Given a question q and a set of retrieved paragraphs P, we use few-shot prompting to condition
pre-trained LMs on the paragraphs. This is done by taking the conventional k-shot prompting for
(closed-book) QA, that only considers tuples of ⟨questions, answers⟩, and extending it with an
evidence paragraph, resulting in a prompt of the form
Evidence: ...
Question: ...
Answer: ...
In all experiments we set k = 15. In Section 4 we give details on how we obtain the ⟨evidence,
question, answer⟩ triplets to populate the prompt.
   1
     https://developers.google.com/custom-search. Collecting evidence for 20k questions
would incur costs of a few hundred dollars.
   2
     We access and use - for research and publication purposes - a search corpus comprising text taken from the
open web, created in accordance with generally agreed standards for inclusion/exclusion of content.
   3
     To prevent data leakage, we filter out urls of the official dataset websites from the returned urls.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


While experimenting with prompts, we found that swapping the question with the evidence, thus
increasing the distance between questions and answers, yielded consistently lower results across all
our datasets. We believe this is another manifestation of LMs’ struggles to incorporate information
from longer contexts; further performance increase could be achieved by selecting in-context examples
for the prompt retrieved based on similarity to the question being answered (Liu et al., 2021b).

3.3       R ERANK : I NCREASING INFERENCE - TIME COMPUTE VIA ANSWER RERANKING

Increasing compute of models via scaling the number of parameters, hence increasing training-time
compute, has been shown to improve performance of models in various few-shot tasks (Brown
et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021). Here, we ask whether similar gains can be obtained when scaling the
inference-time compute. through sampling multiple answers from the model, which we then rerank
using different probabilistic factorizations of the question answering task as scoring functions.
Specifically, as P contains retrieved paragraphs ordered via their similarity to question q, we select
the top n = 50, use each one separately to prompt the model and produce multiple candidate answers
for each paragraph (for classification tasks we produce a distribution over all class labels for each
paragraph). Overall, this allows us to consider a larger number of possible answers candidates while
overcoming potential retrieval errors – considering more paragraphs increases retrieval recall.
Given an answer ai for a question q conditioned on each of the n retrieved paragraph pi , we consider
the following ways forP       estimating the answer probability: (i) direct inference, picks an answer that
                                 n
maximizes p(a | q) = i=1 ptf idf (pi | q)· p(ai | q, pi ), referred to as RAG here and inspired from
the model of Lewis et al. (2020) (ii) Noisy channel inference, picks an answer that maximizes
p(ai , q | pi ) = p(q | aip(q
                          , pi )·p(ai | pi )
                              | pi )         , (Echihabi & Marcu, 2003; Lewis & Fan, 2019) (iii) Product-of-
Experts (PoE), which combines all probabilities used above, in addition to p(pi | q).4
Pre-trained LSLMs as scorers All conditional probabilities are computed using LMs that we
k-shot prompt for producing the respective distributions (k = 15) (see Appendix A.7 for example
prompts). In this way, we turn LMs into models of arbitrary probabilities, which to the best of our
knowledge is something not explored before. Exception to this is ptf idf (pi | q) that is computed as
the normalized cosine similarities between the TF-IDF passage and question representations – as
passages can be long, getting reliable estimates of p(pi | q) using prompted LMs was challenging.


4       E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

Datasets We use 3 question answering datasets: the single-hop NQ (Kwiatkowski et al., 2019),
and the multi-hop H OTPOT QA (Yang et al., 2018) and S TRATEGY QA (Geva et al., 2021); and a
fact-checking multi-hop dataset F EVER (Thorne et al., 2018). We select these datasets as they allow
us to consider a mixture of language generation (NQ, H OTPOT QA) and classification (2-way for
S TRATEGY QA, 3-way for F EVER) tasks, as well as single- and multi-hop questions. We represent all
items in the datasets as tuples ⟨q, A, G⟩, where q is the question, A is the the set of possible answers
(or a single class label for the classification datasets), and G is the set of gold evidence documents
provided by the dataset. For the few-shot learning, we use the prompt format presented in Section 3.2
and create dataset-specific 15-shot prompts (for each of the datasets, we use the same set of questions
for the few-shot examples), for a total of 4 prompts (for computing different scoring probabilities),
populating them with the necessary ⟨evidence, question, answer⟩ triplets from each dataset.5 As
evidence, we use the gold evidence documents in G.
Evaluation metrics To evaluate the performance on these tasks, we report exact match for gen-
eration tasks and accuracy for classification tasks. Moreover, to better understand the interaction
between retrieval and subsequent QA performance, we introduce a retrieval score. For generation
tasks, we calculate answer recall in the conditioning evidence paragraphs P. For classification tasks,
since the answer takes the form of a class label, we instead compute the normalized word overlap
(excluding stopwords) between the gold paragraph G and each of the conditioning paragraphs in P,
and report the maximum word overlap achieved among the paragraphs P.
    4
        The interpolation weights of probabilities are optimized on a held-out set of 10% of data.
    5
        See Appendix A.6 for the prompts we used for each dataset.


                                                          4
       Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Language Models All experiments in this work use the G OPHER LM of 280 billion parameters (Rae
       et al., 2021). Alongside this model, and in order and to answer questions regarding scaling, we also
       use smaller models of the same family abbreviated by their number of parameters, i.e., 44 M, 117 M,
       400 M, 1 B and 7 B. Besides the number of parameters, the models also differ in the input sequence
       length: 2048 for 7 B and 280 B, and 1024 for 44 M, 117 M, 400 M, and 1 B. All models were trained on
       MassiveText for 300 billion tokens. For generation tasks, we use nucleus decoding, with parameters
       0.8 for the probability cut-off and temperature of 1.
       Open-domain question answering models Here, we describe the open-domain question answering
       systems we build, all based on LMs presented above. We first describe our open-book models (referred
       to as OB), which condition on the provided evidence to generate an answer. OBGoogle will use the
       Google retrieved paragraphs. For each question q we will generate 4 candidate answers a′ for
       each of the 50 paragraphs p, for a total of 200 answers. We will then select the best answer a∗
                                                                                                        a|q,p
       as arg maxa′ f (a′ , p, q), where f is a pre-defined scoring function. In its basic form, OBGoogle
       will use as scoring function f only the probability returned by the question answering model.
       Models OBNoisy    Channel
                    Google       ,OBRAG          PoE
                                    Google and OBGoogle will use the noisy channel, direct inference and PoE
       factorizations, introduced in Section 3.3. Moreover, to better assess the performance of few-shot
       prompting, we design a model that assumes an oracle retrieval system – OBGold conditions on gold
       evidence passages for each question provided by the datasets.
       Finally, as a baseline model, we will use a pre-trained LM without evidence, prompting it with
       ⟨question, answer⟩ tuples. This is the conventional way found in the literature of few-shot language
       models (Brown et al., 2020) for performing open-domain question answering. These models are
       usually referred to as closed-book, as they do not use any knowledge source (unlike open-book), but
       solely rely on the knowledge encoded in their weights. We refer to these models as CB.
       To fairly compare the different models, we need to account for the fact that OBGoogle searches for the
       right answer in a big pool of candidates generated by conditioning on multiple paragraphs; for both
       CB and OBGold we sample 200 answers, and select the one with the highest probability. 6

       5        R ESULTS
       5.1        C ONDITIONING A LARGE - SCALE LANGUAGE MODEL ON G OOGLE SEARCH RESULTS
                                              #sampled answers: 1                                #sampled answers: 200
                                                                                                                                                          Retrieval
                                                                                                                      a|q,p
Dataset                       SOTA            CB           OBno reranking
                                                             Google                  CB          OBGold          OBGoogle          OBPoE
                                                                                                                                     Google           performance@50
NQ                            55.9a           21.7               23.1               25.8          61.7              32.7               38.4                      85.0
H OTPOT QA                    65.2b           20.7               24.5               21.2          54.8              26.3               30.3                      55.5
F EVER                        73.2c           44.5               52.2               44.5          66.6e             52.0               57.2                      43.3
S TRATEGY QA                  63.6d           61.0               61.1               61.0          80.4              64.6               66.2                      34.9
 a
     Fajcik et al. (2021) b Yang et al. (2018) c Kruengkrai et al. (2021) d Geva et al. (2021) e Note that in this work we use probabilities of class labels directly, whereas in Rae
 et al. (2021) these probabilities were used as features for a classification model based on multi-class logistic regression.


                   Table 1: Results on 4 question answering datasets using the G OPHER -280B model.

       We assess the effectiveness of our method for improving the performance of pre-trained LMs on open-
       domain question answering. We start with Gopher-280B, the best LM among the ones considered
       in this work; we test whether using few-shot prompting as a way to condition on external retrieved
                           a|q,p
       evidence (i.e., OBGoogle ) improves the performance of Gopher-280B over its closed-book version
       (i.e., CB), which uses knowledge solely in its weights. Table 1 presents the results on our 4 datasets.
       Overall, we find that, indeed, conditioning Gopher-280B on the Google Search results leads to
       improved performance on all datasets, despite the fact that both Gopher-280B open- and closed-
       models use the same underlying LM. We see stronger performance over the closed-book version
       for the generation tasks, with the relative improvements reaching 30% on the NQ dataset. For NQ
       and H OTPOT QA, stronger performance is driven by higher retrieval recall and strong extractive
            6
                Performance plateaued at 50 samples – sampling many answers with the same prompt decreases diversity.


                                                                                             5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


behaviour of the model, very frequently producing an answer present in the conditioning evidence,
a welcomed feature for extractive tasks (i.e., generated answer is present in evidence in 89.4% and
70.5% cases, for NQ and H OTPOT QA respectively). We also see gains, albeit smaller in scale, for
the more reasoning classification tasks, indicating that few-shot prompting with retrieved evidence is
beneficial over and above its extractive power. Appendix A.8 presents a manual error analysis.
Retrieval performance Turning to the retrieval performance achieved by Google Search (see
Retrieval performance column in Table 1), we see that the effectiveness of our approach of using
the question verbatim as a search query heavily depends on the complexity of the questions in each
dataset. Compare for example a typical question in the single-hop NQ “How many episodes in
season 2 breaking bad?”, where recall@50 reaches 85%, with one from H OTPOT QA “What is the
relationship of Yeshahework Yilma’s mother to the man who was Ethiopia’s emperor from 1930
to 1974”, where recall performance drops to 55.5%. Indeed, performance on multi-hop datasets
(H OTPOT QA and S TRATEGY QA) is generally worse than in the single-hop ones (NQ and F EVER). In
fact, S TRATEGY QA sees the smallest relative increase in performance with respect to the closed-book
version. Questions in this dataset, albeit somewhat artificial, are inventive and involve linking non-
trivial, normally unrelated facts (e.g., “Could a sloth hypothetically watch an entire episode of Scrubs
underwater?”), stress-testing performance of retrieval models and calling for more sophisticated
learning to search approaches (Adolphs et al., 2021; Komeili et al., 2021; Nakano et al., 2021).
Compared to current Wikipedia-based state-of-the-art models, which require training on the specific
datasets, we find that the generic Google Search retrieval outperforms DPR (Karpukhin et al., 2020)
on NQ (DPR recall@50 84%), while is only marginally outperformed by MDR (Xiong et al., 2020)
on H OTPOT QA (MDR recall@20 52.1% vs ours recall@20 50.1%). Google Search acts here as a
zero-shot retrieval, capable of generalizing on different tasks and knowledge corpus. Finally, our
probabilistic reranking further improves performance: across all datasets, OBPoEGoogle outperforms
                             a|q,p
consistently the simpler OBGoogle , widening the gap between closed-book and Google-conditioned
model. We provide more in-depth discussion of reranking results in Section 5.2.

5.2   A BLATIONS

Effect of Reranking In Table 1 (see columns #sampled answers:1), we ablate the use of ranking –
even conditioning on a single Google evidence can bring gains over the closed-book model, evident
by the higher performance achieved by OBno   reranking
                                           Google      compared to CB.

Effect of different scoring functions Figure 1               70
presents a comparison of the 4 different scor-                        p(a|q,p)
                                                             60       RAG
ing functions introduced in Section 3.3. Note                         Noisy Channel
                                                        Performace


that, besides p(a|q, p), which is computed us-               50       PoE
ing Gopher-280B, the remaining probabilities
used to compute the 3 scores, i.e., PoE, RAG                 40
and Noisy Channel, are obtained by few-shot                  30
prompting the smaller 7 B model. We find that
that reranking with factorizations that consider             20 HotPotQA NQ         FEVER StrategyQA
scores beyond just the answer probability im-
prove performance across all datasets, despite
the fact that we do not train specialized models Figure 1: Question answering performance on all
for deriving the extra scores but rather use an 4 datasets using Gopher-280B OBGoogle model in
order of magnitude smaller prompted LMs.             combination with different answer scoring func-
                                                     tions for reranking the answers generated for each
Looking at the individual scores, we find of the top 50 Google retrieved paragraphs.
p(a | q, pi ) and p(q | pi , a) to be most informa-
tive – this last probability captures how well the model can “explain” the question given a retrieved
evidence and an answer. In fact, as also show in Appendix A.2, this score could be reliably used for
reranking passages that are more predictive of the final answer. On the other hand, p(pi | q, a), while
being correlated to p(q | pi , a), has a higher variance (likely due to varying length of the passages)
and is much less informative overall. Among the three factorizations that we consider, the lowest
performance is consistently observed for the RAG-inspired factorization. We attribute this to the
way the passage relevance is derived: as we do not use p(pi | q, a) from the model, we instead rely


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


on normalized cosine similarities between TF-IDF vectors which, as we show in Appendix A.2, are
more reliable than the passage probabilities from the LM, but less accurate than p(q | pi , a).
While more elaborate scores are able to reduce the gap with the in-domain fine-tuned models (compare
column SOTA with column OBPoE    Google in Table 1), in line with previous work (Wei et al., 2021) we
find that few-shot prompting still generally lags behind the specialist models. However, this should
be considered in perspective of how generalizeable our setup is to a diverse set of questions, from
single-hop to multi-hop to fact-checking, turning any LM to a retrieval-augmented LM.



Oracle retrieval The results of OBGold using gold evidence, hence assuming oracle retrieval, can
be treated as upper-bound. Results suggest that there is room for improvement in relying more on the
conditioning evidence. We envision several directions: if we remain within the few-shot paradigm,
more accurate prompt optimization, like in-context example selection, can further boost results (Liu
et al., 2021b), while, constrained decoding (Post & Vilar, 2018; Lu et al., 2021) can be a way to
condition the model at inference-time, by explicitly grounding an answer in the provided evidence.



5.3   S CALING ANALYSIS OF OPEN - AND CLOSED - BOOK MODELS

So far, we observed that conditioning a 280                         0.7                                           0.40
                                                                                                                               HotPotQA
billion LM on retrieved evidence from Google                                                                                   HotPotQA-Google
                                                                                                                  0.35         NQ
Search resulted in improved performance over                                                                                   NQ-Google
                                                                    0.6
the closed-book version of the same LM. But                                                                       0.30
are these gains only confined on the (very) large-
scale regime or could this method be used to                                                                      0.25
                                                                    0.5

                                                                                                    Exact Match
                                                         Accuracy


also boost performance of smaller models? To
                                                                                                                  0.20
answer this, we compute the open- and closed-
book performance of 5 additional models con-                        0.4
                                                                                                                  0.15
taining 44 M, 117 M, 400 M, 1 B and 7 B parame-
ters. We follow the same approach as before; we                                 FEVER                             0.10
                                                                    0.3         FEVER-Google
use k-shot learning to prompt for the open-book                                 Random 3-way
models using Google Search results and k-shot                                   StrategyQA                        0.05
                                                                                StrategyQA-Google
learning to prompt for ⟨question, answer⟩ for                                   Random 2-way
                                                                    0.2                                           0.00
the closed-book models, with k = 15. In Fig-                              108    109   1010 1011                         108    109   1010 1011
                                                                          Million Parameters                             Million Parameters
ure 2 we present results as a function of models’
parameters in millions, for open-book (in solid
lines) and closed-book models (dashed lines)         Figure 2: Scaling analysis of open-book (solid
models. We report accuracy for the classifica-       lines) and closed-book (dashed lines) question an-
tion tasks (left figure) and exact match for the     swering models using LMs of varying sizes rang-
generation tasks (right figure).                     ing from 44 M to 280 B parameters.

Conditioning smaller models on retrieved evidence is particularly beneficial for the generation tasks,
which given reliable evidence can be more extractive in nature. In fact, making use of external
evidence does not simply improve the factuality of the models through grounding to external sources,
but in many cases results in smaller open-book models outperforming bigger closed-book models:
for both NQ (in green lines) and H OTPOT QA (in purple lines) the open-book 7 B model is on par
with the several times larger closed-book 280 B model and for NQ the 1 B is only 4% worse than the
the 200x larger closed-book 280 B model. Despite the simplicity of the approach and the potential
errors introduced by the retrieval method, conditioning through few-shot prompting can, to some
extent, make up for a smaller model size.
However, we also see that for the more reasoning tasks, i.e., F EVER (in black lines) and S TRATEGY QA
(in blue lines), the gains manifest mostly in the 7 B models, though are smaller. For the (relatively)
smaller models, their closed-book performance fluctuates around the random baseline. As such,
grounding to factual information is perhaps a secondary concern in those cases; retrieval can boost
reasoning capabilities for models with pre-existing good reasoning skills (as in the case of 280 B), but
cannot compensate for general lack of reasoning abilities.

                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.4   I NCREASING INFERENCE - TIME COMPUTE

The main driver of performance improvements of few-shot LMs has been scaling their model size.
Increasing training-time compute is thus spent in injecting (and potentially memorizing) Internet-scale
data. Here, we put forward a different hypothesis; we posit that we can improve performance of
smaller LMs by giving them direct access to the Internet, thus freeing training-time compute which
could then be spent to increasing their inference-time compute.7 While there are many ways to achieve
that, here we choose to increase models’ compute via using multiple Google retrieved paragraphs to
sample candidate answers for each and then reranking those answers using the functions introduced
in Section 3.3. We focus on the 3 biggest models used in this study, comparing the open-book version
of 1 B and 7 B with the closed-book version of Gopher-280B. We conduct this study on NQ.
Figure 3-left presents exact match performance            32.5
on NQ as a function of number of paragraphs
                                                          30.0
(and hence candidate answers we are sampling
and reranking). We see that considering more              27.5
than the top-1 paragraph improves performance


                                                             Exact Match
of models. Moreover, as evident by the slight             25.0
upward slops, considering gradually more para-            22.5     PoE 1B
                                                                   PoE 7B
graphs benefits those scoring functions that in-                   p(a|q,p) 1B
corporate some notion of paragraph “goodness”,            20.0     p(a|q,p) 7B
                                                                   RAG 1B
i.e., RAG (in purple lines) and PoE (in green             17.5     RAG 7B
lines) and Noisy Channel (in orange lines). In                     Noisy Channel 1B
                                                                   Noisy Channel 7B
contrary, reranking only using the probability            15.0     CB 280B                   CB 280B
p(a|q, p) of the answer under the model (in blue               1 5 15 25 35 45      1012 1013 1014
                                                               Number Paragraphs        FLOPs
lines) results in decreased performance after a
certain point. This is potentially due to some
pathological behaviour of the model, e.g., as- Figure 3: Scaling analysis on the NQ dataset: ex-
signing high probability to candidate answers act match as a function of number of conditioned
that exist in the conditioning evidence but are paragraphs (left) and FLOPs (right).
otherwise wrong. This is consistent with find-
ings in Machine Translation which find that reranking only using the forward probability gives worse
results as the number of candidates increases beyond a certain threshold (Stahlberg & Byrne, 2019).
More interestingly, we find that using as little as 5 paragraphs from Google Search, in conjunction with
the 7 B model (in dashed lines for the different scoring functions) surpasses the performance of closed-
book Gopher-280B model (horizontal black line), suggesting that searching the Internet is worth
more than 273 billion parameters. Finally, Figure 3-right presents a similar plot, but as a function of
FLOPs; this accounts for additional factors, on top of the number of Google retrieved paragraphs, like
models’ size and compute spent to calculate the scores for each of the scoring functions. Closed-book
Gopher-280B spends compute for implicitly combining retrieving the facts that are memorized in its
weights, and then reason over them. By explicitly outsourcing the memorization of facts and their
retrieval to Google Search, the same inference-time compute can now be spent more effectively in
reranking more samples with a smaller model. As such, for the same or less inference-time compute,
reranking models achieve better performance, as indicated by all the lines being to the left of the blue
dot in the horizontal dashed line, i.e., the FLOPs of the closed-book Gopher-280B.

5.5   K EEPING QA MODEL UP - TO - DATE

We now test whether using a commercial engine as a source of up-
to-date information about the world can help stale models answer                   Questions
                                                                                All Post-2020
questions about new events. Since Gopher-280B was trained with
                                                                     CB        26.3      15.8
data up to (and including) November 2020, questions about facts         a|q,p
beyond that date would not have been seen in its training data. To   OB Google 28.1      22.4
derive such questions, we use the SituatedQA dataset (Zhang & Choi,
2021) which contains questions grounded in different dates. Table 2 Table 2: Exact Match perfor-
presents the exact match results on the complete development set of mance on SituatedQA.
   7
     Khandelwal et al. (2019) also find that training smaller models with large datastores surpasses perplexity
performance of bigger language models.


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


questions (all) – we also create a smaller subset of 80 questions about facts in 2021 and beyond to
test adaptation to new information (post-2020).
                                      a|q,p
The higher performance of OBGoogle indicates that using few-shot prompting as a way to condition
on evidence is an effective way of incorporating truly new information into the QA system. However,
                                                                     a|q,p
despite having access to updated information, the performance of OBGoogle on post-2020 questions is
substantially lower than the performance on the complete set of questions, suggesting that conflicting
parametric (i.e., in language model) and contextual (i.e., in retrieved evidence) knowledge poses
challenges for retrieval-based models (Longpre et al., 2021).8

5.6       R EPRODUCIBILITY

We take steps to reproduce the proposed technique using publicly available material; Appendix A.4
presents results using our prompts and data in conjunction with the OPT-6B model (Zhang et al.,
2022) and Appendix A.5 presents results using our language model and prompts in conjunction to
Wikipedia-based DPR evidence (Izacard & Grave, 2020).

6       D ISCUSSION
Towards more open-ended and “in the wild” user interactions, in this work we presented a straightfor-
ward method targeted to alleviate some of the challenges faced by LSLMs with respect to grounding
to factual and up-to-date information. The core of our method lies in combining the powerful few-shot
abilities of LSLMs with a state-of-the-art retrieval model, i.e., Google Search, for access to a broad
and constantly updated knowledge source, the whole web. We applied our method on open-domain
question answering and found that, despite its simplicity, using few-shot prompting to condition
models on the web provides an effective approach for increasing models’ factuality. Improvements
were not just confined to the largest LMs; we saw increases in performance across the board of model
sizes, with smaller open-book models often surpassing performance of bigger few-shot closed-book
models. Further gains were achieved when increasing inference-time compute via using multiple
retrieved evidences to generate multiple answers followed by a reranking stage that uses scores
computed by the same LMs. Our approach offers a simple way to turn virtually any pre-trained LM
to a retrieval-augmented LM model without the need for fine-tuning or adding learnable parameters.
Mainstream view places scaling LMs’ parameters as the main way to improve their few-shot per-
formance. However, significant gains can be achieved by inference-type interventions, i.e., more
targeted use of few-shot abilities and increase of inference-time compute. This may slow down the
race towards the biggest LM, shifting attention towards finding more effective ways to use models.
Limitations Despite their progress, LLMs are still sometimes outperformed by fine-tuned, and even
smaller, models (Wei et al., 2021). While our targeted interventions were successful in closing this gap
on open-domain question answering, we are still behind in-domain fine-tuned models. For reasoning
tasks, retrieval was able to improve only the largest amongst the considered models. Moreover, while
we have considered a wide-range of diverse question answering datasets, our current experiments
only capture a small fraction of (simple) user interactions where factuality plays a crucial role.
Finally, in an attempt to work towards open-ended interactions and improve our system’s performance,
we used a commercial search engine as a retrieval model, allowing us to work with the whole web
as a knowledge source. Since we are not confined to working only with the curated and “sanitized”
Wikipedia, we anticipate a number of safety issues to arise, including misinformation, harmful
content. While we have relied on the underlying safety nets of the search engines we use, more work
should be put in place scoping out and better understanding the risks and, most importantly, providing
effective ways to mitigate those. As working with the whole Web gains more momentum, we expect
to see more work that surfaces and tackles these points. Another potential concern is reproducibility
of the research results given that we do not have as tight control over retrieval results as in the case of
offline retrieval.This might, indeed, create some discrepancies over longer time horizons, not only
due to changes in the underlying search engine logic, but also because new published documents
might provide more direct answers. Overall we believe that potential benefits of understanding how
to use Google Search with LLMs overweight the potential downsides, if done responsibly.
    8
        Published test set results for fine-tuned open- and closed-book are 23.0% and 18.3% (Zhang & Choi, 2021).


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Leonard Adolphs, Benjamin Boerschinger, Christian Buck, Michelle Chen Huebscher, Massimiliano
  Ciaramita, Lasse Espeholt, Thomas Hofmann, and Yannic Kilcher. Boosting search engines with
  interactive agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00527, 2021.
Isabelle Augenstein, Christina Lioma, Dongsheng Wang, Lucas Chaves Lima, Casper Hansen,
   Christian Hansen, and Jakob Grue Simonsen. MultiFC: A real-world multi-domain dataset for
   evidence-based fact checking of claims. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical
  Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural
   Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), 2019.
Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican,
  George van den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. Improving
  language models by retrieving from trillions of tokens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.04426, 2021.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 2020.
Abdessamad Echihabi and Daniel Marcu. A noisy-channel approach to question answering. Technical
  report, University of Southern California, Maria Del Rey, Information Sciences Institute, 2003.
Martin Fajcik, Martin Docekal, Karel Ondrej, and Pavel Smrz. R2-d2: A modular baseline for
 open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.03502, 2021.
Angela Fan, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Guillaume Wenzek, Marzieh Saeidi, Andreas Vla-
  chos, Antoine Bordes, and Sebastian Riedel. Generating fact checking briefs. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2011.05448, 2020.
Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did aristotle
 use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions of
 the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasupat, and Ming-Wei Chang. Realm: Retrieval-
  augmented language model pre-training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08909, 2020.
Gautier Izacard and Edouard Grave. Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open
  domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.01282, 2020.
Gautier Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Maria Lomeli, Lucas Hosseini, Fabio Petroni, Timo Schick, Jane
  Dwivedi-Yu, Armand Joulin, Sebastian Riedel, and Edouard Grave. Few-shot learning with
  retrieval augmented language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.03299, 2022.
Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas Oğuz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi
  Chen, and Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2004.04906, 2020.
Urvashi Khandelwal, Omer Levy, Dan Jurafsky, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Generalization
  through memorization: Nearest neighbor language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00172,
  2019.
Mojtaba Komeili, Kurt Shuster, and Jason Weston. Internet-augmented dialogue generation. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:2107.07566, 2021.
Canasai Kruengkrai, Junichi Yamagishi, and Xin Wang. A multi-level attention model for evidence-
  based fact checking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00950, 2021.
Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
  Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Matthew Kelcey, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina N.
  Toutanova, Llion Jones, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav Petrov.
  Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association
  of Computational Linguistics, 2019.


                                                10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mike Lewis and Angela Fan. Generative question answering: Learning to answer the whole question.
 In ICLR, 2019.
Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal,
  Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe
  Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 2020.
Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What
   makes good in-context examples for gpt-3? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06804, 2021a.
Pengfei Liu, Weizhe Yuan, Jinlan Fu, Zhengbao Jiang, Hiroaki Hayashi, and Graham Neubig.
  Pre-train, prompt, and predict: A systematic survey of prompting methods in natural language
  processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.13586, 2021b.
Shayne Longpre, Kartik Perisetla, Anthony Chen, Nikhil Ramesh, Chris DuBois, and Sameer Singh.
  Entity-based knowledge conflicts in question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.05052, 2021.
Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Liwei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le Bras,
  Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, et al. Neurologic a* esque decoding: Constrained text
  generation with lookahead heuristics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08726, 2021.
Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Bernd Bohnet, and Ryan McDonald. On faithfulness and factuality
  in abstractive summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00661, 2020.
Jacob Menick, Maja Trebacz, Vladimir Mikulik, John Aslanides, Francis Song, Martin Chadwick,
  Mia Glaese, Susannah Young, Lucy Campbell-Gillingham, Geoffrey Irving, and Nat McAleese.
  Teaching language models to support answers with verified quotes. arXiv submission, 2022.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
  Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
  question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Dmytro Okhonko, Samuel Broscheit, Gautier
  Izacard, Patrick Lewis, Barlas Oğuz, Edouard Grave, Wen-tau Yih, et al. The web is your oyster–
  knowledge-intensive nlp against a very large web corpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09924,
  2021.
Matt Post and David Vilar. Fast lexically constrained decoding with dynamic beam allocation for
 neural machine translation. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter
 of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
 Papers), 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language
  models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog, 2019.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, H. Francis Song,
  John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron
  Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu,
  Erich Elsen, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen
  Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro,
  Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch, Jean-
  Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux, Mantas
  Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Yujia Li,
  Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas, Aurelia Guy,
  Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Blake A. Hechtman, Laura Weidinger, Iason
  Gabriel, William S. Isaac, Edward Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol
  Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11446, 2021.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08633, 2021.

Devendra Sachan, Siva Reddy, Will Hamilton, Chris Dyer, and Dani Yogatama. End-to-end training
  of multi-document reader and retriever for open-domain question answering. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.

Kurt Shuster, Spencer Poff, Moya Chen, Douwe Kiela, and Jason Weston. Retrieval augmentation
  reduces hallucination in conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.07567, 2021.

Felix Stahlberg and Bill Byrne. On nmt search errors and model errors: Cat got your tongue? arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1908.10090, 2019.

Nandan Thakur, Nils Reimers, Andreas Rücklé, Abhishek Srivastava, and Iryna Gurevych. Beir: A
  heterogenous benchmark for zero-shot evaluation of information retrieval models. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2104.08663, 2021.

Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
  Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for dialog
  applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.

James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. FEVER: a large-
  scale dataset for fact extraction and VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
  North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
  Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), 2018.

Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du,
  Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2109.01652, 2021.

Wenhan Xiong, Xiang Lorraine Li, Srini Iyer, Jingfei Du, Patrick Lewis, William Yang Wang, Yashar
 Mehdad, Wen-tau Yih, Sebastian Riedel, Douwe Kiela, et al. Answering complex open-domain
 questions with multi-hop dense retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.12756, 2020.

Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov,
  and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
  answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
  Processing, 2018.

Dani Yogatama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, and Lingpeng Kong. Adaptive semiparametric
  language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.

Michael J.Q. Zhang and Eunsol Choi. SituatedQA: Incorporating extra-linguistic contexts into QA.
 Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP),
 2021.

Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen, Christopher
  Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. Opt: Open pre-trained transformer language
  models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068, 2022.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   I LLUSTRATION OF METHOD

Figure 4 presents an illustration of our method.

A.2   U SING LLM- DERIVED SCORES FOR PASSAGE RERANKING

Figure 5 presents results when using LLMs-derived scores to rerank passages.


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Figure 4: Schematic representation of the method presented in Section 3.



                               80
                               70
               Answer Recall


                               60
                               50
                               40
                               30                              p(passage|question)
                                                               p(question|passage)
                               20                              TF-IDF
                                                               DPR
                               10
                                    0   10       20       30          40         50
                                             Number of Passages
Figure 5: Comparing NQ answer recall when reranking Google Search passages using LLMs-derived
scores against DPR retriever on Wikipedia.



A.3   R ETRIEVAL PERFORMANCE ON A SUBSET OF BEIR BENCHMARK

Over and above access to updated information, search engines are also optimized for good retrieval
performance across a variety of sources, domains and queries. The discourse in the community is
slowly moving away from in-domain performance of retrievers when trained with abundance of
in-domain data, towards more realistic scenarios of out-of-distribution generalization using zero-shot
evaluations. The recent BEIR benchmark (Thakur et al., 2021) provides such an evaluation and so we
used this to compare the zero-shot retrieval performance of Google against DPR (we use the DPR
model used in the BEIR benchmark pre-trained on NQ, TriviaQA, WebQuestions, and CuratedTREC).
As the search spaces between DPR and Google are different (Google uses the whole web, DPR
is using the search space provided for each domain by BEIR), we evaluated models using a word
overlap metric between the gold and retrieved passages. We only report metrics for the subsets of
BEIR that contain no more than 500k documents as search space.


                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  average     scidocs    scifact   nfcorpus    arguana     fiqa    trec covid   webis touche2020
   DPR@1           21.1        33.05     15.99      31.54       31.54     21.91       16.44           10.59
  Google@1         43.7        56.85     32.48      60.59       60.59     57.07       37.37           35.50
  DPR@100          50.3        33.66     78.44      28.79       85.57     55.41       24.14           46.44
 Google@100        67.7        68.67     76.00      55.17       86.18     78.97       54.03           55.16

Table 3: Word overlap results between retrieved and gold evidence on subsets of the BEIR benchmark
for different retrieval models.



Looking into the domain-averages performance in Table 3, we see that Google@1 is +22% better than
DPR across all domains considered here. We note that these domains do not include the Wikipedia
based ones (e.g., NQ and HotpotQA) in which we know DPR scores high. On looking at top100,
we see that for certain domains (e.g., nfcorpus, arguana) DPR approaches Google. The difference
between Google and DPR for top100 is smaller than top1, but DPR is still outperformed by google
by 17%.



A.4   R EPRODUCING RESULTS WITH OPT-6B MODEL

We performed an experiment using the OPT model of 6.7 billion parameters. We measured the
performance of OPT-CB and OPT-OB, following the same experimental setup we followed for
the experiments using Gopher-280Bi.e., same number of evidences used, same number of samples
taken and the same prompts). We found the performance of the OTB-CB to be 15% (compared the
similar-sized 7B-CB 11% from Figure 2) and the OTB-OB to be 24% (compared to our 7B-OB 26%
from Figure 2).
 of out-of-distribution generalization using zero-shot evaluations. The recent BEIR bench-
mark (Thakur et al., 2021) provides such an evaluation and so we used this to compare the zero-shot
retrieval performance of Google against DPR (we use the DPR model used in the BEIR benchmark
pre-trained on NQ, TriviaQA, WebQuestions, and CuratedTREC). As the search spaces between
DPR and Google are different (Google uses the whole web, DPR is using the search space provided
for each domain by BEIR), we evaluated models using a word overlap metric between the gold and
retrieved passages. We only report metrics for the subsets of BEIR that contain no more than 500k
documents as search space.



A.5   R EPRODUCING RESULTS USING W IKIPEDIA - BASED DPR EVIDENCE

We find that DPR+Gopher performance (32.9%) is almost indistinguishable from the Google+Gopher
(32.7%), which is expected as the retrieval performance for both is almost the same. Since NQ has
been created using Wikipedia articles, DPR has been trained on Wikipedia and the search space is the
exact Wikipedia snapshot that was used to create the dataset, this experiment is the best possible case
scenario for DPR. For example, we see that many questions in NQ are time-sensitive (e.g., When
does thomas rhett’s new album come out?) and so Google, which is using an updated snapshot of
the world, is at disadvantage when compared to DPR with. The recent Atlas work (Izacard et al.,
2022) report similar findings with respect to the effects of temporal alignment between the Wikipedia
dumps used to create NQ and retrieval evidence.



A.6   QA P ROMPTS

Bellow we provide the prompts used for each of the datasets to create the open-book models. The
prompts for building the closed-book model is derived by omitting the Evidence part of the prompt.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6.1     NQ
 Evidence: Top 20 rankings as of 16 October 2017 Rank Change Team Points Germany 1631 Brazil 1619 Portugal 1446 Argentina 1445 5
,→ Belgium 1333 6 Poland 1323 7 France 1226 8 Spain 1218 9 Chile 1173 10 Peru 1160 11 Switzerland 1134 12 England 1116 13 Colombia
,→ 1095 14 Wales 1072 15 Italy 1066 16 Mexico 1060 17 Uruguay 1034 18 Croatia 1013 19 7 Denmark 1001 20 9 Netherlands 931 * Change
,→ from 14 September 2017 Complete rankings at FIFA.com
 Question: who has been ranked no. 1 in the latest football rankings announced by fifa
 Answer: Germany

 Evidence: "Your Love" is a song by the English rock band the Outfield, taken from their debut album Play Deep (1985). The song was
,→ penned by the band's guitarist John Spinks.
 Question: who sings i just want to use your love tonight
 Answer: English rock band the Outfield

Evidence: Principal photography began on May 20, 2016, in Welch, West Virginia.
Question: where was the movie the glass castle filmed
Answer: in Welch, West Virginia

 Evidence: No. Name Field Affiliation Date of Appointment Date of Retirement Roopa Ganguly Art Bharatiya Janata Party 04-Oct-2016
,→ 03-Oct-2022 Sambhaji Raje Social work Bharatiya Janata Party 07-Jun-2016 03-May-2022 Suresh Gopi Art Bharatiya Janata Party
,→ 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 Subramanian Swamy Economics Bharatiya Janata Party 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 5 Narendra Jadhav Economics
,→ Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 6 Mary Kom Sport Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 7 Swapan Dasgupta Journalism Nominated
,→ 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 8 K.T.S. Tulsi Law Nominated 25-Feb-2014 24-Feb-2020 9 K. Parasaran Law Nominated 09-Jun-2012
,→ 28-Jun-2018 10 Rekha Art Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018 11 Sachin Tendulkar Social service Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018
,→ 12 Anu Aga Business Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018
 Question: who was the first lady nominated member of the rajya sabha
 Answer: Mary Kom

 Evidence: The McChicken is a chicken sandwich sold by the international fast-food chain McDonald's. The sandwich consists of a
,→ toasted wheat bun, a breaded chicken patty, shredded lettuce, and mayonnaise.
 Question: what is on a mcchicken sandwich from mcdonalds
 Answer: a breaded chicken patty

 Evidence: Life of Pi is a Canadian fantasy adventure novel by Yann Martel published in 2001. The protagonist is Piscine Molitor "Pi"
,→ Patel, an Indian boy from Pondicherry who explores issues of spirituality and practicality from an early age. He survives 227
,→ days after a shipwreck while stranded on a lifeboat in the Pacific Ocean with a Bengal tiger named Richard Parker.
 Question: what is the tigers name in life of pi
 Answer: Richard Parker

 Evidence: Malware, short for malicious software, is an umbrella term used to refer to a variety of forms of harmful or intrusive
,→ software, including computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, ransomware, spyware, adware, scareware, and other malicious programs.
,→ It can take the form of executable code, scripts, active content, and other software. Malware is defined by its malicious
,→ intent, acting against the requirements of the computer user -- and so does not include software that causes unintentional harm
,→ due to some deficiency.
 Question: the general term for software that is designed to damage disable or steal data is
 Answer: Malware

 Evidence: Mum Genre Sitcom Created by Stefan Golaszewski Written by Stefan Golaszewski Directed by Richard Laxton Stefan Golaszewski
,→ Starring Lesley Manville Peter Mullan Sam Swainsbury Lisa McGrillis Opening theme Cups by Lulu and the Lampshades Country of
,→ origin United Kingdom Original language (s) English No. of series No. of episodes 12 (to 27 March 2018) Production Running time
,→ 30 minutes Production company (s) Big Talk Productions Distributor ITV Studios Release Original network BBC Two (2016-present)
,→ BBC Two HD (2016-present) Picture format 16: 9 1080i Audio format Stereo Original release 13 May 2016 (2016-05-13) -- present
 Question: who sings the theme tune to mum on bbc2
 Answer: Lulu and the Lampshades

 Evidence: The Chess World Cup 2017 was a 128-player single-elimination chess tournament, held in Tbilisi, Georgia, from 2 to 27
,→ September 2017. It was won by Armenian grandmaster Levon Aronian. This was the second time he had won the Chess World Cup, 12
,→ years after his first win in 2005.
 Question: where was the world chess tournament 2017 held
 Answer: Tbilisi, Georgia

 Evidence: T.J. Miller as Randy Kevin Michael Richardson as Rosie, others David Koechner as Robert "Bob Pogo" Pogrohvich, Frank's
,→ obese, chainsmoking boss. Kevin Farley as Babe, Carl, others Gary Cole as Rodger Dunbarton, the owner and founder of the
,→ airlines where Frank and his co-workers work. Joe Buck as Lou Gagliardi, others John DiMaggio as Scoop Dunbarton, Roger
,→ Dunbarton's racist and moronic nephew. Allison Janney as Henrietta Van Horne T.J. Miller as Randy Michael K. Williams as Smoky
 Question: who voices randy in f is for family
 Answer: T.J. Miller


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Evidence: Las Vegas Stadium is the working name for a domed stadium under construction in Paradise, Nevada for the Las Vegas Raiders
,→ of the National Football League (NFL) and the UNLV Rebels football team from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV). It is
,→ located on about 62 acres west of Mandalay Bay at Russell Road and Hacienda Avenue and between Polaris Avenue and Dean Martin
,→ Drive, just west of Interstate 15. Construction of the $1.9 billion stadium began in September 2017 and is expected to be
,→ completed in time for the 2020 NFL season.
 Question: where are they building the new raiders stadium
 Answer: Paradise, Nevada

 Evidence: At the time of its initial public offering (IPO) on the stock market in June 1992, Starbucks had 140 outlets, with a
,→ revenue of US $ 73.5 million, up from US $1.3 million in 1987. The company's market value was US $271 million by this time. The
,→ 12% portion of the company that was sold raised around US $25 million for the company, which facilitated a doubling of the
,→ number of stores over the next two years. By September 1992, Starbucks ' share price had risen by 70% to over 100 times the
,→ earnings per share of the previous year.
 Question: when did starbucks become a publicly traded company
 Answer: June 1992

 Evidence: At the end of December 31, 2015, its employee strength was 170,664. Abid Ali Neemuchwala was appointed as Wipro's CEO
,→ after T.K. stepped down in early 2016.
 Question: who become the ceo of it wipro company in 2016
 Answer: Abid Ali Neemuchwala

 Evidence: WINNER: Geoffrey Zakarian Episode 5 6 7 8 Comments Zakarian WIN IN IN CO IN CO WIN WIN The Next Iron Chef Falkner IN IN
,→ WIN IN CO WIN CO OUT Elim: Pressure Chiarello IN CO IN WIN IN IN OUT Elim: Passion Guarnaschelli IN WIN IN IN IN IN OUT Burrell
,→ IN IN IN IN WIN OUT Elim: Risk Samuelsson CO IN IN IN OUT Elim: Storytelling MacMillan WIN IN CO OUT Elim: Improvisation Hughes
,→ IN IN OUT Elim: Ingenuity Irvine IN OUT Elim: Transformation Mendelsohn OUT Elim: Resourcefulness
 Question: who wins the next iron chef super chefs
 Answer: Zakarian

 Evidence: Support for and the elevation of leaves, flowers and fruits. The stems keep the leaves in the light and provide a place
,→ for the plant to keep its flowers and fruits. Transport of fluids between the roots and the shoots in the xylem and phloem
,→ Storage of nutrients Production of new living tissue. The normal lifespan of plant cells is one to three years. Stems have cells
,→ called meristems that annually generate new living tissue.
 Question: what are the main functions of the stem
 Answer: Production of new living tissue


                                                      16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6.2     H OT P OT QA
 Evidence: Seesaw is a musical with a book by Michael Bennett, music by Cy Coleman, and lyrics by Dorothy Fields. Michael Bennett
,→ (April 8, 1943 { July 2, 1987) was an American musical theatre director, writer, choreographer, and dancer. He won seven Tony
,→ Awards for his choreography and direction of Broadway shows and was nominated for an additional eleven.
 Question: When was the writer of Seesaw born?
 Answer: April 8, 1943

 Evidence: Heinrich August Marschner (16 August 1795 { 14 December 1861) was the most important composer of German opera between
,→ Weber and Wagner. Carl Maria Friedrich Ernst von Weber (18 or 19 November 1786 5 June 1826) was a German composer, conductor,
,→ pianist, guitarist and critic, and was one of the first significant composers of the Romantic school.
 Question: Heinrich Marschner was a composer who performed in the time frame after one of the first significant composers in what
,→ school of work?
 Answer: Romantic

 Evidence: The Elliott-Donaldson House is a historic mansion in Okolona, Mississippi, U.S.. It was built in 1850, a decade prior to
,→ the American Civil War of 1861-1865. By the end of the war, in 1865, Confederate States Army General Nathan Bedford Forrest
,→ stayed in the house to rest. It has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places since September 15, 1980. Nathan
,→ Bedford Forrest (July 13, 1821 { October 29, 1877), called Bedford Forrest in his lifetime, was a lieutenant general in the
,→ Confederate Army during the American Civil War.
 Question: What lieutenant general stayed in the Elliott-Donaldson House?
 Answer: Nathan Bedford Forrest

 Evidence: Luca Parmitano (born 27 September 1976 in Paternò, Sicily) is an Italian engineer and astronaut in the European Astronaut
,→ Corps for the European Space Agency (ESA). The astronauts work on missions at the International Space Station. He was selected
,→ as an ESA astronaut in May 2009. Prof. Dr. Ulrich Hans Walter (born February 9, 1954) is a German physicist/engineer and a
,→ former DFVLR astronaut.
 Question: who is younger Ulrich Walter or Luca Parmitano?
 Answer: Luca Parmitano

 Evidence: A Boltzmann machine is a type of stochastic recurrent neural network (and Markov Random Field). Ludwig Eduard Boltzmann
,→ (February 20, 1844 { September 5, 1906) was an Austrian physicist and philosopher whose greatest achievement was in the
,→ development of statistical mechanics, which explains and predicts how the properties of atoms (such as mass, charge, and
,→ structure) determine the physical properties of matter (such as viscosity, thermal conductivity, and diffusion).
 Question: What machine has the same name as another machine created by Ludwig Boltzmann?
 Answer: Boltzmann machine

 Evidence: Graham Linehan ( ; born 22 May 1968) is an Irish television comedy writer and director who, often in partnership with
,→ Arthur Mathews, has written or co-written a number of popular television comedies. He is most noted for the sitcoms "Father Ted",
,→ "Black Books" and "The IT Crowd". Amongst others, he has also worked on "Big Train", "Count Arthur Strong", "Brass Eye" and "The
,→ Fast Show". The IT Crowd is a British sitcom by Channel 4, written by Graham Linehan, produced by Ash Atalla and starring Chris
,→ O'Dowd, Richard Ayoade, Katherine Parkinson, and Matt Berry.
 Question: Graham Linehan was the creator of the Ash Atalla-produced sitcom for what UK channel?
 Answer: Channel 4

 Evidence: Andrea Chénier is a verismo opera in four acts by the composer Umberto Giordano, set to an Italian libretto by Luigi
,→ Illica. It was first performed on 28 March 1896 at La Scala, Milan. The opera's story is based loosely on the life of the French
,→ poet André Chénier (1762{1794), who was executed during the French Revolution. The character Carlo Gérard is partly based on
,→ Jean-Lambert Tallien, a leading figure in the Revolution. "La mamma morta " (They killed my mother) is an aria from act 3 of the
,→ 1896 opera "Andrea Chénier" by Umberto Giordano.
 Question: What is the name of the third act in a play where a character named Carlo Gérard is partly based on a revolutionary
,→ figure?
 Answer: La mamma morta

 Evidence: Richard Masur (born November 20, 1948) is an American actor who has appeared in more than 80 movies. From 1995 to 1999, he
,→ served two terms as president of the Screen Actors Guild (SAG). Masur currently sits on the Corporate Board of the Motion
,→ Picture & Television Fund. License to Drive is a 1988 teen adventure film written by Neil Tolkin and directed by Greg Beeman in
,→ his feature film directorial debut. It stars Corey Haim, Corey Feldman, Heather Graham, Carol Kane, Richard Masur, Michael
,→ Manasseri and Nina Siemaszko.
 Question: License to Drive featured what future president of the Screen Actors Guild?
 Answer: Richard Masur

 Evidence: The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) is a British public service broadcaster with its headquarters at Broadcasting
,→ House in London. The BBC is the world's oldest national broadcasting organisation and the largest broadcaster in the world by
,→ number of employees. It employs over 20,950 staff in total, 16,672 of whom are in public sector broadcasting. The total number
,→ of staff is 35,402 when part-time, flexible, and fixed contract staff are included. Tenko was a television drama, co-produced by
,→ the BBC and the ABC.
 Question: Where is the headquarters for the service broadcaster the show Tenko is on?
 Answer: Broadcasting House in London

 Evidence: Thomas Matthew "Tom" Chappell (born 1943) is an American businessman and manufacturer and co-founder of Tom's of Maine in
,→ 1970. Tom's of Maine is a brandname and manufacturer of natural-ingredients-only personal care products, a majority-owned
,→ subsidiary of Colgate-Palmolive since 2006. The company's products are intentionally mostly made without ingredients that are:
,→ chemically derived, have a negative environmental impact, or are tested on animals. While most of its products are vegan, some
,→ contain propolis and/or beeswax sourced from bees.
 Question: Thomas Matthew "Tom" Chappell co-founded a commpany in 1970 that manufactures what products?
 Answer: natural-ingredients-only personal care products

 Evidence: Francis Bacon, 1st Viscount St Alban, {'1': ", '2': ", '3': ", '4': "} ( ; 22 January 15619 April 1626) was an English
,→ philosopher, statesman, scientist, jurist, orator, and author. He served both as Attorney General and as Lord Chancellor of
,→ England. After his death, he remained extremely influential through his works, especially as philosophical advocate and
,→ practitioner of the scientific method during the scientific revolution. James Spedding (28 June 1808 { 9 March 1881) was an
,→ English author, chiefly known as the editor of the works of Francis Bacon.
 Question: James Spedding was chiefly known as the editor of the works of an author who served both as Attorney General and as what?
 Answer: Lord Chancellor of England


                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Evidence: Romeo Montague (Italian: "Romeo Montecchi" ) is the protagonist of William Shakespeare's tragedy "Romeo and Juliet". The
,→ son of Montague and his wife, he secretly loves and marries Juliet, a member of the rival House of Capulet. Forced into exile
,→ after slaying Juliet's cousin, Tybalt, in a duel, Romeo commits suicide upon hearing falsely of Juliet's death. Benvolio is a
,→ fictional character in Shakespeare's drama "Romeo and Juliet". He is Montague's nephew and Romeo's cousin. Benvolio serves as an
,→ unsuccessful peacemaker in the play, attempting to prevent violence between the Capulet and Montague families.
 Question: Which character does this protagonist, who secretly loves and marries a member of the rival house, of William
,→ Shakespeare's tragedy that has a fictional character Benvolio slay?
 Answer: Tybalt

 Evidence: Francesca Schiavone (] ; born 23 June 1980 in Milan) is an Italian tennis player who turned professional in 1998. She won
,→ the 2010 French Open singles title, becoming the first Italian woman to win a Grand Slam event in singles. She was also
,→ runner-up at the 2011 French Open. Her career high ranking is world No. 4, achieved on 31 January 2011. To date, Schiavone is
,→ the last one handed-backhand player to win a Grand Slam title on the women's tour. Carly Gullickson (born November 26, 1986) is
,→ a former American professional tennis player.
 Question: What occupation have Carly Gullickson and Francesca Schiavone both held?
 Answer: professional tennis player.

 Evidence: Otello (] ) is an opera in four acts by Giuseppe Verdi to an Italian libretto by Arrigo Boito, based on Shakespeare's play
,→ "Othello". It was Verdi's penultimate opera, and was first performed at the Teatro alla Scala, Milan, on 5 February 1887. After
,→ Aida (original title: "Verdi's Messiah") is a 1985 play-with-music by Julian Mitchell. It is about Giuseppe Verdi, and the
,→ pressure put upon him after his attempt to retire from composing. Continued insistent prodding from his friends eventually
,→ results in one of his greatest masterpieces, the opera "Otello", which premiered in 1887.
 Question: Where was the opera, which was the subject of After Aida, first performed?
 Answer: Teatro alla Scala

 Evidence: The Commodore 16 is a home computer made by Commodore International with a 6502-compatible 7501 or 8501 CPU, released in
,→ 1984 and intended to be an entry-level computer to replace the VIC-20. A cost-reduced version, the Commodore 116, was sold only
,→ in Europe. In the middle of 1984 a Brazilian company called Prológica, which made its own versions of 8 bits US computers,
,→ brought to the Brazilian market a new equipment for its personal computer series called "CP" (shorten of Personal Computer in
,→ Portuguese).
 Question: Were the Commodore 16 and Prológica CP-400 from the same country?
 Answer: no


                                                      18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6.3     S TRATEGY QA


 Evidence: The Albanian Declaration of Independence is written in Albanian, Gheg, Tosk, and Ottoman Turkish. The Arvanite Greek's are
,→ a major Tosk speaking group of southern Albania.
 Question: Can an Arvanite Greek understand some of the Albanian Declaration of Independence?
 Answer: true

Evidence: An anxious person may benefit from medication or therapy. The Wizard of Oz cannot give courage to anyone.
Question: Would an anxious person benefit from receiving courage from the Wizard of Oz?
Answer: false

 Evidence: Silicon is a key material for the production of semiconductor chips. A silicon shortage would mean fewer semiconductor
,→ chips could be produced. A business that produces fewer products than normal will receive lower than normal revenue.
 Question: Would a silicon shortage be bad for Intel's sales?
 Answer: true

 Evidence: The Superbowl is the championship game of the National Football League The National Football League is a sports league for
,→ American football American football enjoys the majority of its popularity in the United States The bengal fox is found
,→ exclusively on the Indian subcontinent
 Question: Is a bengal fox likely to see the Superbowl?
 Answer: false

Evidence: The letter B is the second letter in the Latin Alphabet. There was one total lunar eclipse in 2008.
Question: Does the letter B's place in alphabet exceed number of 2008 total lunar eclipses?
Answer: true

 Evidence: The Battle of Baghdad was the U.S. invasion of Baghdad in the year 2003. Justin Bieber's album Believe was released in
,→ 2012.
 Question: Did U.S. soldiers listen to Justin Bieber's Believe album during the Battle of Baghdad?
 Answer: false

 Evidence: The Italian Renaissance was a period of history from the 13th century to 1600. A theocracy is a type of rule in which
,→ religious leaders have power. Friar Girolamo Savonarola was the ruler of Florence, after driving out the Medici family, from
,→ November 1494 { 23 May 1498.
 Question: Was Florence a Theocracy during Italian Renaissance?
 Answer: true

 Evidence: The Tohoku earthquake led to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant meltdown Nuclear meltdowns lead to a release of
,→ deadly levels of radiation Godzilla draws power from radiation and is not hurt by it
 Question: Could Godzilla have been killed by the Tohoku earthquake?
 Answer: false

 Evidence: Robert Moses Grove was a baseball player nicknamed Lefty Grove. Pablo Escobar had several nicknames including: Don Pablo,
,→ El Padrino, and El Patrón.
 Question: Did Pablo Escobar's nickname collection outshine Robert Moses Grove's?
 Answer: true

 Evidence: Anaheim is the biggest city in Orange County, California Anaheim was founded by fifty German families People from Germany
,→ speak German
 Question: Did the founders of the biggest city in Orange County, California speak Italian?
 Answer: false

 Evidence: Aerosmith is an American rock band that has five active members. The 2020 Mitsubishi Outlander has flexible seating that
,→ allows for seven seat capacity.
 Question: Can Aerosmith fit in a 2020 Mitsubishi Outlander?
 Answer: true

Evidence: The War in Vietnam (1945-46) lasted around 6 months. The gestation period for a llama is 11 months.
Question: Could a llama birth twice during War in Vietnam (1945-46)?
Answer: false

 Evidence: Ivan the Terrible was nicknamed terrible because of his harsh rule. Ivan the Terrible's father, Vasili III Ivanovich, was
,→ nicknamed Vasili the Adequate. Ivan the Terrible's grandfather, Ivan III Vasilyevich, was nicknamed Ivan the Great.
 Question: Did Ivan the Terrible's father and grandfather have nicer nicknames?
 Answer: true

Evidence: The Beatles were active from 1960 until 1969. Disco began to appear around 1972.
Question: Did the Beatles write any music in the Disco genre?
Answer: false

 Evidence: Ganymede is a moon of Jupiter. Jupiter is the largest planet in our solar system. The solar system is part of the Milky
,→ Way galaxy.
 Question: Is Ganymede in the Milky Way galaxy?
 Answer: true



                                                      19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.6.4     FEVER

 Evidence: Segarra served as Military Aide to the Military Governor of Puerto Rico Theodore Roosevelt , Jr. and during World War II
,→ commanded the 65th Infantry Regiment .
 Question: Raees (film) features a Pakistani actress in a lead role.
 Answer: error

 Evidence: With an estimated 92.7 million inhabitants , it is the world 's 14th-most-populous country , and the ninth-most-populous
,→ Asian country .
 Question: Vietnam is not the ninth most populous Asian country.
 Answer: false

 Evidence: Since Trump 's inauguration , Conway has been embroiled in a series of controversies , including using the phrase ``
,→ alternative facts '' , making reference to a `` Bowling Green massacre '' that never occurred , claiming Michael Flynn had the
,→ full confidence of the president hours before he was dismissed , and publicly endorsing commercial products associated with the
,→ president 's daughter Ivanka Trump .
 Question: Kellyanne Conway has been embroiled in a series of controversies.
 Answer: true

 Evidence: The village has around 2000 families . This village is famous for the celebrations of Batukamma festival celebrated during
,→ Dushera.People from near by villages come here to play Batukamma .
 Question: Tatum O'Neal had three children with juvenile arthritis.
 Answer: error

Evidence: It is being directed by Brian Fee , a storyboard artist on Cars -LRB- 2006 -RRB- and Cars 2 -LRB- 2011 -RRB- .
Question: Cars 3 isn't the third Cars movie Brian Fee has worked on.
Answer: false

Evidence: `` Shut Up '' is a song by English Grime artist and MC Stormzy .
Question: Shut Up is a song.
Answer: true

Evidence: Patrice Loko , French former footballer
Question: The dramatic film The Good German was directed by Steven Soderburgh.
Answer: error

Evidence: Poseidon grossed $ 181,674,817 at the worldwide box office on a budget of $ 160 million .
Question: Poseidon lost $181,674,817.
Answer: false

 Evidence: Qui-Gon Jinn is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise , portrayed by Liam Neeson as the main protagonist of the
,→ 1999 film Star Wars : Episode I -- The Phantom Menace '' .
 Question: Qui-Gon Jinn is a character in the Star Wars franchise.
 Answer: true

 Evidence: It is only known from a partial skull and several vertebrae , but comparisons with other species of monitor lizard put its
,→ size between 60 and in length .
 Question: The Mormon population has grown significantly since 1980.
 Answer: error

 Evidence: Python features a dynamic type system and automatic memory management and supports multiple programming paradigms ,
,→ including object-oriented , imperative , functional programming , and procedural styles .
 Question: Python lacks a dynamic type system.
 Answer: false

 Evidence: The series was nominated for four Annie Awards in 2017 , winning three in the categories of Outstanding Achievement in
,→ Character Animation , Character Design , and Storyboarding in an Animated Television/Broadcast Production . Trollhunters is an
,→ American computer-animated fantasy television series created for Netflix by Guillermo del Toro and produced by DreamWorks
,→ Animation and Double Dare You .
 Question: Trollhunters is animated.
 Answer: true

 Evidence: Guillermo Kuschel -LRB- born 1918 -RRB- , Chile-born entomologist living in New Zealand Maximilian Kuschel -LRB- 1851 --
,→ 1909 -RRB- , German ornithologist and oologist
 Question: Shawn Carlson is American and German.
 Answer: error

 Evidence: Kutcher subsequently appeared in more romantic comedies , including Guess Who -LRB- 2005 -RRB- , A Lot Like Love -LRB-
,→ 2005 -RRB- , What Happens in Vegas -LRB- 2008 -RRB- , and No Strings Attached -LRB- 2011 -RRB- . No Strings Attached is a 2011
,→ American romantic comedy film directed by Ivan Reitman and written by Elizabeth Meriwether .
 Question: Ashton Kutcher was not directed by Ivan Reitman.
 Answer: false

 Evidence: It was formerly called Irian Jaya -LRB- before that West Irian or Irian Barat -RRB- and comprised all of Indonesian New
,→ Guinea .
 Question: Papua was formerly called West Iran.
 Answer: true


A.7     P ROMPTS FOR CALCULATING SCORES


Here, we provide the prompts used to obtain the different scores considered in the different factoriza-
tions. We provide the prompts derived for NQ.


                                                      20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.7.1     C ALCULATING p(q | ai , pi )
 Evidence: FIFA World Rankings. Top 20 rankings as of 16 October 2017 Rank Change Team Points Germany 1631 Brazil 1619 Portugal 1446
,→ Argentina 1445 5 Belgium 1333 6 Poland 1323 7 France 1226 8 Spain 1218 9 Chile 1173 10 Peru 1160 11 Switzerland 1134 12 England
,→ 1116 13 Colombia 1095 14 Wales 1072 15 Italy 1066 16 Mexico 1060 17 Uruguay 1034 18 Croatia 1013 19 7 Denmark 1001 20 9
,→ Netherlands 931 * Change from 14 September 2017 Complete rankings at FIFA.com
 Answer: Germany
 Question: who has been ranked no. 1 in the latest football rankings announced by fifa

 Evidence: Your Love (The Outfield song). "Your Love" is a song by the English rock band the Outfield, taken from their debut album
,→ Play Deep (1985). The song was penned by the band's guitarist John Spinks.
 Answer: English rock band the Outfield
 Question: who sings i just want to use your love tonight

Evidence: The Glass Castle (film). Principal photography began on May 20, 2016, in Welch, West Virginia.
Answer: in Welch, West Virginia
Question: where was the movie the glass castle filmed

 Evidence: List of nominated members of Rajya Sabha. No. Name Field Affiliation Date of Appointment Date of Retirement Roopa Ganguly
,→ Art Bharatiya Janata Party 04-Oct-2016 03-Oct-2022 Sambhaji Raje Social work Bharatiya Janata Party 07-Jun-2016 03-May-2022
,→ Suresh Gopi Art Bharatiya Janata Party 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 Subramanian Swamy Economics Bharatiya Janata Party 25-Apr-2016
,→ 24-Apr-2022 5 Narendra Jadhav Economics Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 6 Mary Kom Sport Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 7
,→ Swapan Dasgupta Journalism Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 8 K.T.S. Tulsi Law Nominated 25-Feb-2014 24-Feb-2020 9 K. Parasaran
,→ Law Nominated 09-Jun-2012 28-Jun-2018 10 Rekha Art Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018 11 Sachin Tendulkar Social service
,→ Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018 12 Anu Aga Business Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018
 Answer: Mary Kom
 Question: who was the first lady nominated member of the rajya sabha

 Evidence: McChicken. The McChicken is a chicken sandwich sold by the international fast-food chain McDonald's. The sandwich consists
,→ of a toasted wheat bun, a breaded chicken patty, shredded lettuce, and mayonnaise.
 Answer: a breaded chicken patty
 Question: what is on a mcchicken sandwich from mcdonalds

 Evidence: Life of Pi. Life of Pi is a Canadian fantasy adventure novel by Yann Martel published in 2001. The protagonist is Piscine
,→ Molitor "Pi" Patel, an Indian boy from Pondicherry who explores issues of spirituality and practicality from an early age. He
,→ survives 227 days after a shipwreck while stranded on a lifeboat in the Pacific Ocean with a Bengal tiger named Richard Parker.
 Answer: Richard Parker
 Question: what is the tigers name in life of pi

 Evidence: Malware. Malware, short for malicious software, is an umbrella term used to refer to a variety of forms of harmful or
,→ intrusive software, including computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, ransomware, spyware, adware, scareware, and other
,→ malicious programs. It can take the form of executable code, scripts, active content, and other software. Malware is defined by
,→ its malicious intent, acting against the requirements of the computer user -- and so does not include software that causes
,→ unintentional harm due to some deficiency.
 Answer: Malware
 Question: the general term for software that is designed to damage disable or steal data is

 Evidence: Mum (TV series). Mum Genre Sitcom Created by Stefan Golaszewski Written by Stefan Golaszewski Directed by Richard Laxton
,→ Stefan Golaszewski Starring Lesley Manville Peter Mullan Sam Swainsbury Lisa McGrillis Opening theme Cups by Lulu and the
,→ Lampshades Country of origin United Kingdom Original language (s) English No. of series No. of episodes 12 (to 27 March 2018)
,→ Production Running time 30 minutes Production company (s) Big Talk Productions Distributor ITV Studios Release Original network
,→ BBC Two (2016-present) BBC Two HD (2016-present) Picture format 16: 9 1080i Audio format Stereo Original release 13 May 2016
,→ (2016-05-13) -- present
 Answer: Lulu and the Lampshades
 Question: who sings the theme tune to mum on bbc2

 Evidence: Chess World Cup 2017. The Chess World Cup 2017 was a 128-player single-elimination chess tournament, held in Tbilisi,
,→ Georgia, from 2 to 27 September 2017. It was won by Armenian grandmaster Levon Aronian. This was the second time he had won the
,→ Chess World Cup, 12 years after his first win in 2005.
 Answer: Tbilisi, Georgia
 Question: where was the world chess tournament 2017 held

 Evidence: F Is for Family. T.J. Miller as Randy Kevin Michael Richardson as Rosie, others David Koechner as Robert "Bob Pogo"
,→ Pogrohvich, Frank's obese, chainsmoking boss. Kevin Farley as Babe, Carl, others Gary Cole as Rodger Dunbarton, the owner and
,→ founder of the airlines where Frank and his co-workers work. Joe Buck as Lou Gagliardi, others John DiMaggio as Scoop Dunbarton,
,→ Roger Dunbarton's racist and moronic nephew. Allison Janney as Henrietta Van Horne T.J. Miller as Randy Michael K. Williams as
,→ Smoky
 Answer: T.J. Miller
 Question: who voices randy in f is for family

 Evidence: Las Vegas Stadium. Las Vegas Stadium is the working name for a domed stadium under construction in Paradise, Nevada for
,→ the Las Vegas Raiders of the National Football League (NFL) and the UNLV Rebels football team from the University of Nevada, Las
,→ Vegas (UNLV). It is located on about 62 acres west of Mandalay Bay at Russell Road and Hacienda Avenue and between Polaris
,→ Avenue and Dean Martin Drive, just west of Interstate 15. Construction of the $1.9 billion stadium began in September 2017 and
,→ is expected to be completed in time for the 2020 NFL season.
 Answer: Paradise, Nevada
 Question: where are they building the new raiders stadium

 Evidence: Starbucks. At the time of its initial public offering (IPO) on the stock market in June 1992, Starbucks had 140 outlets,
,→ with a revenue of US $ 73.5 million, up from US $1.3 million in 1987. The company's market value was US $271 million by this
,→ time. The 12% portion of the company that was sold raised around US $25 million for the company, which facilitated a doubling of
,→ the number of stores over the next two years. By September 1992, Starbucks ' share price had risen by 70% to over 100 times the
,→ earnings per share of the previous year.
 Answer: June 1992
 Question: when did starbucks become a publicly traded company


                                                      21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Evidence: Wipro. At the end of December 31, 2015, its employee strength was 170,664. Abid Ali Neemuchwala was appointed as Wipro's
,→ CEO after T.K. stepped down in early 2016.
 Answer: Abid Ali Neemuchwala
 Question: who become the ceo of it wipro company in 2016

 Evidence: The Next Iron Chef. WINNER: Geoffrey Zakarian Episode 5 6 7 8 Comments Zakarian WIN IN IN CO IN CO WIN WIN The Next Iron
,→ Chef Falkner IN IN WIN IN CO WIN CO OUT Elim: Pressure Chiarello IN CO IN WIN IN IN OUT Elim: Passion Guarnaschelli IN WIN IN IN
,→ IN IN OUT Burrell IN IN IN IN WIN OUT Elim: Risk Samuelsson CO IN IN IN OUT Elim: Storytelling MacMillan WIN IN CO OUT Elim:
,→ Improvisation Hughes IN IN OUT Elim: Ingenuity Irvine IN OUT Elim: Transformation Mendelsohn OUT Elim: Resourcefulness
 Answer: Zakarian
 Question: who wins the next iron chef super chefs


 Evidence: Plant stem. Support for and the elevation of leaves, flowers and fruits. The stems keep the leaves in the light and
,→ provide a place for the plant to keep its flowers and fruits. Transport of fluids between the roots and the shoots in the xylem
,→ and phloem Storage of nutrients Production of new living tissue. The normal lifespan of plant cells is one to three years. Stems
,→ have cells called meristems that annually generate new living tissue.
 Answer: Production of new living tissue
 Question: what are the main functions of the stem


A.7.2     C ALCULATING p(q | pi )
Same as above, but omitting the Answer field of the prompt.

A.7.3     C ALCULATING p(pi | q)
 Question: who has been ranked no. 1 in the latest football rankings announced by fifa
 Evidence: FIFA World Rankings. Top 20 rankings as of 16 October 2017 Rank Change Team Points Germany 1631 Brazil 1619 Portugal 1446
,→ Argentina 1445 5 Belgium 1333 6 Poland 1323 7 France 1226 8 Spain 1218 9 Chile 1173 10 Peru 1160 11 Switzerland 1134 12 England
,→ 1116 13 Colombia 1095 14 Wales 1072 15 Italy 1066 16 Mexico 1060 17 Uruguay 1034 18 Croatia 1013 19 7 Denmark 1001 20 9
,→ Netherlands 931 * Change from 14 September 2017 Complete rankings at FIFA.com

 Question: who sings i just want to use your love tonight
 Evidence: Your Love (The Outfield song). "Your Love" is a song by the English rock band the Outfield, taken from their debut album
,→ Play Deep (1985). The song was penned by the band's guitarist John Spinks.

Question: where was the movie the glass castle filmed
Evidence: The Glass Castle (film). Principal photography began on May 20, 2016, in Welch, West Virginia.

 Question: who was the first lady nominated member of the rajya sabha
 Evidence: List of nominated members of Rajya Sabha. No. Name Field Affiliation Date of Appointment Date of Retirement Roopa Ganguly
,→ Art Bharatiya Janata Party 04-Oct-2016 03-Oct-2022 Sambhaji Raje Social work Bharatiya Janata Party 07-Jun-2016 03-May-2022
,→ Suresh Gopi Art Bharatiya Janata Party 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 Subramanian Swamy Economics Bharatiya Janata Party 25-Apr-2016
,→ 24-Apr-2022 5 Narendra Jadhav Economics Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 6 Mary Kom Sport Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 7
,→ Swapan Dasgupta Journalism Nominated 25-Apr-2016 24-Apr-2022 8 K.T.S. Tulsi Law Nominated 25-Feb-2014 24-Feb-2020 9 K. Parasaran
,→ Law Nominated 09-Jun-2012 28-Jun-2018 10 Rekha Art Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018 11 Sachin Tendulkar Social service
,→ Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018 12 Anu Aga Business Nominated 27-Apr-2012 26-Apr-2018

 Question: what is on a mcchicken sandwich from mcdonalds
 Evidence: McChicken. The McChicken is a chicken sandwich sold by the international fast-food chain McDonald's. The sandwich consists
,→ of a toasted wheat bun, a breaded chicken patty, shredded lettuce, and mayonnaise.

 Question: what is the tigers name in life of pi
 Evidence: Life of Pi. Life of Pi is a Canadian fantasy adventure novel by Yann Martel published in 2001. The protagonist is Piscine
,→ Molitor "Pi" Patel, an Indian boy from Pondicherry who explores issues of spirituality and practicality from an early age. He
,→ survives 227 days after a shipwreck while stranded on a lifeboat in the Pacific Ocean with a Bengal tiger named Richard Parker.

 Question: the general term for software that is designed to damage disable or steal data is
 Evidence: Malware. Malware, short for malicious software, is an umbrella term used to refer to a variety of forms of harmful or
,→ intrusive software, including computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, ransomware, spyware, adware, scareware, and other
,→ malicious programs. It can take the form of executable code, scripts, active content, and other software. Malware is defined by
,→ its malicious intent, acting against the requirements of the computer user -- and so does not include software that causes
,→ unintentional harm due to some deficiency.

 Question: who sings the theme tune to mum on bbc2
 Evidence: Mum (TV series). Mum Genre Sitcom Created by Stefan Golaszewski Written by Stefan Golaszewski Directed by Richard Laxton
,→ Stefan Golaszewski Starring Lesley Manville Peter Mullan Sam Swainsbury Lisa McGrillis Opening theme Cups by Lulu and the
,→ Lampshades Country of origin United Kingdom Original language (s) English No. of series No. of episodes 12 (to 27 March 2018)
,→ Production Running time 30 minutes Production company (s) Big Talk Productions Distributor ITV Studios Release Original network
,→ BBC Two (2016-present) BBC Two HD (2016-present) Picture format 16: 9 1080i Audio format Stereo Original release 13 May 2016
,→ (2016-05-13) -- present

 Question: where was the world chess tournament 2017 held
 Evidence: Chess World Cup 2017. The Chess World Cup 2017 was a 128-player single-elimination chess tournament, held in Tbilisi,
,→ Georgia, from 2 to 27 September 2017. It was won by Armenian grandmaster Levon Aronian. This was the second time he had won the
,→ Chess World Cup, 12 years after his first win in 2005.

 Question: who voices randy in f is for family
 Evidence: F Is for Family. T.J. Miller as Randy Kevin Michael Richardson as Rosie, others David Koechner as Robert "Bob Pogo"
,→ Pogrohvich, Frank's obese, chainsmoking boss. Kevin Farley as Babe, Carl, others Gary Cole as Rodger Dunbarton, the owner and
,→ founder of the airlines where Frank and his co-workers work. Joe Buck as Lou Gagliardi, others John DiMaggio as Scoop Dunbarton,
,→ Roger Dunbarton's racist and moronic nephew. Allison Janney as Henrietta Van Horne T.J. Miller as Randy Michael K. Williams as
,→ Smoky

 Question: where are they building the new raiders stadium
 Evidence: Las Vegas Stadium. Las Vegas Stadium is the working name for a domed stadium under construction in Paradise, Nevada for
,→ the Las Vegas Raiders of the National Football League (NFL) and the UNLV Rebels football team from the University of Nevada, Las
,→ Vegas (UNLV). It is located on about 62 acres west of Mandalay Bay at Russell Road and Hacienda Avenue and between Polaris
,→ Avenue and Dean Martin Drive, just west of Interstate 15. Construction of the $1.9 billion stadium began in September 2017 and
,→ is expected to be completed in time for the 2020 NFL season.



                                                      22
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Question: when did starbucks become a publicly traded company
 Evidence: Starbucks. At the time of its initial public offering (IPO) on the stock market in June 1992, Starbucks had 140 outlets,
,→ with a revenue of US $ 73.5 million, up from US $1.3 million in 1987. The company's market value was US $271 million by this
,→ time. The 12% portion of the company that was sold raised around US $25 million for the company, which facilitated a doubling of
,→ the number of stores over the next two years. By September 1992, Starbucks ' share price had risen by 70% to over 100 times the
,→ earnings per share of the previous year.

 Question: who become the ceo of it wipro company in 2016
 Evidence: Wipro. At the end of December 31, 2015, its employee strength was 170,664. Abid Ali Neemuchwala was appointed as Wipro's
,→ CEO after T.K. stepped down in early 2016.

 Question: who wins the next iron chef super chefs
 Evidence: The Next Iron Chef. WINNER: Geoffrey Zakarian Episode 5 6 7 8 Comments Zakarian WIN IN IN CO IN CO WIN WIN The Next Iron
,→ Chef Falkner IN IN WIN IN CO WIN CO OUT Elim: Pressure Chiarello IN CO IN WIN IN IN OUT Elim: Passion Guarnaschelli IN WIN IN IN
,→ IN IN OUT Burrell IN IN IN IN WIN OUT Elim: Risk Samuelsson CO IN IN IN OUT Elim: Storytelling MacMillan WIN IN CO OUT Elim:
,→ Improvisation Hughes IN IN OUT Elim: Ingenuity Irvine IN OUT Elim: Transformation Mendelsohn OUT Elim: Resourcefulness

 Question: what are the main functions of the stem
 Evidence: Plant stem. Support for and the elevation of leaves, flowers and fruits. The stems keep the leaves in the light and
,→ provide a place for the plant to keep its flowers and fruits. Transport of fluids between the roots and the shoots in the xylem
,→ and phloem Storage of nutrients Production of new living tissue. The normal lifespan of plant cells is one to three years. Stems
,→ have cells called meristems that annually generate new living tissue.


A.8    E RROR A NALYSIS

In addition to discussion of S ITUATED QA in Section 5.5, which can be considered a tail of NQ
dataset, we also perform error analysis of H OTPOT QA and S TRATEGY QA; see examples in Table 4.
Questions in H OTPOT QA fall into two categories: comparison (e.g., “Which was fought earlier in
our nation’s history, the Seven Days Battles or the Battle of Manila?”) and bridge entity questions
(e.g., “Which American professional poker player also starred in the 2015 movie ”Extraction”?”).
While performance of OBGold is comparable for both types, the bridge questions appear particularly
                             a|q,p                        a|q,p
difficult for both CB and OBGoogle configurations: for OBGoogle we observe EM of 21% for bridge vs
47% for comparison questions. We hypothesize that this is because comparison questions always
have access to the correct answers in the prompt through the question itself, even if retrieval fails.
Having a correct answer in the prompt makes the task easier for the model. In contrast, for bridge
questions the answer needs to be generated ”from scratch” if it is not present in retrieved evidence.
                                                                        a|q,p
Manual error analysis of questions where Google retrieval, OBGoogle , and CB fail simultaneously
suggests that there are several sources of error. One is Google Search’s recency bias, some questions
require older documents; next are failures of Exact Match as an accuracy metric (e.g., ‘rookie of year’
vs ‘national basketball associations rookie of year’, ‘nandrolone’ vs ‘anabolic–androgenic steroid
aas’); finally, we also observe data annotations errors (multiple gold answers are possible instead
of a single one provided or the gold answers are wrong). Perhaps surprisingly, on a small subset of
questions that we manually checked, we observe the latter two to be the prevalent causes of errors.
                                                                                                 a|q,p
Therefore, the measured accuracy of 21% on bridge questions is likely a lower-bound of OBGoogle
performance. In fact, we believe that the comparison questions present a more difficult challenge to
the language models, as they often require numeric reasoning.
The corner cases of S TRATEGY QA include questions where Google Search either entirely fails to
retrieve evidence (e.g., “Could a sloth hypothetically watch an entire episode of Scrubs underwater?”)
or it retrieves relevant evidence that contradicts reasoning provided by annotators (e.g., “Can vitamin
C rich fruits be bad for health?”) (note also that some of the questions are subjective, with different
points of view being equally valid). Manual analysis of the results also suggests that most of the
questions in the dataset require iterative retrieval and reasoning, where the sub-questions for the
individual steps cannot be obtained from the original question through simple modifications, but
require reformulation. Hence, whereas retrieved evidence is generally on topic, it is not accurate
enough to support fine-grained reasoning required to answer the questions.


                                                      23
     Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Example 1 H OTPOT QA : OBPoE
                                              Google is correct
                   Q: Which American professional poker player also starred in the 2015 movie ”Extraction”?
                   A OBPoE
                       Google : dan bilzerian
                   A CB: chris ferguson
                   A Gold: dan bilzerian
                   Type: bridge
                   Evidence@1 Dan Bilzerian - Bio, Net Worth, Height Famous Births
                   Deaths. Dan Bilzerian Bio, Net Worth, Height ORIGIN Dan Bilzerian is an
                   American professional poker player, . . .
                   Evidence@2 Dan Bilzerian Net Worth (As of Oct. 2021) - Celebinsidr.com.
                   He has earned most of his money by playing poker. . . .
                   Evidence@3 Dan Bilzerian - Biography of a Poker Playing Playboy - Online Dan Bilzerian :
                   Poker-Playing Playboy Dan Bilzerian is your typical playboy. He surrounds himself with
                   beautiful women, fast cars, and just about anything his heart desires..

                   Example 2 H OTPOT QA : OBPoE  Google fails
                   Q: Who is the American singer-songwriter, who won an award for
                   Best Female Video at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards,
                   and wrote a song for the ATT Team USA Soundtrack?
                   A OBPoE
                       Google : colbie caillat
                   A CB: taylor swift
                   A Gold: taylor swift
                   Type: bridge
                   Evidence@1 Colbie Caillat - Wikipedia. In August 2009 she released Breakthrough, ..
                   She was also part of the group
                   that won Album of the Year at the 2010 Grammy Awards
                   for her featured vocals and writing on Taylor Swift ’s Fearless album.. . .
                   Evidence@2 Colbie Caillat - Wikipedia. She also recorded a French translated version of this song. . . .
                   Evidence@3 The Songs - Taylor Swift Switzerland. Then there is the absolute sadness.
                   The sadness of losing this person, losing all the memories, and the hopes you had for the future...


                   Example 3 H OTPOT QA : OBPoE  Google fails
                   Q: Which was fought earlier in our nation’s history, the Seven Days Battles or the Battle of Manila?
                   A OBPoE
                       Google : battle of manila
                   A CB: seven days battles
                   A Gold: seven days battles
                   Type: comparison
                   Evidence@1 The Seven Days Battles American Battlefield Trust. .. set back almost a year.
                   By late afternoon on May 31, 1862. . .
                   Evidence@2 Battle of Manila (1898) - Wikipedia. Army private fired the first shot
                   at a Filipino revolutionary soldier and Filipino revolutionary forces returned fire. . . .
                   Evidence@3 Battle of Manila (1945) - Wikipedia. The city’s capture was marked as General Douglas
                   MacArthur’s key to victory in the campaign of reconquest. . . .

                   Example 4 H OTPOT QA : OBPoE Google , CB both fail
                   Q: What North Carolina native did Danja produce songs for?
                   A OBPoE
                       Google : justin timberlake
                   A CB: britney spears
                   A Gold: j cole
                   Type: bridge
                   Evidence@1 Producer Danja Explains Why Justin Timberlake ś “Filthy” Doesnt́ ....
                   I cant́ say that ”Filthy” was described in the trailer,..
                   Evidence@2 Producer Danja Explains Why Justin Timberlake ś “Filthy” Doesnt́ ....
                   This is what we do. What were some of those parameters that he gave you?
                   Evidence@3 Danja production discography - Wikipedia. ”Yeah Yeah You Would” (feat. Grace Jones) -
                   06. ”Hate You Now” - 14. ”Hello Good Morning” (feat. T.I.)
                   Keri Hilson - No Boys Allowed[edit] * 07. ”Toy Soldier” (co-written with Keri) * 16.

                   Example 5 S TRATEGY QA : OBPoE Google fails
                   Q: Does Santa Claus work during summer?
                        PoE
                   A OBGoogle : True
                   A CB: False
                   A Gold: False
                   Evidence@1 What Does Santa Claus Do In The Summer? — Mystic Christmas Blog. Mrs. ..
                   During the Summer Santa and his Elves also continue their worldwide charity work
                   along with fighting the forces of evil around the world. ..
                   Evidence@2 What Does Santa Claus Do In The Summer? — Mystic Christmas Blog.
                   What Does Santa Claus Do In The Summer? ..
                   However the term Christmas in July was started by Santa Claus.
                   He begins his preparations for the monumental Christmas season ..
                   What it’s really like to be a professional Santa Claus - Business Insider. ..


Table 4: Examples of questions, CB and OB answers together with retrieved evidence from H OTPOT QA
and S TRATEGY QA datasets.

                                                                             24
