Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ROBUST P OLICY O PTIMIZATION IN D EEP R EINFORCE -
MENT L EARNING

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Entropy can play an essential role in policy optimization by selecting the stochas-
         tic policy, which eventually helps better explore the environment in reinforcement
         learning (RL). A proper balance between exploration and exploitation is challeng-
         ing and might depend on the particular RL task. However, the stochasticity of-
         ten reduces as the training progresses; thus, the policy becomes less exploratory.
         Therefore, in many cases, the policy can converge to sub-optimal due to a lack
         of representative data during training. Moreover, this issue can even be severe in
         high-dimensional environments. This paper investigates whether keeping a certain
         entropy threshold throughout training can help better policy learning. In particu-
         lar, we propose an algorithm Robust Policy Optimization (RPO), which leverages
         a perturbed Gaussian distribution to encourage high-entropy actions. We evalu-
         ated our methods on various continuous control tasks from DeepMind Control,
         OpenAI Gym, Pybullet, and IsaacGym. We observed that in many settings, RPO
         increases the policy entropy early in training and then maintains a certain level
         of entropy throughout the training period. Eventually, our agent RPO shows con-
         sistently improved performance compared to PPO and other techniques such as
         data augmentation and entropy regularization. Furthermore, in several settings,
         our method stays robust in performance, while other baseline mechanisms fail to
         improve and even worsen the performance.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Exploration in a high-dimensional environment is challenging due to the online nature of the task.
In a reinforcement learning (RL) setup, the agent is responsible for collecting high-quality data. The
agent has to decide on taking action which maximizes future return. In deep reinforcement learning,
the policy and value functions are often represented as neural networks due to their flexibility in
representing complex functions with continuous action space. If explored well, the learned policy
will more likely lead to better data collection and, thus, better policy. However, in high-dimensional
observation space, the possible trajectories are larger; thus, having representative data is challenging.
Moreover, it has been observed that deep RL exhibit the primacy bias, where the agent has the
tendency to rely heavily on the earlier interaction and might ignore helpful interaction at the later
part of the training (Nikishin et al., 2022).
Maintaining stochasticity in policy is considered beneficial, as it can encourage exploration (Mnih
et al., 2016; Ahmed et al., 2019). Entropy is the randomness of the actions, which is expected to
go down as the training progress, and thus the policy becomes less stochastic. However, lack of
stochasticity might hamper the exploration, especially in the large dimensional environment (high
state and action spaces), as the policy can prematurely converge to a suboptimal policy. This scenario
might result in low-quality data for agent training. In this paper, we are interested in observing
the effect when we maintain a certain level of entropy throughout the training and thus encourage
exploration.
We focus on a policy gradient-based approach with continuous action spaces. A common practice
(Schulman et al., 2017; 2015) is to represent continuous action as the Gaussian distribution and learn
the parameters (µ, and σ) conditioned on the state. The policy can be represented as a neural net-
work, and it takes the state as input and outputs the one Gaussian parameters per action dimension.
Then the final action is chosen as a sample from this distribution. This process inherently introduces


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: [Left] Standard Gaussian and corresponding Perturb Gaussian distribution (ours). We
observe that the probability density is less centered around the mean in our distribution. [Middle]
Policy entropy at different timesteps of training in DeepMind Hopper Hop Environment. Similar
patterns are observed for other evaluated environments. The PPO agent who uses Standard Gaussian
starts from a particular entropy and becomes less stochastic as the training progresses and reduces
the policy entropy. In contrast, our agent RPO uses our perturbed Gaussian distribution, increases the
entropy at the initial timestep, and then maintains a certain level of entropy throughout the training.
[Right] Our agent RPO shows over 3x performance improvement in normalized return compared to
the base PPO agent on 12 DeepMind control environments. The results are averaged over 10 random
seed runs.



randomness in action as every time it samples action for the same state, the action value might dif-
fer. Though, in expectation, the action value is the same as the mean of the distribution, this process
introduces some randomness in the learning process. However, as time progresses, the randomness
might reduce, and the policy becomes less stochastic.
We first notice that when this method is used to train a PPO-based agent, the entropy of the policy
starts to decline as the training progresses, as in Figure 1, even when the return performance is not
good. Then we pose the question; what if the agent keeps the policy stochastic or entropy throughout
the training? The goal is to enable the agent to keep exploring even when it achieves a certain
level of learning. This process might help, especially in high-dimensional environments where the
state and action spaces often remain unexplored. We developed an algorithm called Robust Policy
Optimization (RPO), which maintains stochasticity throughout the training. We notice a consistent
improvement in the performance of our method in many continuous control environments compared
to standard PPO.
Seeing the data augmentation through the lens of entropy, we observe that empirically, it can help
the policy achieve a higher entropy than without data augmentation. However, this process often
requires prior knowledge about the environments and a preprocessing step of the agent experience.
Moreover, such methods might result in an uncontrolled increase in action entropy, eventually ham-
pering the return performance (Raileanu et al., 2020; Rahman & Xue, 2022). Another way to control
entropy is to use an entropy regularizer (Mnih et al., 2016; Ahmed et al., 2019), which often shows
beneficial effects. However, it has been observed that increasing entropy in such a way has little
effect in specific environments (Andrychowicz et al., 2020). These results show difficulty in setting
proper entropy throughout the agent’s training.
To this end, in this paper, we propose a mechanism for maintaining entropy throughout the training.
We propose to use a new distribution to represent continuous action instead of standard Gaussian.
The policy network output is still the Gaussian distribution’s mean and standard deviation in our
setup. However, we add a random perturbation on the mean before taking an action sample. In
particular, we add a random value z ∼ U (−α, α) to the mean µ to get a perturbed mean µ′ = µ + z.
Finally, the action is taken from the perturbed Gaussian distribution a ∼ N (µ′ , σ). The resulting
distribution is shown in Figure 1. We see that the resulting distribution becomes flatter than the
standard Gaussian. Thus the sample spread more around the center of the mean than standard
Gaussian, whose samples are more concentrated toward means. The uniform random number does
not depend on states and policy parameters and thus can help the agent to maintain a certain level
of stochasticity throughout the training process. We name our approach Robust Policy Optimization
(RPO) and compare it with the standard PPO algorithm and other entropy-controlled methods such
as data augmentation and entropy regularization.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We evaluated our method in several environments from DeepMind Control (Tunyasuvunakool et al.,
2020), OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016), PyBullet (Coumans & Bai, 2016–2021), and Nvidia
IsaacGym (Makoviychuk et al., 2021). We observed that our method RPO performs consistently
better than PPO, and the performance improvement shows larger in high-dimensional environments.
Moreover, RPO outperform two data augmentation-based method: RAD (Laskin et al., 2020) and
DRAC (Raileanu et al., 2020). In addition to that, our method is simple and free from the type of
data augmentation assumption and data preprocessing; still, our method achieves better empirical
performance than the data augmentation-based methods in many environments.
Further, we tested our method against the entropy regularization method, where the entropy of a
policy is controlled by a coefficient weight of the policy entropy. Empirically, we observe that
our method RPO performs better in most environments, and some choice of coefficient eventually
leads to worse performance. Moreover, we observe that even when the agent is trained for a large
simulation experience, the performance might not stay consistent. In particular, in IsaacGym envi-
ronments, the agent has access to a large sample due to the high-performing simulation on GPU.
This abundance of data may not necessarily improve or maintain the performance. In the classic
CartPole environment, we observe that PPO agents quickly achieve a certain performance; however,
it then fails to maintain it, and the performance quickly drops as we train for more. Similar results
have been found in the OpenAI BipedalWalker environments. On the other hand, our method RPO
shows robustness to more data and keeps improving or maintaining a similar performance as we
keep training agents for more data.
In summary, we make the following contributions:

       • We investigate whether keeping the policy stochastic throughout the training is beneficial
         for the RL training.
       • We propose an algorithm, Robust Policy Optimization (RPO), that uses a perturbed Gaus-
         sian distribution to represent actions and is empirically shown to maintain a certain level of
         policy entropy throughout the training.
       • We evaluate our method on 18 tasks from four RL benchmarks. Evaluation results
         show that our method RPO consistently performs better than standard PPO, two data
         argumentation-based methods RAD and DRAC, and entropy regularization.

2   P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM S ETTINGS
Markov Decision Process (MDP). An MDP is defined as a tuple M = (S, A, P, R). Here an
agent interacts with the environment and take an action at ∈ A at a discrete timestep t when at state
st ∈ S. After that the environment moves to next state st+1 ∈ S based on the dynamic transition
probabilities P(st+1 |st , at ) and the agent recieves a reward rt according to the reward function R.
Reinforcement Learning In a reinforcement learning framework, the agent interacts with the MDP,
and the agent’s goal is to learn a policy π ∈ Π that maximizes cumulative reward, where Π is the set
of all possible policies. Given a state, the agent prescribes an action according to the policy π, and
an optimal policy π ∗ ∈ Π has the highest cumulative rewards.
Policy Gradient. The policy gradient method is a class of reinforcement learning algorithms where
the objective is formulated to optimize the cumulative future return directly. In a deep reinforcement
learning setup, the policy can be represented as a neural network that takes the state as input and out-
put actions. The objective of this policy network is to optimize for cumulative rewards. In this paper,
we focus on a particular policy gradient method, Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman
et al., 2017), which is similar to Natural Policy Gradient (Kakade, 2001) and Trust Region Policy
Optimization (TRPO) (Schulman et al., 2015). The following is the objective of the PPO:
                                                πθ (at |st )
                                  Lπ = −Et [                   A(st , at )]                         (1)
                                               πθold (at |st )
, where πθ (at |st ) is the probability of choosing action at given state st at timestep t using the
current policy parameterized by θ. On the other hand, the πθold (at |st ) refer to the probabilities of
using an old policy parameterized by previous parameter values θold . The advantage A(st , at ) is an
estimation which is the advantage of taking action at at st compared to average return from that state.


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In PPO, a surrogate objective is optimized by applying clipping on the current and old policy ratio on
equation 1. In the case of the discrete action, the output is often used as the categorical distribution,
where the dimension is the number of actions. On the other hand, in continuous action cases,
the output can correspond to parameters of Gaussian distribution, where each action dimension is
represented by mean and variance. Finally, the action is taken as the sample from this Gaussian
distribution. In this paper, we mainly focus on the continuous action case and assume the Gaussian
distribution for action.
Entropy Measure Entropy is a measure of uncertainty in the random variable. In the context of our
discussion, we measure the entropy of a policy from the action distribution it produces given a state.
The more entropic an action distribution is, the more stochastic the decision would be as the final
action is eventually a sample from the output action distribution. This measure can be seen as the
policy’s stochasticity, and higher entropy distribution allows agents to explore the state space more.
Thus, entropy can play a role in controlling the amount of exploration the agent performs during
learning. In this paper, we focus on the entropy measure and refer to the stochasticity of policy by
this measure.


3   ROBUST P OLICY O PTIMIZATION (RPO)


Exploration at the start of training can help an agent to collect diverse and representative data. How-
ever, as time progresses, the agent might start to reduce the exploration and try to be more certain
about a state. In standard PPO, we observe that the agent shows more randomness in action at
the beginning (see Figure 1), and it becomes smaller as the training progresses. We measure this
randomness in the form of entropy, which indicates the randomness of the actions taken. In the con-
tinuous case, a practical approach is to represent the action as a parameter of Gaussian distribution.
The entropy of this distribution represents the amount of randomness in action, which also indicates
how much the policy can explore new states.
However, in Gaussian distribution, the samples are concentrated toward the mean; thus, it can limit
the exploration in some RL environments. This paper presents an alternative to this Gaussian distri-
bution and proposes a new distribution that accounts for higher entropy than the standard Gaussian.
The goal is to keep the entropy higher or at some levels throughout the agent training. In partic-
ular, we propose to combine Gaussian Distribution and Uniform distribution. At each timestep of
the algorithm training, we perturb the mean µ of Gaussian N (µ, σ) by adding a random number
drawn from the Uniform U(−α, α) and get the perturbed mean µ′ . Then the sample for action is
taken from the new distribution N (µ′ , σ). In this setup, the Gaussian parameters still depend on the
state, similar to the standard setup. However, the Uniform distribution does not depend on the states.
Thus as training progresses, the standard Gaussian distribution can be less entropic as the policy op-
timizes to be more confident in particular states. However, the state-independent perturbation using
the Uniform distribution still enables the policy to maintain stochasticity.
Figure 1 shows the diagram of the resulting Gaussian distributions. This diagram is generated by
first sampling data from a Gaussian distribution with mean µ = 0.0 and standard deviation σ = 1.0
and then corresponding perturbed mean µ′ = µ + z and standard deviation σ = 1.0, where z ∼
U(−3.0, 3.0). We see that the values are less centered around the mean for our Perturb Gaussian
than the standard. Therefore, samples from our proposed distribution should have more entropy than
the standard Gaussian.
Algorithms 1 shows the details procedure of our RPO method. The agent first collects experience
trajectory data using the current policy and stores it in a buffer D (lines 2 to 10). Next, the agent
uses the standard Gaussian to sample the action in these interaction steps (line 6). Finally, these
experience data are used to update the policy, optimizing for policy parameter θ. In this case, given
a state st , the policy network outputs µ and σ for each action. Then the µ is perturbed by adding a
value z, which samples from a Uniform distribution U(−α, α) (lines 13 and 14 in blue). After that,
the probability is computed from the new distribution N (µ′ , σ), which is eventually used to calculate
action log probabilities that are used for computing loss Lπ . In the case of the α hyperparameter,
we report results using α = 0.5 unless otherwise specified.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Robust Policy Optimization (RPO)
 1: Initialize parameter vectors θ for policy network.
 2: for each iteration do
 3:    D ← {}
 4:    for each environment step do
 5:       µ, σ ← πθ (.|st )
 6:       at ∼ N (µ, σ)
 7:       st+1 ∼ P (st+1 |st , at )
 8:       rt ∼ R(st , at )
 9:       D ← D ∪ {(st , at , rt , st+1 )}
10:    end for
11:    for each observation st in D do
12:       µ, σ ← πθ (.|st )
13:       z ∼ U(−α, α)
14:       µ′ ← µ + z
15:       prob ← N (µ′ , σ)
16:       logp ← prob(at )
17:       Compute RL loss Lπ using logp, at , and value function.
18:    end for
19: end for


4     E XPERIMENTS

4.1   S ETUP

Environments We conducted experiments on continuous control task from four reinforcement
learning benchmarks: DeepMind Control (Tunyasuvunakool et al., 2020), OpenAI Gym (Brock-
man et al., 2016), PyBullet (Coumans & Bai, 2016–2021), and Nvidia IsaacGym (Makoviychuk
et al., 2021). These benchmarks contain diverse environments with many different tasks, from low
to high-dimensional environments (observations and actions space). Thus our evaluation contains
a diverse set of tasks with various difficulties. The IsaacGym contains environments that run in
GPU, thus enabling fast simulation, which eventually helps collect a large amount of simulation
experience quickly, and faster RL training with GPU enables deep reinforcement learning models.
Baselines We compare our method RPO with the PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) algorithm. Here
our method RPO uses the perturbed Gaussian distribution to represent the action output from the
policy network, as described in Section 3. In contrast, the PPO uses standard Gaussian distribution
to represent its action output. Further, we observe that the data augmentation method can help in-
crease the policy’s entropy by often randomly perturbing observations. This process might improve
the performance where higher entropy is preferred. Thus, we compare our method with two data
augmentation-based methods: RAD (Laskin et al., 2020), and DRAC (Raileanu et al., 2020). Here,
The pure data augmentation baseline RAD uses data processing before passing it to the agent, and
the DRAC uses data augmentation to regularize the value and policy network. Both of these data
augmentation methods use PPO as their base RL policy. Another common approach to increase
entropy is to use the Entropy Regularization in the RL objective. A coefficient determines how
much weight the policy would give to the entropy. We observe that various weighting might result
in different levels of entropy increment. We use the entropy coefficient 0.0, 0.01, 0.05, 0.5, 1.0,
and 10.0 and compare their performance in entropy and, in return, with our algorithm’s RPO. Note
that our method does not introduce any additional hyper-parameters and does not use the entropy
coefficient hyper-parameters. The implementation details of our algorithm and baselines are in the
Appendix. To account for the stochasticity in the environment and policy, we run each experiment
several times and report the mean and standard deviation. Unless otherwise specified, we run each
experiment with 10 random seeds.

4.2   R ESULTS

We compare the return performance of our method with baselines and show their entropy to contrast
the results with the entropy of the policy.


                                                5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Results on DeepMind Control Environments. PPO agent fails to learn any useful behavior
and thus results in low episodic return in some environments (humanoid stand, humanoid run, and
hopper hop). Overall, our method RPO performs better and achieves a much higher episodic return.
The RPO also shows a better mean return than the PPO in other environments. In many settings,
PPO agents stop improving their performance after around 2M timestep while RPO consistently
improves over the entire training time.


Comparison with PPO This evaluation is the direct form of comparison where no method uses any
aid (such as data augmentation or entropy regularization) in the entropy value. Figure 2 shows results
comparison on DeepMind Control Environments. Results on more environments are in Appendix
Figure 11. The entropy comparison is given in the Appendix Figure 12. In most scenarios, our
method RPO shows consistent performance improvement in these environments compared to the
PPO. In some environments, such as humanoid stand, humanoid run, and hopper hop, the PPO
agent fails to learn any useful behavior and thus results in low episodic return. In contrast, our
method RPO shows better performance and achieves a much higher episodic return. The RPO
also shows a better mean return than the PPO in other environments. In many settings, such as in
quadruped (walk, run, and escape), walker (stand, walk, run), fish swim, acrobot swingup, the PPO
agents stop improving the performance after around 2M timestep. In contrast, our agent RPO shows
consistent improvement over time of the training. This performance gain might be due to the proper
management of policy entropy, as in our setup, the agent is encouraged to keep exploring as the
training progress. On the other hand, the PPO agent might settle in a sub-optimal performance as
the policy entropy, in this case, decreases as the agent trains for more timesteps. These results show
the effectiveness of our method in diverse control tasks with varying complexity.
Results of OpenAI Gym environments: Pendulum and BipedalWalker are in Figure 3. Overall, our
method, RPO, performs better compared to the PPO. In Pendulum environments, the PPO agent
fails to learn any useful behavior in this setup. In contrast, RPO consistently learns with the increase
in timestep and eventually learns the task. We see the policy entropy of RPO increases initially
and eventually remains at a certain threshold, which might help the policy to stay exploratory and
collect more data. In contrast, the PPO policy entropy decreases over time, and thus eventually, the
performance remains the same, and the policy stops learning. This scenario might contribute to the
bad performance of the PPO.
In the BipedalWalker environment, we see that both PPO and RPO learn up to a certain reward
quickly. However, as we keep training both policies, we observe that after a certain period, the
PPO’s performance drops and even starts to become worse. In contrast, the RPO stays robust as we
train for more and eventually keep improving the performance. These results show the robustness
of our method when ample train time is available. The entropy plot shows a similar pattern, as PPO
decreases entropy over time, and RPO keeps the entropy at a certain threshold.
Figure 4 shows results comparison on PyBullet environments: Ant, and Minituar. We observe that
our method RPO performs better than the PPO in the Ant environment. In the Minitaur environment,
PPO quickly (at around 2M) learns up to a certain reward and remains on the same performance as
time progresses. In contrast, RPO starts from a lower performance, eventually surpassing the PPO’s
performance as time progresses. These results show the robustness of consistently improving the


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Results on OpenAI Gym Environments. The PPO agent fails to learn any useful behavior
in the Pendulum environment. In contrast, RPO consistently learns with the increase in timestep
and eventually achieves higher scores. The entropy of RPO policy increases initially and eventually
remains at a certain threshold. In contrast, the PPO policy entropy decreases over time. In Bipedal-
Walker, the PPO fails to progress after achieving a particular reward, ad eventually, the performance
degrades with more training. In contrast, our RPO agent consistently improves performance over
the entire training time.


Figure 4: Results on PyBullet Environments. Our method RPO consistently performs better than
the PPO in the Ant environment. On the other hand, in the Minitaur environment, PPO quickly
learns up to a particular reward and remains on the same performance as time progresses while RPO
surpasses the PPO’s performance.


Figure 5: Results on IsaacGym Environments. In the Cartpole environment, the performance of PPO
started to degrade over time, and the policy entropy kept decreasing. In contrast, our RPO agent
keeps improving the performance over the entire training time. These results show the robustness of
our method RPO over PPO even when an abundance of simulation is available. In the BallBalance
environment, our method RPO achieves a slight performance improvement compared to PPO.


policy of the RPO method. The entropy pattern remains the same in both cases; PPO reduces entropy
while RPO keeps the entropy at a certain threshold which it learns automatically in an environment.
Figure 5 shows results comparison on IsaacGym environments: Cartpole, and BallBalance. In this
setup, we run the simulation up to 100M timesteps which take around 30 minutes for each run in
each environment in a Quadro RTX 4000 GPU. We see that for Cartpole, both PPO and RPO learn
the reward quickly, around 450. However, as we kept training for a long, the performance of PPO
started to degrade over time, and the policy entropy kept decreasing. On the other hand, our RPO
agent keeps improving the performance; notably, the performance never degrades over time. The
policy entropy shows that the entropy remains at a threshold. This exploratory nature of RPO’s
policy might help keep learning and get better rewards. These results show the robustness of our
method RPO over PPO even when an abundance of simulation is available. Interestingly, more
simulation data might not always be good for RL agents. In our setup, the PPO even suffers from
further training in the Cartpole environment. In the BallBalance environment (results are averaged
over 3 random seed runs), our method RPO achieves a slight performance improvement over PPO.
Overall, our method RPO performs better than the PPO in the two IsaacGym environments.


                                                 7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Result comparison with data augmentation on DeepMind control environments. Our
method RPO performs better in mean episodic return in most environments than PPO and other
data augmentation baselines RAD and DRAC. Moreover, in some environments, the data augmen-
tation baselines worsen the performance compared to the base PPO. The results are after training
the agent for 8M timesteps. The mean and standard deviations are over 10 seed runs.
                       Env              PPO           RAD-PPO         DRAC-PPO         RPO (ours)
                acrobot swingup      23.93 ±6.0      13.41 ±9.84      21.32 ±13.17     40.46 ±4.01
                    fish swim        87.39 ±8.0      81.53 ±6.53       87.5 ±7.74     119.42 ±38.46
                 humanoid stand      6.06 ±0.17       6.14 ±0.37      37.58 ±66.09     55.22 ±35.34
                  humanoid run       1.55 ±1.59        1.1 ±0.04      13.13 ±16.6      13.26 ±9.45
               pendulum swingup    518.65 ±279.73    23.04 ±17.08    320.51 ±319.76   699.79 ±32.97
                 quadruped walk    216.67 ±66.56    395.07 ±124.91   374.78 ±197.98   437.66 ±191.93
                  quadruped run    183.14 ±38.48    158.01 ±26.84    247.02 ±83.23    258.75 ±96.18
                quadruped escape     22.51 ±7.0       54.0 ±22.13     52.62 ±21.89     53.37 ±25.73
                   walker stand    346.55 ±104.87   558.92 ±131.09   361.99 ±93.44    652.7 ±202.47
                   walker walk     329.61 ±67.92    333.22 ±84.38    425.51 ±150.52   611.88 ±170.46
                    walker run      123.63 ±53.5    141.43 ±34.77    132.28 ±37.18    291.83 ±108.8


Figure 6: Comparison with Entropy Regularization. Sometimes (e.g., walker stand), the perfor-
mance improves with a proper setup of tuned coefficient value. In other cases, the improper coef-
ficient value often worsens the performance. In contrast, our method RPO consistently performs
better than PPO and the different entropy coefficient baselines.


Comparison with Data Augmentation. In results on all DeepMind Control environments are
shown in Table 1. Our method performs better in mean episodic return in most environments than
PPO and other data augmentation baselines RAD and DRAC.
The return and policy entropy curve are shown in Appendix, Figure 10. We observe that the data
augmentation slightly improved the base PPO algorithms, and the policy entropy shows higher than
the base PPO. However, our method RPO still maintains a better mean return than all the baselines.
The entropy of our method shows an increase at the initial timestep of the training. However, it
eventually becomes stable at a particular value. The data augmentation method, especially RAD,
shows an increase in entropy throughout the training process. However, this increase does not trans-
late to the return performance. Moreover, data augmentation assumes some prior knowledge about
the environment observation, and selecting a suitable data augmentation method requires domain
knowledge. Improper handling of the data augmentation may result in worsen performance.
In addition, the augmentation method poses an additional processing time which can contribute to
longer training time. In contrast, our method RPO does not require such domain knowledge and is
thus readily applicable to any RL environment. Moreover, in return performance, our method shows
better performance compared to the base PPO and these data augmentation methods.
Comparison with Entropy Regularization
Due to the variety in the environments, the entropy requirement might be different. Thus, improper
setting of the entropy coefficient might result in bad training performance. In the tested environ-
ments, we observe e that sometimes the performance improves with a proper setup of tuned coeffi-
cient value and often worsens the performance (in Figure 6). However, our method RPO consistently
performs better than PPO and the different entropy coefficient baselines. Importantly, our method
does not use these coefficient hyper-parameters and still consistently performs better in various en-
vironments, which shows our method’s robustness in various environment variability.
We observe that in some environments, the coefficient 0.01 improves the performance of standard
PPO with coefficient 0.0 while increasing the entropy. However, an increase in entropy to 0.05 and


                                                        8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Ablation on alpha values of the uniform distribution for RPO. An α value between 0.1 to
3 often results in better performance, while a large value often results in worse performance.


above results in an unbounded entropy increase. Thus, the performance worsens in most scenarios
where the agent fails to achieve a reasonable return. Results with all the coefficient variants in the
Appendix Figure 9. Overall, our method RPO achieves better performance in the evaluated environ-
ments in our setup. Moreover, our method does not use the entropy coefficient hyperparameter and
controls the entropy level automatically in each environment.
Ablation Study We conducted experiments on the α value ranges in the Uniform distribution. Fig-
ure 7 shows the return and policy comparison. We observe that the value of α affects the policy
entropy and, thus, return performance. A smaller value of α (e.g., 0.001) seems to behave similarly
to PPO, where policy entropy decreases over time, thus hampered performance. Higher entropy
values, such as 1000.0, make the policy somewhat random as the uniform distribution dominates
over the Gaussian distribution (as in Algorithm 1. This scenario keeps the entropy somewhat at a
constant level; thus, the performance is hampered. Overall, a value between 0.1 to 3 often results
in better performance. Due to overall performance advantage, in this paper, we report results with
α = 0.5 for all 18 environments. Learning curve for more environments are in Appendix Figure
13.


5   R ELATED W ORK

Since the inception of the practical policy optimization method PPO (TRPO and Natural Policy
Gradient), several studies have investigated different algorithmic components (Engstrom et al., 2019;
Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Ahmed et al., 2019; Ilyas et al., 2019). Entropy regularization enjoys
faster convergence and improves policy optimization (Williams & Peng, 1991; Mei et al., 2020;
Mnih et al., 2016; Ahmed et al., 2019). However, some empirical findings observe the difficulty in
setting proper entropy setup and observe no performance gain in many environments (Andrychowicz
et al., 2020). Gaussian distribution is commonly used to represent continuous action (Schulman
et al., 2015; 2017). Thus many follow-ups to implementation also use this Gaussian distribution
as s default setup (Huang et al., 2022; 2021). In contrast, in this paper, we propose perturbed
Gaussian distribution to represent the continuous action to maintain policy entropy. Furthermore, in
this paper, we showed the empirical advantage of our method in several benchmark environments
compared to the standard Gaussian-based method. Due to space limitations, we moved some related
work discussions to the Appendix.


6   C ONCLUSION

This paper investigates the effect of entropy in policy optimization-based reinforcement learning.
We design a method that, when applied to a policy network, can keep the entropy of the policy
to a certain threshold through training. Our approach uses a perturbed Gaussian distribution by a
random number sample from a uniform distribution to represent the policy. We observe that keep-
ing a certain entropy threshold throughout using our method can help better policy learning. Our
proposed algorithm Robust Policy Optimization (RPO), performs better than the standard PPO on
18 continuous control tasks from four RL benchmarks, DeepMind Control, OpenAI Gym, Pybullet,
and IsaacGym. Further, our method performs better in many settings than other approaches, en-
couraging higher entropy, such as data augmentation and entropy regularization. Overall, we show
our method’s effectiveness and robustness where standard PPO or other baseline methods fail to
maintain or even worsen the performance over time.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Zafarali Ahmed, Nicolas Le Roux, Mohammad Norouzi, and Dale Schuurmans. Understanding the
  impact of entropy on policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
  151–160. PMLR, 2019.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Anton Raichuk, Piotr Stańczyk, Manu Orsini, Sertan Girgin, Raphaël
 Marinier, Leonard Hussenot, Matthieu Geist, Olivier Pietquin, Marcin Michalski, et al. What
 matters for on-policy deep actor-critic methods? a large-scale study. In International conference
 on learning representations, 2020.
Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym, 2016.
Erwin Coumans and Yunfei Bai. Pybullet, a python module for physics simulation for games,
  robotics and machine learning. http://pybullet.org, 2016–2021.
Logan Engstrom, Andrew Ilyas, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
  Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. Implementation matters in deep rl: A case study on ppo and
  trpo. In International conference on learning representations, 2019.
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Chang Ye, and Jeff Braga. Cleanrl: High-quality
  single-file implementations of deep reinforcement learning algorithms. 2021.
Shengyi Huang, Rousslan Fernand Julien Dossa, Antonin Raffin, Anssi Kanervisto, and
  Weixun Wang.      The 37 implementation details of proximal policy optimization. In
  ICLR Blog Track, 2022. URL https://iclr-blog-track.github.io/2022/03/
  25/ppo-implementation-details/. https://iclr-blog-track.github.io/2022/03/25/ppo-
  implementation-details/.
Andrew Ilyas, Logan Engstrom, Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Firdaus Janoos, Larry
  Rudolph, and Aleksander Madry. A closer look at deep policy gradients. In International Con-
  ference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Sham M Kakade. A natural policy gradient. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  14, 2001.
Misha Laskin, Kimin Lee, Adam Stooke, Lerrel Pinto, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas. Rein-
 forcement learning with augmented data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
 33, 2020.
Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles Macklin,
  David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, and Gavriel State. Isaac gym: High
  performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning, 2021.
Jincheng Mei, Chenjun Xiao, Csaba Szepesvari, and Dale Schuurmans. On the global convergence
   rates of softmax policy gradient methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
   6820–6829. PMLR, 2020.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1928–1937. PMLR, 2016.
Evgenii Nikishin, Max Schwarzer, Pierluca D’Oro, Pierre-Luc Bacon, and Aaron Courville. The
  primacy bias in deep reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 16828–16847. PMLR, 2022.
Md Masudur Rahman and Yexiang Xue. Bootstrap state representation using style transfer for better
 generalization in deep reinforcement learning. In European Conference on Machine Learning and
 Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML-PKDD 2022), 2022.
Roberta Raileanu, Max Goldstein, Denis Yarats, Ilya Kostrikov, and Rob Fergus. Auto-
  matic data augmentation for generalization in deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.12862, 2020.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1889–1897. PMLR,
  2015.
John Schulman, Philipp Moritz, Sergey Levine, Michael Jordan, and Pieter Abbeel. High-
  dimensional continuous control using generalized advantage estimation. In Proceedings of the
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Saran Tunyasuvunakool, Alistair Muldal, Yotam Doron, Siqi Liu, Steven Bohez, Josh Merel,
  Tom Erez, Timothy Lillicrap, Nicolas Heess, and Yuval Tassa. dm control: Software and
  tasks for continuous control. Software Impacts, 6:100022, 2020. ISSN 2665-9638. doi:
  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpa.2020.100022. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S2665963820300099.
Ronald J Williams and Jing Peng. Function optimization using connectionist reinforcement learning
  algorithms. Connection Science, 3(3):241–268, 1991.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1   A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK

Another form of approach which adds entropy to the policy is data augmentation. We observe
that the policy entropy often increases when the data is augmented often by some form of random
processes. This improvement in entropy can eventually lead to better exploration in some environ-
ments. However, the type of data augmentation might be environment specific and thus requires
domain knowledge as to what kind of data augmentation can be applied. In contrast, to this method,
our method maintains an entropy threshold during entire policy learning. Moreover, we evaluated
our algorithm with two kinds of data augmentation-based methods RAD (Laskin et al., 2020) and
DRAC (Raileanu et al., 2020). Finally, we evaluate with an effective data augmentation approach
random amplitude modulation, which was found to be worked well in vector-based states set up.
Many other forms of improvement have been investigated in policy optimization, which results
in better empirical success, such as Generalized Advantage Estimation (Schulman et al., 2016),
Normalization of Advantages (Andrychowicz et al., 2020), and clipped policy and value objective
(Schulman et al., 2017; Engstrom et al., 2019; Andrychowicz et al., 2020). These improvements
eventually led to overall improvement and are now used in many standard implementations such as
(Huang et al., 2022; 2021). In our implementation, we leverage these implementation tricks when
possible. Thus our method works on top of these essential improvements. Furthermore, our method
is complementary to these approaches and thus can be used along with this method. In this paper, our
implementation of baselines also used these implementation tricks, which is for a fair comparison.

A.2   E XPERIMENTS

Implementation Details: Our algorithm and the baselines are based on the PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017) implementation available in (Huang et al., 2022; 2021). This implementation incorporated
many important advancements from existing literature in recent years on policy gradient (e.g., Or-
thogonal Initialization, GAE, Entropy Regularization). We refer reader to (Huang et al., 2022) for
further references. The pure data augmentation baseline RAD (Laskin et al., 2020) uses data process-
ing before passing it to the agent, and the DRAC (Raileanu et al., 2020) uses data augmentation to
regularize the loss of value and policy network. We experimented with vector-based states and used
random amplitude scaling proposed in RAD (Laskin et al., 2020) as a data augmentation method
for RAD and DRAC. In the random amplitude scaling, the state values are multiplied with random
values generated uniformly between a range α to β. We used the suggested (Laskin et al., 2020)
and better performing range α = 0.6 to β = 1.2 for all the experiments. Moreover, both RAD and
DRAC use PPO as their base algorithm. However, our RPO method does not use any form of data
augmentation.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         Table 2: Hyperparameters for the experiments.
                                     Description              Value
                               Number of rollout steps         2048
                                     Learning rate            3e − 4
                                Discount factor gamma          0.99
                                 Lambda for the GAE            0.95
                               Number of mini-batches           32
                              Epochs to update the policy       10
                              Advantages normalization         True
                             Surrogate clipping coefficient     0.2
                                    Clip value loss             Yes
                                 Value loss coefficient         0.5


We use the hyperparameters reported in the PPO implementation of continuous action spaces (Huang
et al., 2022; 2021), which incorporate best practices in the continuous control task. Furthermore,
to mitigate the effect of hyperparameters choice, we keep them the same for all the environments.
Further, we keep the same hyperparameters for all agents for a fair comparison. The common
hyperparameters can be found in Table 2.
Entropy Regularization The results comparison of RPO with entropy coefficient are in Figure 8
Data augmentation return curve and entropy: Figure 10 shows data augmentation return curve
and entropy comparison with RPO.
Results on DeepMind Control is in Figure 11.
Entropy Plot for DeepMind Control is in Figure 12.
Ablation Study Ablation on α values of RPO are shown in Figure 13.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            13
                     Figure 8: Comparison with Entropy Regularization.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                            14
       Figure 9: Comparison with Entropy Regularization on different coefficient values.
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Figure 10: Comparison with PPO and data augmentation RAD, and DRAC.


Figure 11: Results on DeepMind Control Environments. PPO agent fails to learn any useful behavior
and thus results in low episodic return in some environments (humanoid stand, humanoid run, and
hopper hop). Overall, our method RPO performs better and achieves a much higher episodic return.
The RPO also shows a better mean return than the PPO in other environments. In many settings,
PPO agents stop improving their performance after around 2M timestep while RPO consistently
improves over the entire training time.


                                               15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                   Figure 12: Results on DeepMind Control Environments.


           Figure 13: Ablation on alpha values of the uniform distribution for RPO.


                                              16
