Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P INK N OISE I S A LL YOU N EED : C OLORED N OISE
E XPLORATION IN D EEP R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
    Onno Eberhard1           Jakob Hollenstein2,1        Cristina Pinneri3,1       Georg Martius1
    1                                                                        2
      Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany          Universität Innsbruck
    3
      Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems
    {firstname.lastname}@tuebingen.mpg.de



                                             A BSTRACT

           In off-policy deep reinforcement learning with continuous action spaces, explo-
           ration is often implemented by injecting action noise into the action selection
           process. Popular algorithms based on stochastic policies, such as SAC or MPO,
           inject white noise by sampling actions from uncorrelated Gaussian distributions. In
           many tasks, however, white noise does not provide sufficient exploration, and tem-
           porally correlated noise is used instead. A common choice is Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
           (OU) noise, which is closely related to Brownian motion (red noise). Both red
           noise and white noise belong to the broad family of colored noise. In this work, we
           perform a comprehensive experimental evaluation on MPO and SAC to explore
           the effectiveness of other colors of noise as action noise. We find that pink noise,
           which is halfway between white and red noise, significantly outperforms white
           noise, OU noise, and other alternatives on a wide range of environments. Thus, we
           recommend it as the default choice for action noise in continuous control.


1      I NTRODUCTION

Exploration is vitally important in reinforcement learning (RL) to find unknown high reward regions
in the state space. This is especially challenging in continuous control settings, such as robotics,
because it is often necessary to coordinate behavior over many steps to reach a sufficiently different
state. The simplest exploration method is to use action noise, which adds small random perturbations
to the policy’s actions. In off-policy algorithms, where the exploratory behavioral policy does not
need to match the target policy, action noise may be drawn from any random process. If the policy
is deterministic, as in DDPG (Lillicrap et al., 2016) and TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018), action noise
is typically white noise (drawn from temporally uncorrelated Gaussian distributions) or Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck (OU) noise, and is added to the policy’s actions. In algorithms where the policy is
stochastic, such as SAC (Haarnoja et al., 2018) or MPO (Abdolmaleki et al., 2018), the action
sampling itself introduces randomness. As the sampling noise is typically uncorrelated over time,
these algorithms effectively employ a scale-modulated version of additive white noise, where the
noise scale varies for different states.

                                      White noise              Pink noise              OU noise
Figure 1: Trajectories of
pure noise agents on a
bounded integrator environ-
ment (Sec. 6). White action
noise (left) does not reach
far in this environment, and
it would not be able to col-
lect a sparse reward at the
edges: it explores locally.
OU noise (right) only explores globally and gets stuck at the edges. Pink noise (center) provides a
balance of local and global exploration, and covers the state space more uniformly than the other two.



                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In many cases, white noise exploration is not sufficient to reach relevant states. Both MPO and SAC
have severe problems with certain simple tasks like MountainCar because of inadequate exploration.
As in TD3 or DDPG, the off-policy nature of these algorithms makes it possible to replace the white
noise process, which is implicitly used for action sampling, by a different random process. The
effectiveness of temporal correlation in the action selection has been noted before (e.g. Osband et al.,
2016) and is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the exploration behavior of white noise (uncorrelated) is
compared to that of noises with intermediate (pink noise) and strong (OU noise) temporal correlation
on a simple integrator environment (more on this in Sec. 6). Using highly correlated noise, such
as OU noise, can yield sufficient exploration to deal with these hard cases, but it also introduces
a different problem: strongly off-policy trajectories. Too much exploration is not beneficial for
learning a good policy, as the on-policy state-visitation distribution must be covered during training
to make statistical learning possible. Thus, a typical approach is to use white noise by default, and
alternatives like OU noise only when necessary. In this work, our goal is to find a better strategy,
by considering noises with intermediate temporal correlation, in the hope that these work well both
on environments where white noise is enough, and on those which require increased exploration.
To this end, we investigate the effectiveness of colored noise as action noise in deep RL. Colored noise
is a general family of temporally correlated noise processes with a parameter β to control the corre-
lation strength. It generalizes white noise (β = 0) and Brownian motion (red noise, β = 2), which is
closely related to OU noise. We find that average performance across a broad range of environments
can be increased significantly by using colored action noise with intermediate temporal correlation
(0 < β < 2). In particular, we find pink noise (β = 1) to be an excellent default choice. Interestingly,
pink noise has also been observed in the movement of humans: the slight swaying of still-standing
subjects, as well as the temporal deviations of musicians from the beat, have both been measured to ex-
hibit temporal correlations in accord with pink noise (Duarte & Zatsiorsky, 2001; Hennig et al., 2011).
Our work contributes a comprehensive experimental evaluation of various action noise types on MPO
and SAC. We find that pink noise has not only the best average performance across our selection of
environments, but that in 80% of cases it is not outperformed by any other noise type. We also find
that pink noise performs on par with an oracle that tunes the noise type to an environment, while
white and OU noise perform at 50% and 25% between the worst noise type selection and the oracle,
respectively. To investigate whether there are even better noise strategies, we test a color-schedule that
goes from globally exploring red noise to locally exploring white noise over the course of training,
as well as a bandit method to automatically tune the noise color to maximize rollout returns. Both
methods, though they significantly improve average performance when compared to white and OU
noise, are nevertheless significantly outperformed by pink noise. In addition to the results of our
experiments, we attempt to explain why pink noise works so well as a default choice, by constructing
environments with simplified dynamics and analyzing the different behaviors of pink, white and OU
noise. Our recommendation is to switch from the current default of white noise to pink noise.


2    BACKGROUND & R ELATED W ORK

Reinforcement learning (RL) has achieved impressive results, particularly in the discrete control
setting, such as achieving human-level performance in Atari games with DQN (Mnih et al., 2015) or
mastering the game of Go (Silver et al., 2016) by using deep networks as function approximators.
In this paper, we are concerned with the continuous control setting, which is especially appropriate
in robotics. In continuous action spaces, it is typically intractable to choose actions by optimizing
a value function over the action space. This makes many deep RL methods designed for discrete
control, such as DQN, not applicable. Instead, researchers have developed policy search methods
(e.g. Williams, 1992; Silver et al., 2014), which directly parameterize a policy. These methods can be
divided into on-policy algorithms, such as TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) and PPO (Schulman et al.,
2017), and off-policy algorithms such as DDPG, TD3, SAC and MPO.
All these algorithms have to address the problem of exploration, which is fundamental to RL: in
order to improve policy performance, agents need to explore new behaviors while still learning to act
optimally. One idea to address exploration is to add a novelty bonus to the reward (e.g. Thrun, 1992).
In deep RL, this can be done by applying a bonus based on sample density (Tang et al., 2017) or
prediction error (Burda et al., 2019). Another method to encourage exploration is to take inspiration
from bandit methods like Thompson sampling (e.g. Russo et al., 2018), and act optimistically with


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


respect to the uncertainty in the Q-function (Osband et al., 2016). The simplest strategy, however, is to
randomly perturb either the policy parameters (Plappert et al., 2018; Mania et al., 2018), or the actions
themselves. This can be done by randomly sampling a function for each episode that deterministically
alters the action selection (Raffin & Stulp, 2020), by learning correlations between action dimensions
and state space dimensions to induce increasing excitation in the environment (Schumacher et al.,
2022), or by learning an action prior from task-agnostic data (Bagatella et al., 2022).
In this work, we consider the simplest and most common form of exploration in continuous control:
action noise. Action noise can be either explicitly added to the policy, or implicitly, by randomly
sampling actions from a stochastic policy. The most common form of action noise is white noise,
which typically comes from sampling from independent Gaussian distributions at every time step.
Apart from white action noise, Lillicrap et al. (2016) successfully used temporally correlated Ornstein-
Uhlenbeck noise, and Pinneri et al. (2020) achieved improvements in model predictive control by
utilizing colored noise. Inspired by this success, in this work we investigate the effectiveness of
colored action noise in the context of model-free RL, specifically on MPO and SAC.

3    M ETHOD
In this paper, we investigate exploration using action noise. In algorithms like DDPG and TD3, where
the learned policy µ is deterministic, action noise is simply added to the policy:
                                          at = µ(st ) + σεt ,                                        (1)
where ε1:T = (ε1 , . . . , εT ) is sampled from a random process, and σ is a scale parameter. If εt
is sampled independently at every time step, e.g. from a Gaussian distribution, then ε1:T is called
white noise (WN). This is the prevailing choice of action noise, though it is also common to use
time-correlated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise (ε1:T ∼ OUT ) (Uhlenbeck & Ornstein, 1930).
Algorithms which parameterize a stochastic policy, such as SAC and MPO, also use action noise. In
continuous action spaces, the most common policy distribution is a diagonal Gaussian, represented
by the functions µ(st ) and σ(st ): at ∼ N (µ(st ), diag(σ(st ))2 ). This can equivalently be written as
                                      at = µ(st ) + σ(st )      εt ,                                 (2)
where εt ∼ N (0, I). In this case, the action noise ε1:T is again Gaussian white noise, which is
scale-modulated by the function σ.
White noise is not correlated over time (cov[εt , εt0 ] = 0). In some environments, this leads to
very slow exploration, which in turn leads to inadequate state space coverage, leaving high reward
regions undiscovered. Thus, it is often beneficial to use action noise with temporal correlation
(cov[εt , εt0 ] > 0), like Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) noise. OU noise was recommended as the default
choice for DDPG, and has been shown to lead to a significant increase in state space coverage
(Hollenstein et al., 2022). OU noise is defined by the stochastic differential equation (SDE)
                                          ε̇t = −θεt + σηt ,                                         (3)
where ηt is a white noise process. If θ = 0, then this equation defines integrated white noise, also
called Brownian motion. Brownian motion is temporally correlated, but cannot be used as action
noise if generated in this way, because its variance increases unboundedly over time, violating the
action space limits. This problem is addressed by setting θ > 0 (a typical choice is θ = 0.15), which
bounds the variance. More details about OU noise and Brownian motion can be found in Sec. A.
A broad family of temporally correlated noises is given by colored noise, which generalizes both
white noise and Brownian motion (in this context called red noise).
Definition 1 (Colored noise). A stochastic process is called colored noise with color parameter β, if
                                                     2
signals ε(t) drawn from it have the property |ε̂(f )| ∝ f −β , where ε̂(f ) = F[ε(t)](f ) denotes the
                                                           2
Fourier transform of ε(t) (f is the frequency) and |ε̂(f )| is called the power spectral density (PSD).
The color parameter β controls the amount of temporal correlation in the signal. The PSDs of colored
noise with different β are shown in Fig. A.2. If β = 0, then the signal is uncorrelated, and the
PSD is flat, meaning that all frequencies are equally represented. This noise is called white noise in
analogy to light, where a signal with equal power on all visible frequencies is perceived as white.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: The environments we use: Pendulum, CartPole (balance + swingup tasks), Ball-In-Cup,
MountainCar, Hopper, Walker, Reacher, Cheetah, Door. See Sec. C for more details. Images partly
taken from Tassa et al. (2018) with permission.

Red noise (β = 2) is named so, because it has more weight on lower frequencies, which in light
corresponds to the red part of the spectrum. Gaussian colored noise with constant variance can be
efficiently generated, and the complete noise signal for an episode can be sampled at once, to be
used as action noise according to Equations (1) and (2). If generated like this, which we denote by
ε1:T ∼ CNT (β) (more details in Sec. A), white noise is identical to independently sampling from
a Gaussian distribution at every time step. Red noise (CNT (2)) is very similar to OU noise with
the default setting θ = 0.15, as both are essentially Brownian motion with bounded variance (see
Fig. A.2).1 By setting 0 < β < 2, colored noise allows us to search for a better default action noise
type with intermediate temporal correlation between white and red noise. One special case is pink
noise, which is defined by β = 1.

4         I S PINK NOISE ALL YOU NEED ?
Fujimoto et al. (2018) found that the type of action noise (white or OU) in general does not influence
the performance of TD3. In contrast to this, Hollenstein et al. (2022) found that the noise type
does have an influence, but that the impact of this choice, as well as which noise type is preferable,
depends entirely on the environment. We start by confirming these latter results2 , and compare white
and OU action noise with a selection of colored action noises (β ∈ [0, 2]), in terms of the achieved
performance. In all of our experiments we use MPO and SAC, relying on the implementations by
Pardo (2020) and Raffin et al. (2021), respectively. We found that both algorithms significantly
outperform TD3 across tasks, and thus only briefly discuss TD3 in Sec. B.1. Since the optimality
of an action noise type depends on the environment, we perform experiments on a diverse set of 10
different tasks taken from the DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018), OpenAI Gym (Brockman
et al., 2016), and the Adroit hand suite (Rajeswaran et al., 2018). These environments are shown in
Fig. 2 and are described in more detail in Sec. C. We report results on some additional tasks in Sec. G.
To evaluate the performance of a training procedure (which always lasts 106 environment interactions),
we run 5 evaluation rollouts every 104 interactions. We then report the performance as the mean
return of all these evaluation rollouts. Since this performance is related to the area under the learning
curve, it is a measure combining both the final policy performance, and the sample efficiency of
an algorithm. More detailed results, including learning curves and an analysis of the final policy
performance, can be found in Sections B.2 and H.

4.1       D OES THE NOISE TYPE MATTER ?

To assess the importance of the choice of action noise, we evaluate the performances achieved
by SAC and MPO when using white noise, OU noise and colored noise as action noise (where
      1
       Other settings of θ for OU noise, which are less similar to red noise, are discussed in Sec. A. In the main
text we only consider the default setting of θ = 0.15.
     2
       We also confirm the former results (see Sec. B.1), but find that colored noise (especially pink noise)
outperforms both white and OU noise on TD3.


                                                        4
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          0.5
                                                                              Environment     Best noise         p   Pink?


Average Performance
                                                                              Pendulum        2.0            0.01      7
                                                                              Cartpole (b.)   1.0 (Pink)       —       3
                          0.0                                                 Cartpole (s.)   1.0 (Pink)       —       3
                                                                              Ball-In-Cup     0.75           0.88      3
                                                                              MountainCar     2.0            0.59      3
                      −0.5                                                    Hopper          1.0 (Pink)       —       3
                                                                              Walker          0.5            0.36      3
                                                                              Reacher         White noise    0.02      7
                      −1.0
                                                                              Cheetah         0.75           0.62      3
                                WN 0.1 0.2 0.35 0.5 0.75 1.0 1.5 2.0 OU       Door            0.75           0.65      3
                                                  β
                                                                              Table 1: A Welch t-test reveals that the per-
 Figure 3: Bootstrap distributions for the expected                           formance difference between pink noise and
 average performance of MPO and SAC using dif-                                the best noise is only significant in two out
 ferent action noise types (details in Sec. B.2). High-                       of ten environments. The rightmost column
 lighted are white noise (WN), pink noise (β = 1),                            answers whether pink noise performs equally
 and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise (OU).                                           well as the best noise type.


 β ∈ {0.1, 0.2, 0.35, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.5, 2}), on the benchmark environments shown in Fig. 2. We repeat
 all learning runs with 20 different seeds, resulting in a total of 20 × 10 × 2 × 10 = 4000 experiments3 ,
 each one reporting a single scalar performance. To control for the influence of the algorithm and
 environment on the performance of a particular noise type, we group all results by algorithm and
 task, and normalize them to zero mean and unit variance. We then calculate a noise type’s average
 performance: the normalized performance of all runs using this noise type, averaged across algorithms
 and environments. In Fig. 3, bootstrap distributions for the expected average performances are shown,
 generated using the 20 random seeds available per task and algorithm (more details in Sec. B.2). It
 can be seen that the noise type indeed matters for performance. A clear preference for pink noise
 (β = 1) becomes visible, which considerably outperforms white noise and OU noise across tasks. In
 Sec. B.2, this performance difference can be seen on the corresponding learning curves, where we
 compare white, OU and pink noise.
 Achieving the best average performance across environments is not the same as being the best
 performing option on each individual environment. This begs the question of when pink noise (the
 best general option) also performs as good as an environment’s best noise type. We perform a Welch
 t-test for each environment to check whether the expected difference between the performances of
 pink noise and the task-specific best noise4 is significant. The results are listed in Table 1. Although
 pink noise only achieves the highest mean across seeds in three of the ten tasks, the statistical analysis
 reveals that the difference between pink noise and the best noise type is only significant in two out of
 ten cases. In other words, in the tested environments, pink noise performs on par with the best choice
 of noise type in 80% of cases! What about the two environments, Pendulum and Reacher, where pink
 noise is outperformed by other noise types? On Pendulum, pink noise, on average, achieves 83% of
 the performance of red noise (β = 2). In contrast, white noise only achieves 39% of the performance
 of red noise (OU performs similarly to red noise). On Reacher, pink noise achieves 99% of white
 noise’s performance, while OU noise achieves only 76%. So, even on the few environments where
 pink noise is outperformed significantly, it is clearly preferable as a default over white noise and OU
 noise. These results indicate that pink noise seems to be all you need.

 4.2                      I S PINK NOISE A GOOD DEFAULT ?

 The best performance on a given environment is always achieved with the task-specific best action
 noise type. It would be nice to always use this best noise type, but it is often unpractical to run a large
 hyperparameter search to find it, especially when including many possible colors β. It is common
 therefore, to stick to a “default” choice, which is typically white noise. In the previous section, we
 saw that pink noise is a better default choice than white noise, but it is still unclear whether this is
                      3
      seeds × tasks × algorithms × noise types (WN + OU + 8 colors)
                      4
      To compute the best noise type, we normalize out the contribution of the algorithm (similarly to the average
 performance) and take the mean performance over random seeds on each environment.


                                                                          5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                Average Performance                  Figure 4: Bootstrap distributions for the
                             −1.0       −0.5         0.0       0.5
                                                                     expected average performances of all
              Oracle                                                 methods we discuss in this paper. High-
           Pink noise                                                lighted are again white noise and OU
    Bandit (Sec. 5.2)                                                noise (the popular options), as well as
 Random (Sec. 5.2)
                                                                     pink noise (our suggestion). While OU
Schedule (Sec. 5.1)
                                                                     noise and white noise only achieve about
                                                                     25% and 50% of the possible perfor-
          White noise
                                                                     mance gain of an oracle method, pink
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
                                                                     noise performs equally to the oracle! Pink
          Anti-Oracle                                                noise is also not outperformed by a color-
                        0%     20%     40%     60%   80%   100%      scheduling method (Sec. 5.1), nor by a
                                    Performance Gain                 bandit algorithm (Sec. 5.2).


enough, or if a hyperparameter search might be needed for good performance. In this section, we will
analyze how much performance is lost by sticking to a default value of white noise, pink noise, or
OU noise, compared to using the task-specific best noise type.
We choose the task-specific best noise type via an “oracle” method, which can be thought of as a very
extensive grid search: an environment’s best noise type is selected by looking at the results of all
noise types, and choosing the best performing option across 10 seeds. By also doing an “anti-oracle”
experiment, which selects the worst noise type on each environment (i.e. the most unlucky pick of
noise types possible), we can define a new “performance gain” measure, which might be easier to
interpret than the average performance in the previous section.5 The performance gain of a noise
type specifies where its average performance falls between the anti-oracle’s performance (0%) and
the oracle’s performance (100%). Figure 4 presents the performance gains of using white noise,
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise and pink noise as a default for all environments.
By always sticking to Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise, only about 25% of the highest possible performance
gain is achieved, and the resulting performance would be closer to using the anti-oracle. By using
white noise instead, we already achieve a performance gain of over 50%. However, picking pink
noise does not appear to sacrifice any performance compared to the oracle!6 The gain achieved by
switching from white noise as the default to pink noise is both considerable and significant, and we
recommend switching to pink noise as the default action noise.

5         A LL THE COLORS OF THE RAINBOW
We have found that pink noise is the best default action noise over a broad range of environments.
There are still some environments, however, where pink noise is outperformed by other noise types,
specifically by white and red noise on the Reacher and Pendulum tasks, respectively. This indicates
that there may not exist a single noise type which performs best on all environments. However, this
consideration is only valid if the noise is kept constant over the course of training. If we instead try a
different approach, and choose the noise type separately for each rollout, we may find a strategy that
is outperformed nowhere. In this section we discuss two such non-constant methods, which differ in
the way a rollout’s noise type is selected: a color-schedule going from β = 2 to β = 0, and a bandit
approach with the intention of finding the optimal color for an environment.

5.1       I S COLOR - SCHEDULING BETTER THAN PINK NOISE ?

To find a more effective exploration method than pink noise, it is helpful to understand why learning
in the Pendulum and Reacher environments works better with other noise types. The Pendulum
environment is underactuated and requires a gradual build-up of momentum by slowly swinging back
and forth. Strongly correlated action noise, such as red noise, makes this behavior much more likely.
The Reacher task, on the other hand, has neither a particularly large state space, nor does it exhibit
      5
      The (anti-)oracle is evaluated on the 10 seeds not used for noise type selection to avoid sampling bias. We
repeat this by selecting (evaluating) once on the first (latter) 10 seeds, and once on the latter (first) 10 seeds.
    6
      It looks as if pink noise is even exceeding the oracle’s performance. This difference is not statistically
significant and is due to the oracle only having access to the 10 seeds not used for evaluation.


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



      Environment     P>S       P<S      Pink ≥ Schedule?       P>B       P<B      Pink ≥ Bandit?
      Pendulum                 <0.01              7                        0.73            3
      Cartpole (b.)   <0.01                       3             0.10                       3
      Cartpole (s.)    0.01                       3            <0.01                       3
      Ball-In-Cup     <0.01                       3             0.47                       3
      MountainCar                0.15             3             0.29                       3
      Hopper           0.05                       3             0.15                       3
      Walker          <0.01                       3                        0.28            3
      Reacher         <0.01                       3                        0.50            3
      Cheetah          0.05                       3               0.64                     3
      Door             0.15                       3               0.27                     3

Table 2: How does pink noise compare to a schedule and a bandit method? For each environment, we
perform a Welch t-test to test for inequality of the performances of pink noise vs. the schedule/bandit
method. The p-values are arranged to show which performance is higher. Pink noise performs
significantly better than the schedule on most environments. Compared to the bandit algorithm, pink
noise performs better overall, but on most environments the difference is not significant. In the “Pink
≥ ...?” columns, (3) means that pink noise does not perform significantly worse than the alternative.

under-actuation, such that white noise is well suited to explore the space. Here, temporally correlated
noise will only lead to off-policy trajectory data, thereby inhibiting learning. In general, strongly
correlated noise leads to more global exploration, while uncorrelated noise explores more locally.
We return to these ideas in Sec. 6, where we analyze the effects of high and low correlation on two
simple environments.
Our method should work well on both of these environments, and on environments which require a
mix of local and global exploration. Thus, we are looking for a strategy which balances local and
global exploration. A simple idea to do this is a color-schedule: start with highly correlated red noise
(β = 2) and then slowly decrease β to white noise (β = 0) over the course of training. The rationale
behind this strategy is that high-reward regions can be quickly discovered at the beginning of training
when β is large, while the trajectories get more on-policy over time, helping with environments like
Reacher. Indeed, a similar approach that schedules the action noise scale, has been shown to work
quite well (Hollenstein et al., 2022).
We implement a β-schedule, which linearly goes from β = 2 to β = 0, on MPO and SAC and repeat
the experiment with 20 random seeds on all environments. Bootstrap distributions for the expected
average performance across environments are shown in Fig. 4 (denoted by Schedule). The results
indicate that the schedule is generally better than OU and white noise, but does not outperform pink
noise. Indeed, pink noise is significantly better, as the confidence intervals do not overlap. If we take
a more detailed look at the individual environments (Table 2), we see that thanks to the additional
highly correlated noise, the schedule does outperform pink noise on the Pendulum environment, as
expected. However, in all other environments pink noise either significantly outperforms the schedule
or they perform on par, so our recommendation to use pink noise as a default remains.

5.2     I S BANDIT COLOR SELECTION BETTER THAN PINK NOISE ?

The results in the previous section indicate that, while changing the noise type over the training
process can improve performance, simply moving from globally exploring red noise to more locally
exploring white noise does not outperform pink noise. Instead of trying to find a different schedule to
fit all environments, in this section we consider an adaptive approach. By using a bandit algorithm to
select the action noise color for each rollout on the basis of past rollout returns, it might be possible
to find not only the general best noise for a given environment, but even to automatically adapt the
noise to different stages of training. The bandit algorithm we use is based on Thompson sampling,
the details are explained in Sec. D.
We use the rollout return itself as the bandit reward signal. The reasoning for this is that in environ-
ments where strong exploration is necessary (such as Pendulum and MountainCar), high return will
only be achieved by strongly correlated actions. On the other hand, if environments do not require
correlated actions, or a capable policy has been learned, the highest return should be achieved by the
action noise which least disturbs the policy, i.e. noise with a low correlation.


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As an additional baseline, we also perform an experiment where a color (β) is randomly selected
for each rollout.7 For both methods we use the same list of β values as in Sec. 4.1 (incl. β = 0),
and repeat the experiments with 20 random seeds. The results on MPO and SAC are shown in
Fig. 4 (marked with Bandit and Random) and Table 2. It can be seen that the bandit method is
again outperformed by pink noise. Indeed, a bootstrapping test yields a highly significant difference
in expected average performance across environments (p = 0.005). Looking at the results on the
individual tasks (Table 2), it seems like the bandit method does outperform pink noise on the two
problematic environments (Pendulum and Reacher), however, this difference is not significant. A
detailed comparison of the bandit and its random baseline can be found in Table D.1, which shows
that neither of the two methods significantly outperforms the other on any environment. This indicates
that, while there may be merit in changing the noise type over the training process, the rollout return
appears to contain too little information to effectively guide the noise type selection. Thus, our
recommendation to use pink noise as a default remains unchanged.

6       H OW DO ACTION NOISE AND ENVIRONMENT DYNAMICS INTERACT ?
Why is pink noise such a good default noise type? In Sec. 5.1, we briefly discussed the concepts of
local and global exploration, and hypothesized that the best exploration behavior provides a balance
of the two, such that high reward regions will be found, while trajectories are not too off-policy. To
analyze how different noise types behave, we will look at a simplified bounded integrator environment:
a velocity-controlled 2D particle moving in a box (more details in Sec. F.2). If we control this particle
purely by noise, we can analyze the exploration behavior in isolation of a policy. As a first test, we run
20 episodes of 1000 steps in an environment of size 250 × 250 with white noise, pink noise, and OU
noise (all with unit variance, x- and y-velocity controlled independently). The resulting trajectories
are shown in Fig. 1. It can be seen that pink noise provides the best combination of local and global
exploration: it reaches the edges (unlike white noise), but does not get stuck there (unlike OU noise).
A good mix of local and global exploration gives rise to a more uniform state space coverage, as
can be seen in Fig. 1. Thus, how well a noise type explores depends highly on the size of the
environment: if the environment was much smaller, white noise would be enough to cover the space
and pink noise trajectories would look similar to the OU trajectories shown here. On the other
hand, if the environment were bigger, then pink noise would not reach the edges and OU noise
would explore better. The uniformity of the state space coverage is measured by the entropy of the
state-visitation distribution. We estimate the entropy induced by a noise type using a histogram
density approximation: we partition the state space into a number of boxes (50 × 50 = 2500 boxes),
sample 104 trajectories, and count the number of sampled points in each box.
Figure 5 shows the entropy achieved by white noise, OU noise and pink noise as a function of the
environment size. The sizes are chosen to reflect the complete sensible range for episode lengths of
1000 steps, each with unit variance: from very small (50 × 50) to very large (2000 × 2000). Pink
noise is not “special” in the sense that it performs best on all environments, as we already saw in
the previous sections. However, it performs best on “medium scales”, as determined by the episode
length, and does not suffer from severe degradation in performance over the whole spectrum of
sensible environments. If we do not know where on this spectrum a given environment lies, then pink
noise is clearly a better default choice than white noise or OU noise!
Besides integrating actions, another common aspect of environment dynamics is oscillation. Oscil-
lation dynamics are dominant in the Pendulum and MountainCar environments8 , but also relevant
in other domains, like Ball-In-Cup, Cartpole, and Walker. To model these dynamics, we construct
a second environment: a simple harmonic oscillator. This system is a frictionless 1-dimensional phys-
ical setup, in which a mass m is attached to an ideal spring of stiffness k. The state space consists of
the mass’s position and velocity, and the action describes a force that is applied to the mass. The goal
is to maximize the energy in the oscillator system (which is equivalent to maximizing the amplitude),
similar to the MountainCar and Pendulum tasks, where this is necessary to collect the sparse reward.
The oscillator environment is parameterized by the resonant frequency f of the system, which is fixed
by setting the stiffness k = 4π 2 and the mass m = 1/f 2 (more details in Sec. F.1). Figure 5 shows

    7
        This method would be roughly equivalent to the bandit method if we provided no bandit reward signal.
    8
        See Sec. E for a simple method exploiting this property to solve MountainCar.


                                                        8
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                         Bounded Integrator Environment                                   Oscillator Environment
                 8


                                                          Energy [harmf ]
Entropy [nats]   6                                                          10−1



                 4       WN
                                                                            10−2
                         Pink
                         OU
                 2
                          104         105         106                              10−3      10−2           10−1
                                     Area                                                 Resonant frequency f

 Figure 5: Pink noise strikes a favorable middle ground between white noise and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
 noise on a wide range of environments. On both a bounded integrator environment parameterized
 by its size (left), and on a simple harmonic oscillator environment parameterized by its resonant
 frequency (right), it is much more general in terms of the range of parameters which yield good
 results, and performs well on the complete range of reasonable parameterizations. We argue that this
 quality is what makes it a good default.


 the average energy in the oscillator system (over 1000 episodes of 1000 steps each) as a function of
                                                                      1
 the resonant frequency f , which we vary from very low (f = 1000        , episode length = 1 period) to
                 1
 very high (f = 2 , Nyquist frequency), when driven by white noise, pink noise, and OU noise. The
 energy is measured relative to the average energy achieved by a sinusoidal excitation at the resonant
 frequency, denoted harmf . Even though this is a completely different setup to the bounded integrator,
 and we are using a very different performance metric, the two plots look remarkably similar. Again,
 this shows the power of pink noise as a default action noise: if we do not know the resonant frequency
 of the given environment, pink noise is the best choice.
 These two environments (bounded integrator and oscillator) are rather simplistic. However, the
 dynamics of many real systems undoubtedly contain parts which resemble oscillations (when a spring
 or pendulum is present), single or double integration (when velocities/steps or forces/torques are
 translated into positions) or contact dynamics (such as the box in the bounded integrator). If an
 environment’s dynamics are very complex, i.e. they contain many such individual parts, then the
 ideal action noise should score highly on each of these “sub-tasks”. However, if all these individual
 parts have different parameters (like the environment size or resonant frequency above), it stands
 to reason that the best single action noise would be the one which is general enough to play well
 with all parameterizations, i.e. pink noise. On the flip side, the average performance in Fig. 3 over all
 environments may be interpreted as the performance over a very complicated environment, with the
 sub-tasks being the “actual” environments. This might explain why we see this curve: all sub-tasks
 have very different parameters, and require different action noises (as seen in Table 1), but pink noise
 is general enough to work well on all sub-tasks, and thus easily outperforms noise types like white
 noise or OU noise, which are only good on very specific environments (see Fig. 5).

 7                   C ONCLUSION
 In this work we performed a comprehensive experimental evaluation of colored noise as action noise
 in deep reinforcement learning for continuous control. We compared a variety of colored noises
 with the standard choices of white noise and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise, and found that pink noise
 outperformed all other noise types when averaged across a selection of standard benchmarks. Pink
 noise is only significantly outperformed by other noise types on two out of ten environments, and
 overall performs equally well to an oracle selection of the noise type. Additionally, we compared
 pink noise to more sophisticated methods that change the noise type over the course of training: a
 color-schedule, a bandit method, and a random selection scheme. No method outperforms pink noise,
 and our recommendation is to use pink noise as the default action noise. Finally, we studied the
 behaviors of pure noise agents on two simplified environments: a bounded integrator and a harmonic
 oscillator. The results showed that pink noise is much more general with respect to the environment
 parameterization than white noise and OU noise, which sheds some light on why it performs so well
 as the default choice.


                                                              9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to thank Marco Bagatella, Sebastian Blaes, and Pierre Schumacher for helpful feedback on
earlier revisions of this text, and the Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems for supporting
Cristina Pinneri. Georg Martius is a member of the Machine Learning Cluster of Excellence, EXC
number 2064/1 – Project number 390727645. We acknowledge the support from the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) through the Tübingen AI Center (FKZ: 01IS18039B).

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
We submitted our code as supplementary material, and provide a polished version of it online (https:
//github.com/martius-lab/pink-noise-rl). In an effort to ensure reproducibility, we
took particular care in applying random seeds to all randomized parts of the algorithms, including the
environments, algorithm initialization and training, as well as the action noise signals. In Sec. C, we
provide details on the exact algorithms and environments we use. The hyperparameters for our own
methods are included in the code submission. Additionally, our main experiments were all repeated
with 20 different random seeds to eliminate statistical flukes.

R EFERENCES
Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Yuval Tassa, Rémi Munos, Nicolas Heess, and
  Martin A. Riedmiller. Maximum a posteriori policy optimisation. In 6th International Conference
  on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada, April 30 - May 3, 2018,
 Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2018. URL https://openreview.net/
  forum?id=S1ANxQW0b. 1

Marco Bagatella, Sammy Joe Christen, and Otmar Hilliges. SFP: State-free priors for exploration
 in off-policy reinforcement learning. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. URL
 https://openreview.net/forum?id=qYNfwFCX9a. 3

Greg Brockman, Vicki Cheung, Ludwig Pettersson, Jonas Schneider, John Schulman, Jie Tang, and
  Wojciech Zaremba. Openai gym. CoRR, abs/1606.01540, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/
  abs/1606.01540. 4, 20

Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In 7th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New
  Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019. OpenReview.net, 2019. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=H1lJJnR5Ym. 2

James W. Cooley and John W. Tukey. An algorithm for the machine calculation of complex fourier
  series. Mathematics of Computation, 19:297–301, 1965. 13

Marcos Duarte and Vladimir M. Zatsiorsky. Long-range correlations in human standing. Physics
 Letters A, 283(1):124–128, 2001. ISSN 0375-9601. URL https://www.sciencedirect.
 com/science/article/pii/S0375960101001888. 2

Scott Fujimoto, Herke van Hoof, and David Meger. Addressing function approximation error in
  actor-critic methods. In Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Sweden, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1582–1591. PMLR, 2018. URL http://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v80/fujimoto18a.html. 1, 4, 18

Aurélien Garivier and Eric Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for non-stationary bandit
  problems. arXiv: 0805.3415, 2008. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/0805.3415. 20

Tuomas Haarnoja, Aurick Zhou, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Soft actor-critic: Off-policy
  maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with a stochastic actor. In Proceedings of the 35th
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2018, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm, Swe-
  den, July 10-15, 2018, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1856–1865.
  PMLR, 2018. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/haarnoja18b.html. 1


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Holger Hennig, Ragnar Fleischmann, Anneke Fredebohm, York Hagmayer, Jan Nagler, Annette Witt,
  Fabian J. Theis, and Theo Geisel. The nature and perception of fluctuations in human musical
  rhythms. PLOS ONE, 6(10):1–7, 10 2011. URL https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
  pone.0026457. 2
Jakob Hollenstein, Sayantan Auddy, Matteo Saveriano, Erwan Renaudo, and Justus Piater. Action
  noise in off-policy deep reinforcement learning: Impact on exploration and performance. Transac-
  tions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. ISSN 2835-8856. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=NljBlZ6hmG. Survey Certification. 3, 4, 7
Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jonathan J. Hunt, Alexander Pritzel, Nicolas Heess, Tom Erez, Yuval Tassa,
  David Silver, and Daan Wierstra. Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In
  4th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico,
  May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.
  02971. 1, 3, 15
Horia Mania, Aurelia Guy, and Benjamin Recht.       Simple random search of static lin-
  ear policies is competitive for reinforcement learning.   In Advances in Neural In-
  formation Processing Systems 31: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
  cessing Systems 2018, NeurIPS 2018, December 3-8, 2018, Montréal, Canada, pp.
 1805–1814, 2018. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/
 7634ea65a4e6d9041cfd3f7de18e334a-Abstract.html. 3
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wierstra,
  Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nat.,
  518(7540):529–533, 2015. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236. 2
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped DQN. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 29: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems 2016, December 5-10, 2016, Barcelona, Spain, pp.
  4026–4034, 2016. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2016/hash/
  8d8818c8e140c64c743113f563cf750f-Abstract.html. 2, 3
Fabio Pardo. Tonic: A deep reinforcement learning library for fast prototyping and benchmarking.
  CoRR, abs/2011.07537, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.07537. 4, 15, 20
Cristina Pinneri, Shambhuraj Sawant, Sebastian Blaes, Jan Achterhold, Joerg Stueckler, Michal
  Rolínek, and Georg Martius. Sample-efficient cross-entropy method for real-time planning. In 4th
  Conference on Robot Learning, CoRL 2020, 16-18 November 2020, Virtual Event / Cambridge,
  MA, USA, volume 155 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1049–1065. PMLR,
  2020. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v155/pinneri21a.html. 3
Matthias Plappert, Rein Houthooft, Prafulla Dhariwal, Szymon Sidor, Richard Y. Chen, Xi Chen,
 Tamim Asfour, Pieter Abbeel, and Marcin Andrychowicz. Parameter space noise for exploration.
 In 6th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2018, Vancouver, BC, Canada,
 April 30 - May 3, 2018, Conference Track Proceedings. OpenReview.net, 2018. URL https:
 //openreview.net/forum?id=ByBAl2eAZ. 3
Antonin Raffin and Freek Stulp. Generalized state-dependent exploration for deep reinforcement
  learning in robotics. CoRR, abs/2005.05719, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.
  05719. 3
Antonin Raffin, Ashley Hill, Adam Gleave, Anssi Kanervisto, Maximilian Ernestus, and Noah
  Dormann. Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. J. Mach. Learn.
 Res., 22:268:1–268:8, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1364.html. 4,
 15, 20
Aravind Rajeswaran, Vikash Kumar, Abhishek Gupta, Giulia Vezzani, John Schulman, Emanuel
  Todorov, and Sergey Levine. Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforce-
  ment learning and demonstrations. In Robotics: Science and Systems XIV, Carnegie Mellon


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


  University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, June 26-30, 2018, 2018. URL http://www.
  roboticsproceedings.org/rss14/p49.html. 4, 20
Daniel Russo, Benjamin Van Roy, Abbas Kazerouni, Ian Osband, and Zheng Wen. A tutorial on
  thompson sampling. Found. Trends Mach. Learn., 11(1):1–96, 2018. URL https://doi.org/
  10.1561/2200000070. 2
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael I. Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2015, Lille, France, 6-11 July 2015, volume 37 of JMLR Workshop and Conference
  Proceedings, pp. 1889–1897. JMLR.org, 2015. URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v37/schulman15.html. 2
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. CoRR, abs/1707.06347, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1707.06347. 2
Pierre Schumacher, Daniel Häufle, Dieter Büchler, Syn Schmitt, and Georg Martius. Dep-rl: Embod-
  ied exploration for reinforcement learning in overactuated and musculoskeletal systems. arXiv:
  2206.00484, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.00484. 3
David Silver, Guy Lever, Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, and Martin A. Riedmiller.
  Deterministic policy gradient algorithms. In Proceedings of the 31th International Conference on
  Machine Learning, ICML 2014, Beijing, China, 21-26 June 2014, volume 32 of JMLR Workshop
  and Conference Proceedings, pp. 387–395. JMLR.org, 2014. URL http://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v32/silver14.html. 2
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, Laurent Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the
  game of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nat., 529(7587):484–489, 2016. URL
  https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16961. 2
Haoran Tang, Rein Houthooft, Davis Foote, Adam Stooke, Xi Chen, Yan Duan, John Schulman,
  Filip De Turck, and Pieter Abbeel. #exploration: A study of count-based exploration for deep
  reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual
  Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach,
  CA, USA, pp. 2753–2762, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/
  2017/hash/3a20f62a0af1aa152670bab3c602feed-Abstract.html. 2
Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Budden,
  Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy P. Lillicrap, and Martin A. Riedmiller.
  Deepmind control suite. CoRR, abs/1801.00690, 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
  1801.00690. 4, 20
Sebastian Thrun. Efficient exploration in reinforcement learning. Technical Report CMU-CS-92-102,
  Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, January 1992. 2
Jens Timmer and Michel Koenig. On generating power law noise. Astronomy and Astrophysics, 300:
  707, 1995. 13
G. E. Uhlenbeck and L. S. Ornstein. On the theory of the brownian motion. Phys. Rev., 36:823–841,
  Sep 1930. URL https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.36.823. 3
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforce-
  ment learning. Mach. Learn., 8:229–256, 1992. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
  BF00992696. 2


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                               Appendix


                                  Supplementary Material
                                P INK N OISE I S A LL YOU N EED


A     C OLORED N OISE AND O RNSTEIN -U HLENBECK N OISE

Colored noise has an interesting property that was not mentioned in the main text: integrating a
colored noise signal with parameter β again yields a colored noise signal, only with parameter
β + 2. This stems from the property of the Fourier transform that an integration in the time domain
corresponds to a multiplication with (i2πf )−1 in the frequency domain. Let v(t) be the original
                                  2                                Rt
colored noise signal with |v̂(f )| ∝ f −β . Then the PSD of x(t) = 0 v(τ ) dτ is
                                 Z t                2                   2
                      2                                     1                            2
              |x̂(f )| = F             v(τ ) dτ (f ) =         v̂(f )       ∝ f −2 |v̂(f )| ∝ f −(β+2) .          (4)
                                  0                       i2πf
From this, and the definition of white noise as colored noise with β = 0, it follows that Brownian
motion (integrated white noise) is also colored noise with parameter β = 2. In Fig. A.1, sampled
signals of most of the noise types we use in this paper are shown, and in Fig. A.2, we plot the power
spectral densities of some of these.

              White noise (β = 0)                         β = 0.5                         Pink noise (β = 1)

      2

      0
εt


     −2


                      β = 1.5                       Red nosie (β = 2)                    OU noise (θ = 0.15)

      2

      0
εt


     −2


          0     250       500    750     1000   0   250        500   750      1000   0    250    500       750   1000
                           t                                    t                                 t

Figure A.1: Sampled signals from various action noise processes with noise scale σ = 1. The
exception is OU noise, whose noise scale is adjusted such that var[εt ] = 1 (see discussion below).

We generate colored noise using the procedure described by Timmer & Koenig (1995), based
on the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) (Cooley & Tukey, 1965). This method is very efficient, as
it only requires sampling a Gaussian signal in the frequency space (where the PSD is shaped),
and then transforming it to the time domain via the FFT. In particular, this procedure is faster
than sampling an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck signal (using the most common procedure, which we
describe below). We use the colorednoise Python package (https://github.com/
felixpatzelt/colorednoise) to sample colored noise signals, and always sample signals
of the complete episode length (which we denote by ε1:T ∼ CNT (β)). The Python implementation
contained a bug, which among other things made it so the generated “white noise” was correlated, and
our fix of this bug is included as of version 2.1.0 of the package. Colored noise sampled according to
this procedure is stationary and Gaussian: the signals are marginally identical to standard Gaussian
distributions, i.e. p(εt ) = N (εt | 0, 1). The only difference to white noise (independent Gaussian
samples at every time step) is that they are temporally correlated: p(εt , εt0 ) 6= p(εt )p(εt0 ). This is
shown empirically on the example of pink noise in Fig. A.3.


                                                          13
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                                      Appendix


                                                  Colored Noise                                Brownian Motion, OU Noise, Red Noise
                                                                 White noise (β = 0)                                     Integrated WN
                                                                 Pink noise (β = 1)                                      OU noise (θ = 0.15)
                          104                                    Red noise (β = 2)                                       Red noise (β = 2)
                                                                 True f −β                                               True f −2
Power Spectral Density



                          102



                          100



                         10−2



                                           10−2             10−1                   100               10−2               10−1                100
                                                        f                                                         f

   Figure A.2: Left: The power law trends can be seen in the PSDs of sampled colored noise signals.
   Right: Brownian motion, here generated by integrating white noise sampled from N (0, 1), is
   compared to two related stationary noises: Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise (θ = 0.15), and red noise. The
   similarity between OU and red noise is visible. All signals are of length T = 1000.


  A.1                         O RNSTEIN -U HLENBECK NOISE GENERATION AND VARIANCE CORRECTION

  Also included in Fig. A.3 is Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) noise. It can be seen that OU noise starts out
  as non-stationary but quickly converges to the same marginal distribution p(εt ) = N (εt | 0, 1) as
  the other noise types. Important to note is that all these noise types are suitable for use as action
  noise only because they are (or quickly become) stationary, and hence their variance does not grow
  without bounds (contrary to that of Brownian motion). The property that all noise types have the same
  marginal distribution shows that our results are only due to a change in the temporal correlation of
  the action noise, not in the scale or shape of the distribution, as this is the same as of regular Gaussian
  white noise. To make sure that OU noise converges to a standard Gaussian marginal distribution we
  cannot use a noise scale of σ = 1, but have to correct it. Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise can be defined by
  the stochastic differential equation
                                                                 dxt = −θxt dt + σ dwt ,                                                      (5)


                              White noise (εt ∼ N (0, 1))    Pink noise (ε1:T ∼ CNT (1))                OU noise (ε1:T ∼ OUT )
                          3
                                                                                                                                        0.8
                          2
                                                                                                                                        0.6
                          1
                                                                                                                                              Density


                          0
   εt


                                                                                                                                        0.4
                         −1
                                                                                                                                        0.2
                         −2

                         −3                                                                                                             0
                              0    250   500      750   1000 0        250     500        750   1000 0       250   500    750    1000
                                           t                                   t                                   t

   Figure A.3: The colored noise we use as action noise has the same marginal distribution as indepen-
   dent Gaussian samples. We sampled 3 × 105 action noise signals of length T = 1000 from each of the
   following random processes: independent Gaussian samples (white noise, left), pink noise (center),
   Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise (right). At every time step t we show a histogram density estimate over
   action noise values εt . This shows that our results are only due to the increased temporal correlation
   of the action noise signals, as the marginal distributions remain unchanged from white noise.


                                                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                    Appendix


where wt is a Wiener process (integrated white noise with the property that w(t)−w(t0 ) ∼ N (0, t−t0 )
for any 0 ≤ t0 < t). This definition of Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise is equivalent to the Langevin
equation (3) in the main text, but is nicer to work with, as the white noise process ηt is ill-defined as
the derivative of the Wiener process. We sample OU noise signals by discretizing the equation above:
                                                                  √
                               x[t + ∆t] = x[t] − θx[t]∆t + σ ∆tε,                                    (6)
where ε ∼ N (0, 1). Denoting xt := x[t∆t] (with x−1 = 0) and εt ∼ N (0, 1) for all t ∈ N0 , it can
be seen that
                         √
                  x0 = σ ∆tε0
                                        √
                  x1 = x0 − θx0 ∆t + σ ∆tε1
                         √                     √
                      = σ ∆t(1 − θ∆t)ε0 + σ ∆tε1
                         √                      √                   √
                  x2 = σ ∆t(1 − θ∆t)2 ε0 + σ ∆t(1 − θ∆t)ε1 + σ ∆tε2
                      ..
                       . √ X    t
                   xt = σ ∆t      (1 − θ∆t)t−τ ετ .
                                  τ =0
Thus, as a sum of zero-mean Gaussian distributions, the marginal distribution is:
                                                  t
                                                                      !
                                    √           X
                                                               t−τ 2
                          p(xt ) = σ ∆tN 0,          ((1 − θ∆t) )
                                                     τ =0
                                                      t
                                                                         !
                                                     X
                                               2                    2τ
                                   =N      0, σ ∆t          (1 − θ∆t)        .
                                                     τ =0

The variance of this distribution is a geometric series which converges as t → ∞ if (1 − θ∆t)2 < 1,
which holds if 0 < θ∆t√< 2. It is interesting to note that if θ∆t = 1, then Eq. (6) yields white noise,
as it reduces to xt = σ ∆tε. On the other hand, if θ∆t = 0, the equation describes integrated white
noise (Brownian motion), which is known to have unbounded variance. If 1 < θ∆t < 2, then the
signal exhibits negative temporal correlation, which follows from Eq. (6). If the geometric series
converges, then the limiting variance is given by
                                                 σ 2 ∆t
                                                           .
                                            1 − (1 − θ∆t)2
We can thus ensure a standard Gaussian marginal distribution (in the limit) by setting the noise scale
to a “corrected” value of                   r
                                               1 − (1 − θ∆t)2
                                        σ=                       ,                                   (7)
                                                      ∆t
which is how we set the OU noise scale throughout the paper to make the comparison with white
and colored noise fair. In Fig. A.3, it can be seen that this limiting marginal distribution is reached
fairly quickly. In Sec. B, we also report Ornstein-Uhlenbeck results with the more common choice of
σ = 1, which we find to generally perform slightly worse (cf. Fig. B.1).
If the variance is corrected, then θ∆t is the only parameter of OU noise, such that e.g. (θ = 0.3, ∆t =
1) is equivalent to (θ = 30, ∆t = 0.01). This immediately follows by plugging Eq. (7) into Eq. (6),
yielding                                               p
                              xt+1 = (1 − θ∆t)xt + 1 − (1 − θ∆t)2 εt ,
which only contains the product θ∆t as a parameter. In this paper we thus set ∆t = 0.01 without
loss of generality. In the main text we also only consider OU noise as a replacement for strongly
correlated Brownian motion and always set θ = 0.15, as this is the most common default setting used
in practice.9 However, as noted in the discussion above, Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise can also exhibit
intermediate temporal correlation between white noise and Brownian motion, by setting 0 < θ < 100
(i.e. 0 < θ∆t < 1). This raises the question of whether there is a certain parameterization of OU
noise which is as general as pink noise.
    9
      We chose these values for ∆t and θ because these are the default choices the RL libraries we consider
(Raffin et al., 2021; Pardo, 2020). Lillicrap et al. (2016) also recommend θ = 0.15. If the variance is not
corrected (we report these experiments in Sec. B), then the choice of ∆t does make a difference.


                                                    15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                    Appendix


          Power Spectral Density         Bounded Integrator (H/nats)                   Oscillator (E/ harmf )
                                         8                                                                       102
                                  Pink                                                                   Pink
 103
                                                                                10−1                             101
      1                                  6
 10
                                                                                                                 100


                                                                                                                        θ
10−1                                                                            10−2
                                         4
                                                                                                                 10−1
10   −3

                                                   Pink
                                         2                                      10−3
                                                   4            5         6
                                                                                                                 10−2
               10   −3
                             10   −1
                                              10           10        10             10−3    10−2     10−1
                         f                                 Area                        Resonant frequency f

Figure A.4: Left: Power spectral densities of OU noise. OU noise interpolates between white noise
and Brownian motion by changing the cutoff frequency of a low-pass filter which filters white noise.
Center: Entropy achieved by OU noise of different θ on the bounded integrator environment. No
θ achieves a higher worst-case entropy than pink noise. Right: Energy achieved by OU noise of
different θ on the harmonic oscillator environment. No θ achieves a worst-case energy that comes
close to the one of pink noise.


A.2       G ENERALITY OF O RNSTEIN -U HLENBECK NOISE

The way in which OU noise interpolates between white noise and Brownian motion by choosing
θ ∈ (0, 100) is very different to colored noise with β ∈ (0, 2). We have shown (e.g. in Fig. A.2)
that colored noise with intermediate temporal correlation has a power-law power spectral density
with intermediate exponent (or slope in the log-log plot). On the other hand, Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
noise can be interpreted as a “leaky integration” of white noise, i.e. white noise passed through a
low-pass filter. How “leaky” this integrator is, is controlled by the parameter θ: if θ = 0 then the
integrator is ideal, resulting in integrated white noise (Brownian motion with diverging variance). If
θ = 100 (with ∆t = 0.01), then the integrator is “completely leaky” (an all-pass filter) and the white
noise passes through without being integrated. In terms of the power spectral density this change
in θ corresponds to shifting the cutoff frequency of the low-pass filter. This is shown on the left in
Fig. A.4 for θ ∈ {0.01, 0.03, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100}.
For an action noise type to be general (cf. Sec. 6), we want it to work well on all environments. In
the power spectral density plots, it can already be seen that pink noise distributes power over the
frequencies much more “generally” than Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise of any θ: At any given frequency
f , pink noise exhibits higher power than most values of θ, and all values of θ have lower power than
pink noise at most frequencies. Why this makes pink noise a more general action noise can be made
more concrete by revisiting the bounded integrator and harmonic oscillator environments introduced
in Sec. 6. The generality of a noise measures how robust it is to the choice or parameterization of the
environment: The most general noise type is the one which performs best on the most adversarial
environment parameterization. Thus, the most general θ for an environment parameterized by a
parameter α solves the following optimization problem:
                                                   max min perf(α, θ),
                                                       θ        α

where the performance metric perf(α, θ) should be normalized appropriately such that the maximum
performance attainable for different values of α is identical. This can be ensured by simply dividing
by the performance attained by the best θ for each value of α:
                                                        perf(α, θ)
                                               max min0              .                                                  (8)
                                                θ  α,θ perf(α, θ 0 )
                                                   |     {z        }
                                                                generality(θ)

This gives the worst-case performance of the most general noise in terms of the best possible
performance achievable by changing the noise type on this worst-case environment. By replacing the
expression perf(α, θ) by perf(α, pink) and removing the maximization over θ, we can also calculate
the generality of pink noise.


                                                                    16
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                        Appendix


 As discussed in Sec. 6, the performance of a noise type on the bounded integrator and oscillator
 environments is given by the achieved entropy and energy, respectively. This is shown for all values θ
 (as well as for pink noise) in Fig. A.4, where the parameterization parameter α is the environment size
 for the bounded integrator and the resonant frequency for the harmonic oscillator. It can already be
 seen that on both environments, for each choice of θ there exists a parameter α where the performance
 of θ is worse than the worst-case performance of pink noise. This can be quantified by calculating
 the generality of each θ and pink noise on these environments according to Eq. (8). On the bounded
 integrator, the maximum generality of OU noise is 77%, and on the oscillator environment the
 maximum generality is 9.1%. On both environments, the maximum is attained by θ = 3. Pink
 noise achieves generalities of 79% and 22% on the bounded integrator and oscillator environments,
 respectively. This gives further evidence that pink noise is a good default.

   B                   A DDITIONAL RESULTS

   B.1                   TD3

  In addition to MPO and SAC, we also performed all experiments from the main text on TD3. MPO
  and SAC parameterize a stochastic policy, meaning they learn the action noise scale as a function
  σ(s) of the state. TD3, on the other hand, uses a deterministic policy, and the action noise is added
  independently of the state. Usually, the noise scale σ is kept fixed over the course of training, and this
  how we handle it in our experiments as well. However, σ is an important hyperparameter, and there
  is no single value that works well on all environments. Thus, we repeat our experiments with all of
  the values σ ∈ {0.05, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 1}, and 10 different random seeds.
  In Fig. B.1, the results of the TD3 experiments with constant noise type are shown in the form of
  bootstrap distributions for the expected average performance, and compared to the same experiments
  on MPO and SAC, as well as to a Fig. 3-like plot where the influence of the agent has been normalized
  out. As we have an additional hyperparameter (σ), we first average the TD3 performance over all σ
  values, before computing the average performance across tasks. The beneficial effect of pink noise

                                        MPO + SAC + TD3                                           MPO
                       1.0
Average Performance


                       0.5

                       0.0

                      −0.5

                      −1.0

                      −1.5


                                                SAC                                               TD3
                       1.0
Average Performance


                       0.5

                       0.0

                      −0.5

                      −1.0

                      −1.5

                             WN 0.1   0.2 0.35 0.5 0.75 1.0   1.5   2.0   OU   WN 0.1   0.2 0.35 0.5 0.75 1.0   1.5   2.0   OU
                                                  β                                                 β

  Figure B.1: All three algorithms (MPO, SAC, TD3) show a clear preference for pink action noise
  as measured by the average performance over the environments of Fig. 2. The results of the OU
  experiments with the uncorrected noise scale of σ = 1 are marked with a dotted median.


                                                                          17
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                                         Appendix


                                                                                                              Figure B.2: Average performances
          TD3                                                                                                 across environments are combined
                                                                                                              from all β values (incl. WN). It can
                                                                                                              be seen that TD3 is consistently out-
         SAC                                                                                                  performed by both MPO and SAC.
                                                                                                              A closer look at the mean perfor-
                                                                                                              mance over all β values on each
     MPO                                                                                                      individual environment reveals that
                                                                                                              TD3 is outperformed on all environ-
                                   −4              −2            0                      2                4    ments by both MPO and SAC.
                                                        Average Performance


   can be clearly seen on TD3 as well. In this figure we also show the results of Ornstein-Uhlenbeck
   noise with a noise scale of σ = 1 rather than the corrected noise scale of Eq. (7). Incidentally, these
   results also confirm Fujimoto et al. (2018)’s finding that, on TD3, white noise and OU noise (with
   θ = 0.15) perform similarly.
  The reason why we did not include TD3 into the analysis of the main text, is that we found TD3 to
  be consistently outperformed by both MPO and SAC. In Fig. B.2, the average performances across
  environments are combined from all β values (incl. white noise), and shown for MPO, SAC and
  TD3. It can be seen that TD3 generally performs much worse than MPO and SAC. Looking at the
  mean performance over all β values on each individual environment, TD3 is outperformed on all
  environments by both MPO and SAC. We thus decided to exclude TD3 from our main analysis.

    B.2                        MPO & SAC

  In the majority of this work, we measure performance in terms of the mean evaluation return over a
  training process. We use this method, because it implicitly measures both the final policy performance,
  and the sample efficiency (how quickly does the algorithm reach high performance). Most of the data
  we present is additionally normalized, which is necessary to aggregate performances over different
  environments, and thus it is often not very clear how exactly to interpret the results (other than
  recognizing statistical significance). In this section, we want to present some of our results in more
  familiar terms, namely learning curves and final policy performance.
  To validate the approach of using the (mean) performance instead of the performance of the final
  policy, we have reproduced the results in Fig. 3 using the final policy performance (mean evaluation
  return in the last 5% of the training process), shown in Fig. B.3. In Fig. B.4, we show learning curves
  of white noise, pink noise, and OU noise on all environments for MPO and SAC. Both visualizations
  confirm our takeaway that pink noise is a better default action noise than white noise or OU noise.
  More detailed results can be found in Sec. H.
  The bootstrap distributions for the expected average performance (such as in Figures 3, 4, B.1, and
  B.3) are constructed by randomly choosing one seed for each environment, yielding one scalar


                             0.4
                                                                                                              Figure B.3: The average final per-
Average Final Performance


                             0.2                                                                              formance is like the average perfor-
                                                                                                              mance (see Sec. 4), but only uses
                             0.0
                                                                                                              the evaluation returns of the last 5%
                                                                                                              of training, thereby measuring the
                            −0.2
                                                                                                              quality of the final learned policy.
                            −0.4
                                                                                                              This figure shows the same anal-
                                                                                                              ysis on MPO and SAC as Fig. 3,
                            −0.6                                                                              and demonstrates that pink noise is
                                                                                                              preferable also in terms of final pol-
                            −0.8                                                                              icy performance.
                                        WN   0.1    0.2   0.35   0.5       0.75   1.0       1.5    2.0   OU
                                                                       β


                                                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                        Appendix



                MPO               Pendulum                   SAC             MPO              Cartpole (b.)               SAC
                                                                      1000
          800
                                                                       750
          600
 Return                                                                                                            WN
          400                                                          500
                                                                                                                   OU
          200                                                          250                                         OU (σ = 1)
                                                                                                                   Pink
            0                                                            0
                MPO              Cartpole (s.)               SAC             MPO              Ball-In-Cup                 SAC
          800                                                         1000

          600                                                          750
 Return


          400                                                          500

          200                                                          250

            0                                                            0
                MPO              MountainCar                 SAC             MPO                 Hopper                   SAC
          100

                                                                       150
           50
Return


                                                                       100
            0
                                                                        50
          −50
                                                                         0
                MPO                 Walker                   SAC             MPO                Reacher                   SAC
                                                                      1000
          600
                                                                       750
 Return


          400
                                                                       500

          200                                                          250

            0                                                            0

                MPO                Cheetah                   SAC             MPO                  Door                    SAC
                                                                      3000
          600
                                                                      2000
 Return


          400
                                                                      1000
          200

            0                                                            0
                0.0       0.5        1.0 0.0         0.5        1.0          0.0       0.5       1.0 0.0          0.5       1.0
                                       6                          6                                   6                          6
                      Interactions ×10           Interactions ×10                  Interactions ×10           Interactions ×10

Figure B.4: Learning curves (median and interquartile range of evaluation returns) of the two baseline
action noise types white noise (WN) and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) noise, as well as our suggestion
of pink noise. It can be seen that pink noise, while not being better than both on all environments, is
the best default choice. It is never outperformed by both white noise and OU noise, and routinely
outperforms white noise (e.g. MountainCar), OU noise (e.g. Door), or both (e.g. Hopper).


(normalized) performance per environment, assuming all other variables like algorithm and noise type
are fixed. Averaging these normalized performances (the reason that performances are normalized
on each environment is so that this averaging is reasonable) gives an estimate for the average
performance across environments of the given variables (e.g. noise type and algorithm). As there are
S different random seeds (typically S = 20), we can repeat this procedure S times (with resampling)
and take the mean of all S average performance estimates, giving us an estimate for the expected
average performance of the given variables. Doing this N times (we use N = 105 ), the N estimates
for the expected average performance can be collected into a bootstrap distribution, as shown in these
figures.


                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                 Appendix


C    E NVIRONMENTS & A LGORITHMS

We evaluate our method on 10 different tasks (see Fig. 2). Most of these are from the DeepMind
Control Suite (DMC, Tassa et al., 2018), but we also use OpenAI Gym (Brockman et al., 2016)
and the Adroit hand suite (Rajeswaran et al., 2018). The respective sources and exact IDs of all
environments are compiled in Table C.1. See Sec. G for results on additional tasks.

                  Environment      Source    ID
                  Pendulum         DMC       pendulum (swingup)
                  Cartpole (b.)    DMC       cartpole (balance_sparse)
                  Cartpole (s.)    DMC       cartpole (swingup_sparse)
                  Ball-In-Cup      DMC       ball_in_cup (catch)
                  MountainCar      Gym       MountainCarContinuous-v0
                  Hopper           DMC       hopper (hop)
                  Walker           DMC       walker (run)
                  Reacher          DMC       reacher (hard)
                  Cheetah          DMC       cheetah (run)
                  Door             Adroit    door-v0

                    Table C.1: Environments used in this work (see also Fig. 2).


For our experiments, we relied on the TD3 and SAC implementations in Stable-Baselines3 (Raffin
et al., 2021), as well as the MPO implementation in the Tonic RL library (Pardo, 2020). We only
used the default hyperparameters of these algorithms, as provided by the libraries. Our own code
for using colored noise with these libraries is made available online at https://github.com/
martius-lab/pink-noise-rl.


D    BANDIT METHOD DETAILS

To use a bandit algorithm to select the action noise
color β for a rollout, it is necessary to define the Algorithm D.1: Thompson Sampling
bandit reward, which should score a rollout in terms Input: Arms B = (β1 , . . . , βK ),
of the β that was chosen. In our case, we use the               Reward distributions std σ
rollout return (sum of rewards) as the score, as ex- Initialize m ∈ RK , Σ ∈ SK     +
plained in Sec. 5.2. Additionally, we have to se- for i ∈ N do
lect a list of colors (“bandit arms”) to search over:        Sample q ∼ N (m, Σ)
B = (β1 , β2 , . . . , βK ) (with βk ∈ [0, 2], ∀k in our     ai ← arg maxk∈{1,...,K} qk
case). If we assume that the bandit rewards (= roll-         τi ← Run rollout with βai
out scores) are Gaussian distributed with a known            ri ← score of rollout τi
standard deviation σ, we can use Bayesian inference          Do Bayesian update of m, Σ using
to estimate the means (µ ∈ RK ) of the reward dis-            {aj , rj }ij=1 , σ
tributions. A simple bandit algorithm we can use in end
this context is Thompson sampling, shown in Algo-
rithm D.1 (SK + denotes the set of positive semi-definite K × K matrices). The relationships between
the random variables are shown in the Bayesian network in Figure D.1a.
There is a second strong assumption in the Thompson sampling algorithm shown in Algorithm D.1
(similarly for other algorithms like UCB): it assumes that the reward distributions are stationary, i.e.
that they don’t change over time. This is not the case in the context of reinforcement learning: if
the rollout score ri is defined as the return, then, if the reinforcement learning algorithm works, it
should naturally be the case that the policy improves over time, and thus, on average, ri > rj for
i   j. This setting of non-stationary bandit distributions can be addressed by using a sliding-window
approach (e.g. Garivier & Moulines, 2008): instead of updating the belief parameters m, Σ with
respect to the whole history of observations, only keep a window of the last N rollouts.
There remains one other problem: how do we choose the prior parameters m and Σ and the variance
σ 2 of the reward distributions? For Σ, the easiest solution is to assume independent arms, i.e. make


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                               Appendix


                                   σ                                                      σ


               µ           µ ai            ri                       µ           µ ai               r̃i
                                  N                                                       N

                   N                                                    N                                     b
                            ai                                                   ai                ri         c
            m, Σ                                                  m, Σ
                                           i∈N                                          i = 1, . . . , N

                            (a)                                                         (b)

Figure D.1: (a) A Bayesian bandit with Gaussian reward distributions. The rewards from arm k are
sampled from N (µk , σ). Thompson sampling (Alg. D.1) can infer µ while trading off exploration
and exploitation. (b) By introducing the constants b and c, the algorithm can be made scale invariant
by performing Thompson sampling with respect to the normalized reward r̃i = (ri − b)/c.


Σ diagonal. This is not necessarily the most efficient solution, as one can imagine that two similar
β values will also perform similarly in their rollouts.10 For m, the non-stationarity becomes a
problem: again assuming we use the rollout return as a score, these scores will probably be much
lower at the beginning of training than at the end. Additionally, we might not even know the scale
of returns in a task. To account for this, it would be necessary to make the prior variances Σkk very
large/uninformed. Similarly, σ needs to be large, to account for the unknown scale of the bandit
reward spread. However, this would mean that many more samples (rollouts) are necessary to tighten
the belief distributions. This is a problem, especially because we only have a small set of N rollouts
when using the sliding-window method.
The ideal would be a bandit method which is invariant with respect to affine transformations of the
rewards, in the sense that it would make no difference if all rewards r were transformed to be br + c
for some constants b > 0 and c ∈ R for all arms. In Fig. D.1b, this situation is shown in a Bayesian
network. Here, the generative process is almost the same as before (see Fig. D.1a), except that the
reward r̃i is scaled and translated by ri = br̃i + c before observation. If, as shown, the constants
b and c are independent of the chosen arm and stay constant within the window, it is possible to
optimize them via maximum marginal likelihood, given the window of past observations of ri .
The bandit inference task is to infer the distributional means µ = (µ1 , . . . , µk ) from the actions
(color indices) a = (ai )N                                           N
                          i=1 and rewards (rollout scores) r = (ri )i=1 . We set the prior means of
the belief distributions to 0 (m = 0), because we want the normalized reward distributions to be
centered around 0. For now, we don’t fix Σ, but let it be any positive semi-definite K × K matrix.
The generative model for r is defined via the following prior and likelihood function:
                                     p(µ | Σ) = N (µ | 0, Σ)                                                       (9)
                                                   Y
                            p(r | µ, a, b, c, σ) =   N (ri | bµai + c, (bσ)2 )                                    (10)
                                                        i

These lead us to the following evidence/marginal likelihood function:
                                      Y
               p(r | a, b, c, σ, Σ) =   p(ri | ai , b, c, σ, Σ)                                                   (11)
                                           i
                                           YZ
                                       =          p(ri | µ, ai , b, c, σ) p(µ | Σ) dµ                             (12)
                                           i
                                           YZ
                                       =          N (ri | be>             2
                                                            ai µ + c, (bσ) ) N (µ | 0, Σ) dµ                      (13)
                                           i
                                           Y
                                       =        N (ri | be>             2    >
                                                          ai 0 + c, (bσ) + beai Σbeai )                           (14)
                                           i
   10
      We also tried a different approach by using a modified RBF kernel matrix to account for covariance between
the arms, but the results were essentially the same as with independent arms.


                                                        21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                Appendix



                                          Y
                                      =       N (ri | c, b2 (σ 2 + Σai ai )),                                   (15)
                                          i

where we used canonical basis vectors to represent µai = e>   ai µ. For maximization, it is convenient
to work with the log-evidence:
                                         Y
          log p(r | a, b, c, σ, Σ) = log   N (ri | c, b2 (σ 2 + Σai ai ))                         (16)
                                               i
                                          X    1                             (c − ri )2
                                              − log 2πb2 (σ 2 + Σai ai ) − 2 2

                                      =                                                                         (17)
                                          i
                                               2                          2b (σ + Σai ai )
                                      =: L(b, c)                                                                (18)
We can now maximize the evidence by setting the partial derivatives to 0:
                                      X
                         ∂c L(b, c) ∝    (c − ri ) = 0                                                          (19)
                                                   i
                                              X −1                      (c − ri )2
                              ∂b L(b, c) =                     +                       =0                       (20)
                                                   i
                                                         b          b3 (σ 2 + Σai ai )

Solving these equations gives us
                                                       1 X
                                          c=               ri                                                   (21)
                                                       N i
                                                       1 X (c − ri )2
                                          b2 =                          .                                       (22)
                                                       N i σ 2 + Σai ai

Using these values, we can “reconstruct” the unscaled/normalized reward
                                                 ri − c
                                                       r̃i =                                (23)
                                                    b
and perform Thompson sampling with respect to r̃i . This normalized Thompson sampling algorithm,
including the sliding window modification, is presented in Algorithm D.2.
                                                             Next, we want to show that this method is indeed in-
Algorithm D.2: Normalized TS                                 variant to affine transformations of the bandit reward.
Input: Arms B = (β1 , . . . , βK ),                          Proposition 1. The posterior distribution over µ in
         Window size N                                       the normalized bandit algorithm (Alg. D.2) is iden-
Initialize                                                   tical for the observations r = (r1 , . . . , rN ) and
 m ← 0 ∈ RK , Σ ∈ SK    +,σ ← 1                              r 0 = b0 r + c0 , for all b0 > 0 and c0 ∈ R. In other
for l ∈ N do                                                 words, the algorithm is invariant to a scaling and
     i ← l mod N                                             translation of the rewards.
     M ← min{l, N }
     Sample q ∼ N (m, Σ)
                                                             Proof. In this setting, the observed rewards ri are
     ai ← arg maxk∈{1,...,K} qk
                                                             normalized to
     τi ← Run rollout with βai
     ri ← score                                                                       ri − c(r)
           1
             PMof rollout τi                                                    r̃i =                       (24)
     c← M          r                                                                     b(r)
          r j=1 j
     b← M    1
               PM (c−rj )2                                   with
                 j=1 σ 2 +Σa aj j
                                                                                      N
   r̃i ← rib−c                                                                   1 X
                                                                          c(r) =       ri                       (25)
   Do Bayesian update of m, Σ using                                              N i=1
     {aj , r̃j }M
                j=1 , σ
                                                                                 v
                                                                                 u     N
end                                                                              u1 X     (c(r) − ri )2
                                                                          b(r) = t                      .       (26)
                                                                                   N i=1 σ 2 + Σai ai

To prove the invariance of the algorithm, we will simply show that this normalized reward is the same
for both sets of observations, i.e. that r̃ = r̃ 0 . Then, clearly, the posteriors p(µ | r̃) and p(µ | r̃ 0 )
will also be the same. Expanding r̃ 0 , we get:


                                                               22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                Appendix


                             r 0 − c(r 0 )
                        r̃ 0 =                                                                    (27)
                                 b(r 0 )
                             b0 r + c0 − c(b0 r + c0 )
                           =                                                                      (28)
                                    b(b0 r + c0 )
                                                  PN
                                  b0 r + c0 − N1 i=1 (b0 ri + c0 )
                           =v             PN                                                      (29)
                                 N
                                     ( N1 j=1 (b0 rj + c0 ) − (b0 ri + c0 ))2
                            u
                            u1 X
                            t
                              N i=1                σ 2 + Σai ai
                                                   PN
                                 b0 r + c0 − b0 N1 i=1 ri − c0
                           =v              PN                                                     (30)
                                 N
                                     (b0 N1 j=1 rj + c0 − b0 ri − c0 )2
                            u
                            u1 X
                            t
                              N i=1              σ 2 + Σai ai
                                 b0 (r − c(r))
                           =v                                                                     (31)
                                 N      2
                                      b0 (c(r) − ri )2
                            u
                            u1 X
                            t
                              N i=1 σ 2 + Σai ai
                             r − c(r)
                           =                                                                      (32)
                                b(r)
                           = r̃                                                                   (33)

Thus, we can conclude that the reward normalization indeed guarantees invariance to affine reward
transformations in algorithms such as Thompson sampling.



With this reward normalization, the prior parameters m (of m = m1) and s (of Σ = s2 I) become
redundant. We have already set m = 0, and we now also set the prior variances Σkk to 1. This en-
courages the algorithm to keep the normalized mean estimates µk approximately N (0, 1)-distributed.
The “likelihood” parameter σ remains to be tuned, but it is now not necessary to account for the
large uncertainty in the reward scale, as σ is only concerned with the normalized reward. In our
experiments we always set σ = 1.


D.1   BANDIT VS . R ANDOM

Although we found the normalized
bandit algorithm (Alg. D.2) to work               Environment Bandit 6= Random               p
well on simple non-stationary tasks,              Pendulum                  7             0.98
in the RL setting (for choosing β)                Cartpole (b.)             7             0.09
the performance was just as that of               Cartpole (s.)             7             0.67
a random β selection for every roll-              Ball-In-Cup               7             0.87
out. In Table D.1, we list the results            MountainCar               7             0.54
of a Welch t-test, testing for inequal-           Hopper                    7             0.09
ity of the performance distributions              Walker                    7             0.15
achieved by the bandit algorithm and              Reacher                   7             0.70
random β selection on every environ-              Cheetah                   7             0.20
ment. It can be seen that the two meth-           Door                      7             0.59
ods are statistically indistinguishable.
This shows that the bandit method                Table D.1: Bandit vs. Random (Welch t-test)
does not work as intended, as “ran-
dom arm selection” should be an easy
baseline to outperform. The reason for this is probably due to the rollout return not being informative
enough as a bandit reward signal.


                                                   23
     Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                 Appendix


     E     S OLVING M OUNTAIN C AR BY FFT

     MountainCar is a very simple environment. Although its dynamics are almost those of a harmonic
     oscillator, there is a difference to the oscillator environment from Sec. 6: MountainCar’s oscillation
     dynamics are non-linear. At the bottom of MountainCar’s valley (see Fig. 2), the small-angle
     approximation of a non-linear oscillator may be used, but for the motion to go up to the top, the
     behavior is different from simple harmonic motion. Nevertheless, we can use this insight to develop a
     very simple open-loop control algorithm to solve this environment, by running one rollout without
     applying any action (just letting the mountain make the car go back and forth a bit), then analyzing
     the resulting trajectory and inferring the hill’s (small-angle) resonant frequency (via the Fast Fourier
     Transform algorithm). Finally, we can control the car by simply swinging it back and forth at the
     resonant frequency. This algorithm, which works very well on this task, is shown below.


 1   import gym
 2   import numpy as np
 3   from scipy.fft import rfft
 4
 5   # Initialize environment
 6   env = gym.make('MountainCarContinuous-v0')
 7   T = env._max_episode_steps
 8
 9   # Run a single rollout with no force. Save x-coordinate to `x`.
10   obs = env.reset()
11   x = [obs[0]]
12   for t in range(T):
13       obs, *_ = env.step([0])
14       x.append(obs[0])
15
16   # Find resonant frequency = highest peak of FFT (excluding DC)
17   f = (np.argmax(abs(rfft(x))[1:]) + 1) / (T + 1)
18
19   # Action plan (harmonic excitation)
20   a = np.sin(2*np.pi*f * np.arange(T))
21
22   # Test on 1000 rollouts
23   N = 1000
24   solved = 0
25   for i in range(N):
26       env.reset()
27       for t in range(T):
28            _, r, _, _ = env.step([a[t]])
29            if r > 0:
30                solved += 1
31                break
32
33   print(f"Solved: {solved/N * 100:.0f}%.")                   # prints "Solved: 100%."


     F     T OY E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS

     F.1   O SCILLATOR E NVIRONMENT

     The oscillator environment of Sec. 6, which we make available online as a gym environment
     (https://github.com/onnoeberhard/oscillator-gym), models the 1-dimensional
     motion of a particle of mass m, attached to the origin by an ideal spring of stiffness k, damped with
     friction coefficient b, and driven by a force (the action) F . This motion is described by the ordinary
     differential equation
                                               mẍ = F − bẋ − kx,                                      (34)
     where x is the particle’s position. In our experiments we set the friction coefficient b to zero, i.e.
     the system is undamped. This setup is then called a simple harmonic oscillator. The energy of the


                                                       24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                                   Appendix


oscillator is the sum of kinetic and potential energy:
                                                                   1       1
                                                              E=     mẋ2 + kx2 .                                                   (35)
                                                                   2       2
The resonant frequency is:
                                                    r
                                                  1     k
                                            f=            .                                      (36)
                                                 2π m
As we want to configure the oscillator to have a given resonant frequency f , we need to find m and k
accordingly. To get a unique solution, we impose a second constraint: the energy at x = 1 and ẋ = 0
should be E = 2π 2 . If we now solve the two equations (35) and (36) for m and k, imposing the
constraint on E, we get the solution
                                                                   k = 4π 2                                                         (37)
                                                                        1
                                                                   m= 2                                                             (38)
                                                                       f
to set the resonant frequency. In Fig. F.1, a few pure-noise trajectories (akin to Fig. 1) are shown on
the oscillator environment.
                                              White noise                     Pink noise                      OU noise

                               0.04
       f = 2 × 10−3


                               0.02

                               0.00
                      ẋ


                           −0.02

                           −0.04


                                       −2.5      0.0    2.5          −2.5       0.0        2.5         −2.5    0.0       2.5


                                0.4
         f = 2 × 10−2


                                0.2

                                0.0
                          ẋ


                               −0.2

                               −0.4

                               −0.6
                                                  0            5                  0               5              0              5
                                 15

                                 10
           f = 2 × 10−1


                                  5

                                  0
                          ẋ


                                −5

                               −10

                               −15
                                      −10          0          10   −10             0             10   −10         0            10
                                                  x                               x                              x

Figure F.1: Trajectories on the oscillator environment. For each of the 3 resonance frequencies
f ∈ {0.002, 0.02, 0.2}, we sample 5 action noise signals of length 10
                                                                   f of white noise, pink noise and
OU noise. We can see what was already shown in Fig. 5: pink noise is much less sensitive to the
parameterization than white noise and OU noise, and always manages to excite the oscillator up to a
certain amplitude. White noise and OU noise only work well in the high- and low-frequency regime,
respectively.



                                                                         25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                  Appendix


F.2   B OUNDED I NTEGRATOR E NVIRONMENT

The bounded integrator environment of Sec. 6 has very simple dynamics:
                                     st+1 = clip(st + at , −c, c),                                  (39)
where s0 = 0 and c is the parameter determining the size of the environment. Thus, the “area” in
Fig. 5 is given by c2 . In Fig. 1, this parameter is fixed at c = 250, and in Fig. F.2 these trajectories
(center row) are compared to trajectories on a smaller (top row) and a larger environment (bottom
row), in a similar spirit to Fig. F.1.

                   White noise                   Pink noise                    OU noise
       c = 25
       c = 250
       c = 1000


Figure F.2: Trajectories on the bounded integrator environment. For each of the 3 environment sizes
c ∈ {25, 250, 1000}, we sample 20 action noise signals of length 1000 steps of white noise, pink
noise, and OU noise. We can see what was already shown in Fig. 5: pink noise is less sensitive to the
parameterization than white noise (which is too slow to explore the medium and large environments)
and OU noise (which, on the medium and small environments, gets stuck at the edges and fails to
explore the interior).


G     A DDITIONAL E NVIRONMENTS
In addition to the environments described in Sec. C, we also ran experiments on several tasks from
the “MuJoCo-Maze” suite (https://github.com/kngwyu/mujoco-maze). The results are
shown in Fig. G.1 in the form of learning curves and the average performance (cf. Sec. B.2) of each
noise type over all six environments. We tested white noise, pink noise, and (variance-corrected,
cf. Sec. A.1) Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise, and trained MPO and SAC on all environments for 106
interactions using 20 seeds. Pink noise again outperforms white noise and Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise
as a default choice across environments. These experiments were conducted to verify our method on


                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023                                                                       Appendix



               MPO       Point, U-Maze       SAC MPO             Point, 4-Rooms        SAC             Avg. performance
           1
                          WN                                                                    0.6


  Return
                          OU
                          Pink                                                                  0.4
           0

               MPO   Swimmer, U-Maze         SAC MPO     Swimmer, 4-Rooms              SAC      0.2


         20                                                                                     0.0
Return


                                                                                              −0.2
           0
                                                                                              −0.4
               MPO       Ant, U-Maze         SAC MPO             Ant, 4-Rooms          SAC
         20                                                                                   −0.6
Return


                                                                                              −0.8
           0

               0             1 0                1 0                  1 0                  1   −1.0
                     t    ×106           t   ×106            t    ×106            t    ×106            WN     Pink     OU

Figure G.1: Performances of white noise, pink noise, and OU noise on several “MuJoCo-Maze” tasks
(all with sparse rewards). It can be seen that pink noise is the best default choice of the three, as it has
the highest average performance (Sec. B.2).

a different set of problems and are thus not included in the main analysis. The results provide further
evidence in support of our main takeaway: pink noise makes a very good default action noise.

H              D ETAILED R ESULTS

                                    Final Performance                           Mean Performance
   Environment            Agent     WN        OU      Pink        WN       OU         Pink    Oracle        Anti     Gain
   Pendulum               MPO       311       702      574         247    651          558      670       239         430
                          SAC       224       350      446         158    283          294      361       158         202
   Cartpole (b.)          MPO       999      1000     1000         928    940          967      967       928          39
                          SAC       960       908      958         939    890          941      950       890          59
   Cartpole (s.)          MPO       703       784      788         535    499          666      666       489         177
                          SAC       377       608      730         226    459          532      533       159         374
   Ball-In-Cup            MPO       974       973      978         926    909          948      948       909          39
                          SAC       976       975      979         930    901          933      941       901          39
   MountainCar            MPO        13        56       92          13     52           91       92        13          78
                          SAC         0        90       94           0     89           93       93         0          93
   Hopper                 MPO        25        62      108          14     34           69       69        14          54
                          SAC        89        94      119          43     53           77       80        43          36
   Walker                 MPO       530       377      448         384    284          363      390       284         106
                          SAC       593       506      602         437    363          471      472       363         108
   Reacher                MPO       956       856      966         864    600          871      888       581         306
                          SAC       955       914      940         776    653          745      776       653         122
   Cheetah                MPO       666       612      678         481    440          543      543       440         103
                          SAC       631       577      640         469    439          483      502       439          63
   Door                   MPO      2586      2492     2909        1830   1376         2207     2207      1376         830
                          SAC      2192      1535     2195        1332    546         1183     1332       546         785

Table H.1: Comparison of final policy performance (see Sec. B.2) and mean performance over the
training process (Sec. 4) on all environments. Results are averaged across seeds, and shown for white
noise (WN), Ornstein-Uhlenbeck noise (OU), and pink noise (Pink) as action noise on MPO and
SAC. Additionally, the Oracle and Anti-Oracle (“Anti”) performances are shown. The gain between
these (rightmost column) represents the difference achievable by changing the noise type, and is the
basis for the “performance gain” measure used in Sec. 4.2.



                                                             27
