Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C AN N EURAL N ETWORKS L EARN I MPLICIT L OGIC
FROM P HYSICAL R EASONING ?

 Aaron Traylor,1 Roman Feiman,2 & Ellie Pavlick1
 1
   Department of Computer Science
 2
   Department of Cognitive, Linguistic & Psychological Sciences
 Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, USA
 {aaron_traylor, roman_feiman, ellie_pavlick}@brown.edu



                                            A BSTRACT

         Despite the success of neural network models in a range of domains, it remains
         an open question whether they can learn to represent abstract logical operators
         such as negation and disjunction. We test the hypothesis that neural networks
         without inherent inductive biases for logical reasoning can acquire an implicit
         representation of negation and disjunction. Here, implicit refers to limited, domain-
         specific forms of these operators, which work in psychology suggests may be a
         precursor (developmentally and evolutionarily) to the type of abstract, domain-
         general logic that is characteristic of adult humans. To test neural networks, we
         adapt a test designed to diagnose the presence of negation and disjunction in
         animals and pre-verbal children, which requires inferring the location of a hidden
         object using constraints of the physical environment as well as implicit logic: if a
         ball is hidden in A or B, and shown not to be in A, can the subject infer that it is
         in B? Our results show that, despite the neural networks learning to track objects
         behind occlusion, they are unable to generalize to a task that requires implicit logic.
         We further show that models are unable to generalize to the test task even when
         they are trained directly on a logically identical (though visually dissimilar) task.
         However, experiments using transfer learning reveal that the models do recognize
         structural similarity between tasks which invoke the same logical reasoning pattern,
         suggesting that some desirable abstractions are learned, even if they are not yet
         sufficient to pass established tests of logical reasoning.


1   I NTRODUCTION
People have the capacity for flexible logical reasoning. For example, given two alternatives (A or
B), and subsequent information that allows ruling out one of them (not A), people can conclude that
the other is true with certainty (therefore B), termed reasoning by exclusion. It is an open question
whether achieving similar reasoning with neural models will require explicit logical components to
be built into the network architecture or if the capacity for such reasoning can be learned from data.
Prior work on logical reasoning in neural networks (Marcus, 2001; Evans et al., 2018, among others)
has focused on whether models are able to acquire abstract, domain-general logical operators, such as
the ¬ and ∨ found in first order logic. However, recent psychological studies of logic in non-human
animals and human infants have suggested that this powerful reasoning machinery does not appear in
adults fully formed, ex nihilo. Rather, this work has argued that both over the human lifespan and
across species, domain-general logical operators may develop and evolve from scaffolding provided
by precursors that are themselves more limited. These precursors are implicit logical operators that
can differ from the explicit, domain-general forms in two ways: they might only be able to operate
on content in specific domains, and they might perform only some of the functional role of their
full-fledged counterparts (Völter & Call, 2017; Bermudez, 2003; Cesana-Arlotti et al., 2018), (see
Feiman et al., 2022, for discussion).
In this work, we ask whether neural network models, which lack explicit representations of the
logical operators for negation and disjunction, can nonetheless acquire implicit representations of
such operators via self-supervised training. In particular, we focus on implicit logic within the domain


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of intuitive physics, as this is one of the earliest domains in which such reasoning emerges in young
children (Cesana-Arlotti et al., 2018; 2020; Feiman et al., 2022). We design a set of experiments in
which models are trained to track objects as they move throughout a visual scene, and then evaluated
on a task from developmental psychology that requires reasoning about the location of a hidden object
and is considered to be a face-valid test for the representation of (implicit) negation and disjunction.
We find that, by most measures, object-tracking neural networks are unable to generalize zero-shot
to the logical reasoning test, even when given training data which directly illustrates the requisite
reasoning pattern. However, in transfer learning experiments, we find evidence that neural networks
encode some degree of structural similarity between visually distinct but logically equivalent tasks,
suggesting that they may yet be capable of representing the desired operators. Future work will need
to determine the exact training conditions under which they would do so.
In summary, our primary contributions are: (1) We introduce the notion of implicit logic, taken from
developmental and comparative psychology, into the repertoire of neural network evaluation; (2) We
adapt a standard test of logical inference in humans and use it to evaluate neural network models; (3)
We present a series of studies which present primarily negative results regarding neural networks’
ability to learn implicit logical reasoning in the physical domain, but which offer some suggestive
evidence regarding the models’ ability to transfer representations between logically equivalent tasks.

2     BACKGROUND

2.1   T WO T ESTS OF R EASONING BY E XCLUSION

To test whether computational models can reason using implicit negation and disjunction, we adapt
two tasks previously used with infants (Feiman et al., 2022; Piaget, 1954) and many species of
non-human animals (Call, 2004; Völter & Call, 2017, for review). In the "Two-Cup" task (see Figure
1), participants first see two cups, which are then hidden behind a screen. An object (e.g., a toy or
food) is then lowered behind the screen into one cup (setting up A or B). The screen is then removed,
showing that one cup is empty (not A), licensing the inference that the object must be in the other
cup (therefore B). Finally, participants are invited to search. Success requires representing (explicitly
or implicitly) that the ball is not in the empty cup in order to avoid searching there. Infants and many
animal species succeed on this task in a zero-shot setting. In Piaget’s (1954) “Invisible Displacement”
paradigm, participants see a hand holding an object. The hand closes to hide the object, moves behind
an occluder, and then emerges again, empty palm facing the participant (A or B; not A). This licenses
the inference that the object must have been deposited behind the occluder (therefore B). In this work,
we use the Two-Cup task as our target test task. In Sections §4.2 and §4.3, we train on Invisible
Displacement in order to assess whether a neural model trained to solve one reasoning-by-exclusion
task can transfer its representations to another task that is formally similar but visually distinct.

2.2   E XPLICIT VS . I MPLICIT L OGICAL R EASONING

One way to solve both tasks is with explicit symbolic logical reasoning: represent the initial pos-
sibilities for the object’s location as A∨B, and represent evidence ruling out one of them as ¬A,
thus licensing the conclusion B. However, more minimal solutions are also possible. Feiman et al.
(2022) propose that logical representations (negation, disjunction), can be implicit in two senses.
First, while explicit logic is characteristically domain-general (OR and NOT can compose with any
concepts, regardless of their content), implicit logical operations can be domain-specific, operating
only over certain kinds of content (e.g. representations of objects’ locations). Second, implicit logical
representations might perform only part of the function of their explicit counterparts. For example, a
function that compares two arguments (e.g. blue and red) for incompatibility is an implicit negation
in this sense. It plays part of the functional role of representing blue as not red even as it would
(correctly) not represent the negation of red as equivalent to blue in other computational contexts. In
the Two-Cup task, participants could use an implicit representation of negation to represent that the
cup being empty is incompatible with it containing the object (see Feiman et al., 2022, for discussion).
After ruling out the empty cup from consideration, further deriving the certain conclusion that
the object must then be in the other cup is a signature of disjunction. This conclusion could be
licensed by an explicit logical operator (A∨B), but it could also be the consequence of an implicit
representation with only part of the functional role of ∨. For instance, the two options could be linked


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


probabilistically, such that learning that the object is not in one cup increases the probability that it is
in the other (see Feiman et al., 2022; Mody & Carey, 2016; Rescorla, 2009).

2.3     T HIS W ORK

(Feiman et al., 2022) propose that such implicit logical representations – both with partial function
and limited to a specific domain – could be evolutionary and developmental precursors to their explicit
counterparts. On this account, implicit logical representations could emerge from specific content
knowledge that is not logically structured, such as the intuitive physical understanding that predicts
how objects might move in space based on visual input. In this paper, we test whether models trained
to represent object-tracking and occlusion will possess emergent representations of negation and
disjunction that are implicit in both senses: representations limited to the content domain of intuitive
physics, and to the function of detecting incompatibility between two input states.

3       E XPERIMENTAL D ESIGN
3.1     E VALUATION TASK

To test whether a model has an implicit representation of negation and disjunction, we evaluate its
performance on the Two-Cup task. Figure 1 shows our implementation of this task. We convert the
task into a 2D video format using pygame and Box2D. Our environment consists of wedges and
cups (which are static), a ball (which obeys gravity), and occluders (which move up and down from
the bottom of the screen). The task is to predict the location of the ball at each frame of the video. In
each sequence, the ball falls from the top of the screen, and can either roll off the wedge into the left
or the right cup, each of which are occluded. Because the ball’s path off the wedge is also occluded,
it is ambiguous which cup the ball falls into until the occluders are removed. The occluder in front of
the cup that does not contain the ball is the first to fall, thus licensing the negation inference.
We designate the frame at which the first cup is revealed to be empty (frame f in Figure 1) to be the
critical frame–i.e., the frame at which a model with implicit logic should be able to determine with
certainty the location of the ball. We thus evaluate models by comparing before and after the critical
frame whether the model predicts the ball to be in the correct cup, the incorrect cup, or elsewhere on
the screen. After our initial tests showed that variance in performance across examples was low, we
constructed a set of 100 test examples over which to compute this metric.


    a          b            c             d              e           f             g            h


Figure 1: Frames from the Two-Cup task test video. Frames a-d create ambiguity between the two
possible hiding locations for the ball, and frames e-h are the part of the task on which we evaluate
the model. The goal is to determine the location of the small yellow ball, which drops at frame d. At
frame e, the subject should know that the ball is either in the left cup or the right cup, but its exact
location is unknown. When the left occluder drops at frame f, the subject should know that the ball
is not in the left cup, and must be in the right cup, despite not seeing it. This is the critical frame.

3.1.1     M ODEL
To test whether the capacity for implicit logical reasoning emerges in systems designed to represent
an intuitive understanding of Newtonian physics, we use a neural network model that has a built-in
notion of discrete objects, but which must learn the physical dynamics (and their generalization to
logical reasoning tasks) from data. In addition to being consistent with developmental evidence on
the emergence of logic, this architectural choice simplifies the learning problem and thus allows us to
study the phenomena we aim to study without needing to train extremely large models, as would be
the case if we took a tabula rasa approach.


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We use the Object-Permanence Network (OPNet) model described by (Shamsian et al., 2020). OPNet
is an LSTM trained on video data that tracks objects as they move and are occluded by other objects.
It thus learns to track and predict object locations without a built-in representation of object physics.
Specifically, OPNet consists of a) an object detection module that segments a frame into visible
elements (rather than use this module, we feed in ground truth bounding boxes), b) an LSTM that
attends to the scene and produces a distribution over current objects to identify which the target object
(in our case, the ball) is currently behind, if any, and finally c) a "where is it" LSTM that predicts a
bounding box for the target object based on a weighted average of components a) and b). 1

3.1.2    T RAINING
In our experiments (§4.1,4.2,4.3), we consider a variety of training conditions in order to determine
which, if any, allow the model to encode an implicit negation and disjunction to succeed on the
Two-Cup task. In all experiments, we require at a minimum that the model has been exposed to the
basic elements of the Two-Cup task, so that the visual appearance of this task is in-distribution. We
also require that the evaluation task itself (namely, the sub-sequence of frames (e)–(h) in Figure 1)
remains entirely unseen in training, to ensure that the model cannot exploit specific heuristics of
that sequence in order to solve the task. With these constraints, we design three sets of training data
schemas, described below in Section 4. Each training set contains 5,000 videos of 57 frames each.

Physical Reasoning Schema We generate simple scenes which show the basic physical phenomena
of the environment. Each example has a randomly selected template, each of which enumerates
different interactions the ball may have within the environment; e.g. it falls into the cup, it falls onto a
wedge and then into a cup, it falls onto a wedge and then rolls along the ground, etc. In each template,
the ball falls from a randomly chosen point on the x-axis (though the height from which it falls is kept
constant) at a random time within the first 40 frames of the video. Randomly generated occluders
appear throughout the scene and may or may not block the path of the ball. Attributes of the cups and
wedges (e.g. x-location, size, height) are also chosen uniformly at random from pre-set ranges. When
the ball rolls along the ground of the scene, it will stop at a randomly selected x location 2

Two-Cup Ablations Training Schema We construct a set of training examples which are designed
to expose the model to the general concepts necessary to solve the Two-Cup task, without giving
it access to heuristics it could use to succeed on evaluation without representing implicit logic.
Specifically, we considered all variations and perturbations of the Two-Cup task’s sequence of events,
e.g., varying the number of cups, number of occluders, and the order in which the occluders rise
and fall. We then filter out any sequence of events which either (1) were logically equivalent to the
Two-Cup task and thus would prevent the Two-Cup tasks from being held out or (2) had direct overlap
with the true Two-Cup task’s frames at and after the critical frame, even if they did not require the
same logical reasoning. For example, if in Figure 1 we changed the order of the events in frames
b-d from “small occluder rise”, “large occluder rise”, “ball fall” to “ball fall”, “small occluder rise”,
“large occluder rise” (d-b-c), it would not be permissible in this training set because frames e-h
remain the same as the Two-Cup task. We found that 38 perturbations of the Two-Cup Scene were
permissible, and a full list is available in the Appendix. For each video made using this procedure,
we randomly select a permissible perturbation, and vary elements such as cup size, wedge size, and
x-axis of the midpoint of the scene, but keep the order of events and location of the ball constant.

Invisible Displacement Training Schema Finally, we generate a training set which exposes the
model to the same logical reasoning pattern that occurs in the Two-Cup task, but which is visually
distinct. We use this training data in a subset of our experiments (§4.2) in which we seek to provide the
model with a better chance at passing the Two-Cup task without training on the Two-Cup task itself.
To generate such a training set, we use a variation on Piaget’s Invisible Displacement experiments
(§2.1). In our Invisible Displacement data, as shown in Fig. 2, the ball rolls off of a wedge and then
behind two occluders that are positioned directly next to each other. The ball stops at a random point
    1
      The loss in the original OPNet model consists of MAE compared to the ground truth location of the ball,
and a "consistency error" that penalizes the model for moving its prediction from one frame to the next. In order
to ensure that the model can update its predictions during the Two-Cup task, we remove the consistency loss.
    2
      This constraint ensures compatibility with the Invisible Displacement training schema. In the examples
derived from the Two-Cup task, the ball does not roll along the ground.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


behind the occluders (similar to the procedure in the Physical Reasoning schema), and its location is
ambiguous until one occluder falls, revealing that the location behind it is empty.



              a                      b                     c                     d


Figure 2: Frames from the Invisible Displacement task within our experimental framework. At frame
b, because of the random stopping, it is ambiguous whether the ball has landed behind the yellow or
the red occluder. At the critical frame c, it becomes possible to infer the ball’s location.


3.2     P ROOF - OF -C ONCEPT

Our primary studies (§4) ask whether neural network models can learn implicit negation and disjunc-
tion in the context of physical reasoning tasks. In this section, as a proof-of-concept, we demonstrate
that such implicit reasoning is possible. Using a model that has a built-in (rather than learned) physics
engine, we illustrate that a model with an explicit representation of physical dynamics is able to
reason using implicit negation and disjunction, and can succeed on the Two-Cup task.

3.2.1     M ODEL
We use a pared-down version of ADEPT (Smith et al., 2019), a model of humans’ object tracking
as constrained by their intuitive physics. This model is not trained and works out-of-the-box.
ADEPT uses a Bayesian filtering algorithm to represent beliefs about the locations of occluded
objects, and probabilistically represents potential future trajectories of those objects using a built-
in physics simulator. This model is not trained and works out-of-the-box. For a video sequence
x1 , x2 , ..., xt , ...xT , the model receives ground truth object segmentations of bounding boxes around
the visible objects in the scene at each frame xi . Objects that are occluded are not included.
An important feature of ADEPT is its ability to maintain beliefs about multiple possible worlds,
which is done explicitly using a particle filter. ADEPT maintains a set of “particles”, each of which is
a representation of the complete scene at time t. The next step of each particle is generated using
a noisy internal physics simulator. After several steps, the particles are resampled based on their
likelihood, which is calculated based on the overlap between the particle’s representation of the world
and the observations. Additional details explaining the ADEPT model are included in the Appendix.
We evaluate the accuracy of the ADEPT model on the Two-Cup task data using 100 particles 3 . We
calculate the likelihood of each particle at the critical frame, and then group all particles based by
where they represent the ball in the scene. If a particle represents the ball as being in the same cup
that the ground truth ball is in, that particle is coded as ”correct cup“, if it’s in the other cup it is coded
as “incorrect cup”, and anywhere else on the screen is “elsewhere”. We then sum the likelihood of
the particles in each of the three groups to arrive at a final score.

3.2.2     R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION
Our results are shown in Figure 3. Before the critical frame, the ADEPT model is uncertain about the
location of the ball (frame f), and its belief is distributed roughly evenly over the two cups. After the
critical frame, its belief shifts entirely to the correct cup (frame g). This pattern is consistent with the
negation and disjunction inferences, and the ADEPT model thus succeeds at the Two-Cup task.
   3
     We experimented with many values of particle count, and found that the choice did not affect the results as
long as there was a reasonable chance that at least one particle would end up in each cup.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         e                    f                   g


Figure 3: Key frames of the Two-Cup task, visualizing the particles of the ADEPT model. There are
100 particles, and each circle is one particle’s representation of its beliefs about the ball’s location.


These results illustrate how implicit representations of negation and disjunction can work. The model
succeeds at the Two-Cup task, but it does so using a representational mechanism specific to the
physical reasoning domain (here, the particle filter). The disjunction is implicit by virtue of all the
particles being simulated in either cup at the same time, prior to the reveal of the empty cup. The
negation is then implicit in how ADEPT responds to the empty cup. The probability of resampling
any particle in which the ball had been in the empty cup is reduced to zero. Clearly, this mechanism
could not readily transfer to other logical reasoning tasks (e.g., linguistic reasoning) in the way a
formal logical operator could. These results thus illustrate a plausible way in which neural network
models might learn to solve the same task by modeling the physical world. Namely, if the neural
network learns to represent the physics of objects’ motion, as well as a representation of uncertainty
and resampling in the face of unexpected observations, it should be able to pass the Two-Cup task.

4     E XPERIMENTS

We present three experiments, which get progressively easier, each requiring less generalization from
the model than the previous. This experimental structure is due to the fact that we observe negative
results in the earlier experiments, and thus progressively relax requirements in order to understand the
conditions under which the model can succeed (if at all). First, we train OPNet only on a basic object
tracking task, and evaluate whether such training is sufficient for the model to encode an implicit
negation and disjunction, as measured by the Two-Cup task (§4.1). Second, we train on the Invisible
Displacement task (§2.1) in addition to basic object tracking (§4.2). Finally, we consider a transfer
learning paradigm, in which the model is trained first on the Invisible Displacement task and then
fine-tuned on the Two-Cup task (§4.3).

4.1   E XPERIMENT 1: Z ERO -S HOT T RANSFER FROM O BJECT T RACKING

We first test whether a model trained only on object tracking will acquire a capacity for implicit
logical reasoning that is sufficient to generalize directly to the Two-Cup task. We train an OPNet
model on Physical Reasoning + Two-Cup Ablations data. To compare this model’s performance to
a plausible ceiling benchmark, we also train a model on a separate dataset of 5,000 Two-Cup task
videos, which are instead drawn from the same distribution as the held-out Two-Cup test set. We
compare the accuracy of the two models to “hypothetical success” on the Two-Cup task – before the
critical frame, the ball could be in either cup, but after the critical frame in which one cup is revealed
to be empty, an ideal model will always predict that the ball is in the other cup. We select the model
that minimizes loss on the dev set (100 examples for Physical Reasoning + Two-Cup Ablations data,
50 examples for Two-Cup data). Model training details are in the Appendix.

Control Experiments In order to ensure that the experimental model has learned to track objects in
this environment, we also test it on several control datasets. These control datasets are permutations
of the Two-Cup task and are intended to ensure that the model has succeeded in encoding the basic
environmental knowledge (other than the logical reasoning patterns) on which the Two-Cup task
depends. First, Two-Cup Freebie is designed to rule out failure based on the task setup. This test
set contains the same setup as Two-Cup; but the first revealed cup shows the ball, thus removing the
need to reason by exclusion. Next, to ensure that the model can track the ball’s location, even when
occluded, we create the Known Specific Location and Known Cup Location test sets. In the former,
we reorder the frames in Fig. 1 such that the ball falls, then the occluders rise, before proceeding like


                                                    6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          Train on Two-Cup task, test on Two-Cup task
                      Dataset           Correct Incorrect           Elsewhere
                   Two-cup task           0.81       0.19              0.00
             Train on Physical Reasoning + Two-Cup Ablations, test on Two-Cup task
                      Dataset           Correct Incorrect           Elsewhere
                   Two-cup task           0.48       0.50              0.02
                      Freebie             1.00       0.00              0.00
             Known Specific Location      1.00       0.00              0.00
               Known Cup Location         0.94       0.03              0.03
                 Outside (visible)         n/a       0.00              1.00
                Outside (occluded)         n/a       0.12              0.88

Table 1: Results on the Two-Cup task and the control datasets. The models’ predictions before the
critical frame are always split roughly evenly between the two cups, when relevant. In the Outside
experiments, “elsewhere” is the correct answer, because the ball is outside of both cups.


normal. This should give away the ball’s location before any inference is necessary. Similarly, in the
latter, to ensure that the model can track an occluded ball with only general knowledge of its location
(i.e. it identifies that the ball is in a cup, but not exactly where), we reorder the frames such that the
small occluders rise, then the ball falls, then the scene proceeds. Finally, to ensure that the model is
tracking the ball and not just guessing a cup, we create the Outside control set. In this set we use
the Two-Cup setup, but the ball falls entirely outside of the cup-and-wedge structure. There are two
settings: occluded, where it falls behind a third occluder, and visible, where it is never obscured.
The experimental model succeeds with high accuracy (88%-100%) on each of the control sets, as
shown in Table 1. More detailed explanations for the results are in the Appendix.

Two-Cup Task Experiment As shown in Table 1, the predictions of the experimental model
(Physical Reasoning + Two-Cup Ablations) do not change after the critical frame. In each test video,
the occluder falling to reveal the empty space does not cause the experimental model to update its
prediction. Comparatively, when the model is trained directly on the Two-Cup task, it predicts the
correct cup after the critical frame roughly 81% of the time. These results show that the neural
network model trained only on object tracking within the physical constraints of the Two-Cup setup
does not learn an implicit representation of the logical operators required to pass the Two-Cup task.

4.2   E XPERIMENT 2: Z ERO -S HOT T RANSFER FROM R EASONING - BY-E XCLUSION TASK

One explanation for the failure observed in the above experiment is that the models never encountered
a situation in which the ball could be in either of two, non-contiguous locations at training time, and
thus never learned to represent and reason about this form of uncertainty, or to update its beliefs
about the location of the ball once the uncertainty is resolved (as the ADEPT model from §3.2 was
able to do). To test this possibility, we provide the model with much richer training data, training it
on the logical structure of the task without giving away the visual details of the solution. We train
an OPNet model not only on our original Physical Reasoning + Two-Cup Ablations data, but also
on Invisible Displacement data, which requires the same inferences as the Two-Cup task but uses a
visually different setup. We then observe that model’s performance on the Two-Cup task.

Control Experiments Similarly to the Physical Reasoning + Two-Cup Ablations experiments, we
also introduce control experiments in order to rule out the possibility that the model fails to learn
the necessary object tracking. We test the Physical Reasoning + Two-Cup Ablations + Invisible
Displacement model on all of the earlier control sets, plus three designed to test the model’s ability
to learn from the Invisible Displacement training task– Invisible Displacement Test, Invisible
Displacement Freebie and Roll-then-occlude. Invisible Displacement Test is held-out test data. In
Invisible Displacement Freebie, to rule out failure in the object tracking required for the Invisible
Displacement task itself, when the first occluder drops in the Invisible Displacement task, the ball is
found. Finally in Roll-then-occlude, similarly to the “Known Specific/Cup Location“ experiments,
we test to see that the model can track an observed ball behind occlusion. The ball rolls and comes to
a stop before the occluders rise, and then the scene progresses like normal.


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The model succeeds at the control experiments, (including the Invisible Displacement test), scoring
between 95-100% accuracy on all datasets. Detailed results can be found in the Appendix.

Two-Cup Task Experiment Again, as in the prior experiment, the model performs at chance on
the Two-Cup test (details in Appendix). The neural model makes the same errors as in the other
tests: when the occluder falls, it does not update its prediction. Even though the model is trained on
examples of the exact reasoning pattern on which it is tested, it is still unable to generalize to the
Two-Cup task. There are at least two possible explanations. First, the failure might suggest that the
model did not learn to solve the Invisible Displacement task in the “right way”, and thus despite
learning to solve that task at training time, the learning does not result in representations that are
reusable on the Two-Cup task. A second explanation is that the representations learned do capture the
logical structure of the task, but the model is not able to recognize the similarity between the tasks in
the zero-shot transfer setting. This latter failure would suggest that the neural network could succeed
with additional training focused on recognizing visually novel instantiations of the same logic.

4.3   E XPERIMENT 3: T RANSFER L EARNING ACROSS R EASONING - BY-E XCLUSION TASKS

In our final experiment, we test whether the neural models that failed to reason by exclusion might
nevertheless be learning some representation relevant to the logical structure of both tasks. If they
do, pretraining on Invisible Displacement and then finetuning on the Two-Cup task might allow it
to succeed more quickly at the held-out Two-Cup test than training on the Two-Cup task alone. To
examine this, we compare how quickly OPNet models begin to succeed on the Two-Cup task when
first trained on Invisible Displacement or Physical Reasoning to models initialized from scratch.
Figure 4 shows the results. We find that the model that is first trained on Invisible Displacement and
then trained on the Two-Cup training data succeeds at the held-out Two-Cup test set before both a
model that is trained on the Two-Cup task from scratch and a model trained only on object tracking.


Figure 4: Accuracy (% of examples that place bounding box for the ball in the "correct cup") on the
Two-Cup task over time when finetuned on the Two-Cup task and pretrained using various methods.
Each is averaged across 5 random seeds. There are 5,000 data points in one epoch.


5     D ISCUSSION

This work asks whether neural network models are capable of learning implicit representations
of logic from self-supervised training in the domain of physical reasoning. Overall, the results in
Section 4 are primarily negative. We see in §4.1 that the neural networks trained on a basic physical
reasoning task fail to generalize to the Two-Cup task. More importantly, in §4.2, we see the same
models failed even when trained on the Invisible Displacement task, a task which should in principle
rely on exactly the same conceptual representations as does the target Two-Cup task. Thus, the
evidence strongly suggests that the neural networks are learning to solve the training tasks using
representations other than those which the tasks are designed to require. However, in Section 4.3, we
see suggestive evidence that the neural network might learn some desirable representations related
to logical reasoning, demonstrated by the fact that training on one logical reasoning tasks speeds


                                                   8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


learning on another logically identical task. While this falls short of our test for possession of an
(implicit) logical representation, it does indicate that the network may be capable of developing the
desired representation, e.g., under different training conditions.
As a proof-of-concept, the ADEPT model we analyzed in §3.2 was able to succeed on the Two-Cup
task. This indicates that, at a minimum, a good model of the physical dynamics of the environment
combined with a good model of possible worlds is sufficient to deploy implicit logical operators
for reasoning. Thus, when we observe that the object tracking neural network models fail on our
evaluations, it implies that they are failing to learn at least one of the relevant components of ADEPT’s
model of intuitive physics. Our control conditions presented in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 suggest the model
learns to track objects throughout the environment reasonably well. Thus, we are inclined to conclude
that the neural model fails because it does not learn to represent uncertainty over multiple possibilities
and/or lacks mechanisms for updating beliefs about possibilities in response to observations. Future
work considering alternative architectures and loss functions may well reveal more positive results.


6    R ELATED WORK

Intuitive physics is thought to be one of the domains of “core knowledge” in human cognition,
which are the foundations of higher-level mental processes (Spelke & Kinzler, 2007; Carey, 2009).
In recent years, computational approaches to intuitive physics problems have gained popularity–
Duan et al. (2022) have conducted a comprehensive survey. We focus on models with object-centric
representations (Smith et al., 2019; Shamsian et al., 2020).
There are several datasets of intuitive physics tasks for computational models to train and test on.
IntPhys 2019 is a benchmark dataset, on which models are trained only on positive examples; the test
task is then to distinguish examples that do and do not conform to the physics of the environment
(Riochet et al., 2018). Published concurrently is (Piloto et al., 2018), which takes a similar approach.
Rather than distinguishing consistent/inconsistent image sequences, the PHYRE task is a dataset of
physical reasoning tasks where the objective is to take one action to manipulate the scene and reach a
goal state (Bakhtin et al., 2019). Within the realm of object tracking in video, the CATER dataset
contains videos of a target object as it is occluded and shuffled behind and within other objects in a
three-dimensional scene (Girdhar & Ramanan, 2020). Although it is not an intuitive physics task per
se, similarly to this work, the ACRE dataset borrows the “blicket detector” task from developmental
psychology in order to measure the ability of neural network-based and neurosymbolic reasoning
models at the task of causal induction, or inferring causality from limited data (Zhang et al., 2021).
Neural network models are commonly thought not to be able to learn representations of explicit logical
operators that generalize flexibly (Marcus, 2001). Some work pursues that question empirically, and
seeks to determine whether, given a fixed set of symbols, the functions of explicit logical operators
can be learned or distinguished from one another (Evans et al., 2018; Traylor et al., 2021). Other
work seeks to determine whether these models can generalize negation to novel symbols (Hill et al.,
2020). In the field of natural language processing, large neural language models are often trained on
large corpora of text, and then tested on natural language inference tasks, or those requiring negation
(sentences containing words such as no and not, which is an analogous framework to the implicit
logic testing presented in this work. The representation of negation within these models tends to be
dependent on the sentential context (Kassner & Schütze, 2020; Talmor et al., 2020).


7    C ONCLUSION

In this work, we measured neural models’ ability to learn implicit representations of negation and
disjunction from data. We found that, despite tracking objects as they move and are occluded
throughout the environment, the neural models were not able to generalize to a diagnostic task
requiring implicit negation and disjunction without observing examples from that diagnostic task
itself. Furthermore, when trained on visually dissimilar data that requires the same logical capabilities,
transferring the representations to the target task did not improve performance. However, when
training on the diagnostic task, pretraining on a similar logical task caused the models to learn the
target task faster than other initialization methods. These results show a potential weakness of models
that attempt to learn and generalize logical capability from data.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research is supported in part by DARPA via the GAILA program (HR00111990064). The views
and conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of DARPA or the U.S. Government.
We would also like to thank James Tompkin, George Konidaris, Tomer Ullman, Kevin Smith, Chen
Sun, Jack Merullo, Nihal Nayak, and the participants of the McDonnell Workshop for their helpful
comments.

R EFERENCES
Anton Bakhtin, Laurens van der Maaten, Justin Johnson, Laura Gustafson, and Ross Girshick. Phyre:
  A new benchmark for physical reasoning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Jose Luis Bermudez. Thinking Without Words. Oxford University Press USA, 2003.
Josep Call. Inferences about the location of food in the great apes (pan paniscus, pan troglodytes,
  gorilla gorilla, and pongo pygmaeus). Journal of Comparative Psychology, 118(2):232, 2004.
Susan. Carey. The origin of concepts. Oxford series in cognitive development. Oxford University
  Press, Oxford ;, 2009. ISBN 9780195367638.
Nicoló Cesana-Arlotti, Ana Martín, Ernő Téglás, Liza Vorobyova, Ryszard Cetnarski, and Luca L
  Bonatti. Precursors of logical reasoning in preverbal human infants. Science, 359(6381):1263–1266,
  2018.
Nicolò Cesana-Arlotti, Ágnes Melinda Kovács, and Ernő Téglás. Infants recruit logic to learn about
  the social world. Nature communications, 11(1):1–9, 2020.
Jiafei Duan, Arijit Dasgupta, Jason Fischer, and Cheston Tan. A survey on machine learning
   approaches for modelling intuitive physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06481, 2022.
Richard Evans, David Saxton, David Amos, Pushmeet Kohli, and Edward Grefenstette. Can neural
  networks understand logical entailment? In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018.
Roman Feiman, Shilpa Mody, and Susan Carey. The development of reasoning by exclusion in
  infancy. Cognitive Psychology, 135:101473, 2022.
Rohit Girdhar and Deva Ramanan. CATER: A diagnostic dataset for Compositional Actions and
  TEmporal Reasoning. In ICLR, 2020.
Felix Hill, Andrew Lampinen, Rosalia Schneider, Stephen Clark, Matthew Botvinick, James L
  McClelland, and Adam Santoro. Environmental drivers of systematicity and generalization in a
  situated agent. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Nora Kassner and Hinrich Schütze. Negated and misprimed probes for pretrained language models:
  Birds can talk, but cannot fly. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
  putational Linguistics, pp. 7811–7818. Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020. doi:
 10.18653/v1/2020.acl-main.698. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.
  acl-main.698.
Gary F Marcus. The algebraic mind: Integrating connectionism and cognitive science. MIT press,
  2001.
Shilpa Mody and Susan Carey. The emergence of reasoning by the disjunctive syllogism in early
  childhood. Cognition, 154:40–48, 2016.
Jean Piaget. The construction of reality in the child. Routledge, 1954.
Luis Piloto, Ari Weinstein, Dhruva TB, Arun Ahuja, Mehdi Mirza, Greg Wayne, David Amos,
  Chia-chun Hung, and Matt Botvinick. Probing physics knowledge using tools from developmental
  psychology. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.01128, 2018.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Michael Rescorla. Chrysippus’ dog as a case study in non-linguistic cognition. The philosophy of
 animal minds, pp. 52–71, 2009.
Ronan Riochet, Mario Ynocente Castro, Mathieu Bernard, Adam Lerer, Rob Fergus, Véronique
  Izard, and Emmanuel Dupoux. Intphys: A framework and benchmark for visual intuitive physics
  reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.07616, 2018.
Aviv Shamsian, Ofri Kleinfeld, Amir Globerson, and Gal Chechik. Learning object permanence from
  video. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 35–50. Springer, 2020.
Kevin Smith, Lingjie Mei, Shunyu Yao, Jiajun Wu, Elizabeth Spelke, Josh Tenenbaum, and Tomer
  Ullman. Modeling expectation violation in intuitive physics with coarse probabilistic object
  representations. Advances in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
Elizabeth S Spelke and Katherine D Kinzler. Core knowledge. Developmental science, 10(1):89–96,
  2007.
Alon Talmor, Yanai Elazar, Yoav Goldberg, and Jonathan Berant. oLMpics-on what language model
  pre-training captures. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:743–758,
  2020. doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00342. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.
  tacl-1.48.
Aaron Traylor, Roman Feiman, and Ellie Pavlick. And does not mean or: Using formal languages
  to study language models’ representations. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural
  Language Processing (Volume 2: Short Papers), pp. 158–167, 2021.
Christoph J Völter and Josep Call. Causal and inferential reasoning in animals. 2017.
Chi Zhang, Baoxiong Jia, Mark Edmonds, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yixin Zhu. Acre: Abstract causal
  reasoning beyond covariation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 10643–10653, 2021.


                                               11
