Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O N THE T RADE -O FF BETWEEN ACTIONABLE
E XPLANATIONS AND THE R IGHT TO BE F ORGOTTEN
 Martin Pawelczyk1∗, Tobias Leemann1 , Asia Biega2†, and Gjergji Kasneci1†
 1
   University of Tübingen, Germany
 2
   Max-Planck-Institute for Security and Privacy, Germany



                                               A BSTRACT

            As machine learning (ML) models are increasingly being deployed in high-stakes
            applications, policymakers have suggested tighter data protection regulations (e.g.,
            GDPR, CCPA). One key principle is the “right to be forgotten” which gives users
            the right to have their data deleted. Another key principle is the right to an action-
            able explanation, also known as algorithmic recourse, allowing users to reverse
            unfavorable decisions. To date, it is unknown whether these two principles can be
            operationalized simultaneously. Therefore, we introduce and study the problem
            of recourse invalidation in the context of data deletion requests. More specifically,
            we theoretically and empirically analyze the behavior of popular state-of-the-art
            algorithms and demonstrate that the recourses generated by these algorithms are
            likely to be invalidated if a small number of data deletion requests (e.g., 1 or 2)
            warrant updates of the predictive model. For the setting of differentiable models,
            we suggest a framework to identify a minimal subset of critical training points
            which, when removed, maximize the fraction of invalidated recourses. Using our
            framework, we empirically show that the removal of as little as 2 data instances
            from the training set can invalidate up to 95 percent of all recourses output by
            popular state-of-the-art algorithms. Thus, our work raises fundamental questions
            about the compatibility of “the right to an actionable explanation” in the context
            of the “right to be forgotten”, while also providing constructive insights on the
            determining factors of recourse robustness.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Machine learning (ML) models make a variety of consequential decisions in domains such as finance,
healthcare, and policy. To protect users, laws such as the European Union’s General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) (GDPR, 2016) or the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) (OAG, 2021)
constrain the usage of personal data and ML model deployments. For example, individuals who
have been adversely impacted by the predictions of these models have the right to recourse (Voigt &
Von dem Bussche, 2017), i.e., a constructive instruction on how to act to arrive at a more desirable
outcome (e.g., change a model prediction from “loan denied” to “approved”). Several approaches in
recent literature tackled the problem of providing recourses by generating instance level counterfactual
explanations (Wachter et al., 2018; Ustun et al., 2019; Karimi et al., 2020; Pawelczyk et al., 2020a).
Complementarily, data protection laws provide users with greater authority over their personal
data. For instance, users are granted the right to withdraw consent to the usage of their data at any
time (Biega & Finck, 2021). These regulations affect technology platforms that train their ML models
on personal user data under the respective legal regime. Law scholars have argued that the continued
use of ML models relying on deleted data instances could be deemed illegal (Villaronga et al., 2018).
Irrespective of the underlying mandate, data deletion has raised a number of algorithmic research
questions. In particular, recent literature has focused on the efficiency of deletion (i.e., how to delete
individual data points without retraining the model (Ginart et al., 2019; Golatkar et al., 2020a)) and
model accuracy aspects of data deletion (i.e., how to remove data without compromising model
    ∗
        Corresponding author: martin.pawelczyk@uni-tuebingen.de
    †
        Equal senior author contribution.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


accuracy (Biega et al., 2020; Goldsteen et al., 2021)). An aspect of data deletion which has not been
examined before is whether and how data deletion may impact model explanation frameworks. Thus,
there is a need to understand and systematically characterize the limitations of recourse algorithms
when personal user data may need to be deleted from trained ML models. Indeed, deletion of
certain data instances might invalidate actionable model explanations – both for the deleting user and,
critically, unsuspecting other users. Such invalidations can be especially problematic in cases where
users have already started to take costly actions to change their model outcomes based on previously
received explanations.
In this paper, we formally examine the problem of algorithmic recourse in the context of data deletion
requests. We consider the setting where a small set of individuals has decided to withdraw their data
and, as a consequence of the deletion request, the model needs to be updated (Ginart et al., 2019). In
particular, this work tackles the subsequent pressing question:
     What is the worst impact that a deleted data instance can have on the recourse validity?
We approach this question by considering two distinct scenarios. The first setting considers to what
extent the outdated recourses still lead to a desirable prediction (e.g., loan approval) on the updated
model. For this scenario, we suggest a robustness measure called recourse outcome instability to
quantify the fragility of recourse methods. Second, we consider the setting where the recourse action
is being updated as a consequence of the prediction model update. In this case, we study what
maximal change in recourse will be required to maintain the desirable prediction. To quantify the
extent of this second problem, we suggest the notion of recourse action instability.
Given these robustness measures, we derive and analyze theoretical worst-case guarantees of the
maximal instability induced for linear models and neural networks in the overparameterized regime,
which we study through the lens of neural tangent kernels. We furthermore define an optimization
problem for empirically quantifying recourse instability under data deletion. For a given trained
ML model, we identify small sets of data points that maximize the proposed instability measures
when deleted. Since the resulting brute-force approach (i.e., retraining models for every possible
removal set) is NP-hard, we propose two relaxations for recourse instability maximization that can
be optimized using (i) end-to-end gradient descent or (ii) via a greedy approximation algorithm. To
summarize, in this work we make the following key contributions:

       • Novel recourse robustness problem. We introduce the problem of recourse invalidation
         under the right to be forgotten by defining two new recourse instability measures.
       • Theoretical analysis. Through rigorous theoretical analysis, we identify the factors that
         determine the instability of recourses when users whose data is part of the training set submit
         deletion requests.
       • Tractable algorithms. Using our instability measures, we present an optimization frame-
         work to identify a small set of critical training data points which, when removed, invalidates
         most of the issued recourses.
       • Comprehensive experiments. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple real-world
         data sets for both regression and classification tasks with our proposed algorithms, showing
         that the removal of even one point from the training set can invalidate up to 95 percent of all
         recourses output by state-of-the-art methods

Our results also have practical implications for system designers. First, our analysis and algorithms
help identify parameters and model classes leading to higher stability when a trained ML model is
subjected to deletion requests. Furthermore, our proposed methods can provide an informed way
towards practical implementations of data minimization (Finck & Biega, 2021), as one could argue
that data points contributing to recourse instability could be minimized out. Hence, our methods
could increase designer’s awareness and the compliance of their trained models.

2    R ELATED W ORK

Algorithmic Approaches to Recourse. Several approaches in recent literature have been suggested
to generate recourse for users who have been negatively impacted by model predictions (Tolomei
et al., 2017; Laugel et al., 2017; Dhurandhar et al., 2018; Wachter et al., 2018; Ustun et al., 2019;


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Van Looveren & Klaise, 2019; Pawelczyk et al., 2020a; Mahajan et al., 2019; Mothilal et al., 2020;
Karimi et al., 2020; Rawal & Lakkaraju, 2020; Dandl et al., 2020; Antorán et al., 2021; Spooner
et al., 2021; Albini et al., 2022). These approaches generate recourses assuming a static environment
without data deletion requests, where both the model and the recourse remain stable.
A related line of work has focused on determining the extent to which recourses remain invariant to
the model choice (Pawelczyk et al., 2020b; Black et al., 2021), to data distribution shifts (Rawal et al.,
2021; Upadhyay et al., 2021), perturbations to the input instances (Artelt et al., 2021; Dominguez-
Olmedo et al., 2022; Slack et al., 2021), or perturbations to the recourses (Pawelczyk et al., 2023).
Sample Deletion in Predictive Models. Since according to EU’s GDPR individuals can request
to have their data deleted, several approaches in recent literature have been focusing on updating a
machine learning model without the need of retraining the entire model from scratch (Wu et al., 2020;
Ginart et al., 2019; Izzo et al., 2021; Golatkar et al., 2020a;b; Cawley & Talbot, 2004). A related
line of work considers the problem of data valuation (Ghorbani et al., 2020; Ghorbani & Zou, 2019).
Finally, removing subsets of training data is an ingredient used for model debugging (Doshi-Velez &
Kim, 2017) or the evaluation of explanation techniques (Hooker et al., 2019; Rong et al., 2022).
Contribution. While we do not suggest a new recourse algorithm, our work addresses the problem
of recourse fragility in the presence of data deletion requests, which has previously not been studied.
To expose this fragility, we suggest effective algorithms to delete a minimal subset of critical training
points so that the fraction of invalidated recourses due to a required model update is maximized.
Moreover, while prior research in the data deletion literature has primarily focused on effective data
removal strategies for predictive models, there is no prior work that studies to what extent recourses
output by state-of-the-art methods are affected by data deletion requests. Our work is the first to
tackle these important problems and thereby paves the way for recourse providers to evaluate and
rethink their recourse strategies in light of the right to be forgotten.

3    P RELIMINARIES
The Predictive Model and the Data Deletion Mechanism. We consider prediction problems from
some input space Rd to an output space Y, where d is the number of input dimensions. We denote a
sample by z = (x, y), and denote the training data set by D = {z1 , . . . , zn }. Consider the weighted
empirical risk minimization problem (ERM), which gives rise to the optimal model parameters:
                                                n
                                                X
                                wω = arg min          ωi · ` yi , fw0 (xi ) ,                         (1)
                                          w0    i=1

where `(·, ·) is an instance-wise loss function (e.g., binary cross-entropy, mean-squared-error (MSE)
loss, etc.) and ω ∈ {0, 1}n are data weights that are fixed at training time. If ωi = 1, then the
point zi = (xi , yi ) is part of the training data set, otherwise it is not. During model training, we
set ωi = 1 ∀i, that is, the decision maker uses all available training instances at training time. In
the optimization expressed in equation 1, the model parameters w are usually an implicit function
of the data weight vector ω and we write wω to highlight this fact; in particular, when all training
instances are used we write w1 , where 1 ∈ Rn is a vector of 1s. In summary, we have introduced the
weighted ERM problem since it allows us to understand the impact of arbitrary data deletion patterns
on actionable explanations as we allow users to withdraw their entire input zi = (yi , xi ) from the
training set used to train the model fw1 . Next, we present the recourse model we consider.
The Recourse Problem in the Context of the Data Deletion Mechanism. We follow an established
definition of counterfactual explanations originally proposed by Wachter et al. (2018). For a given
model fwω : Rd →  − R parameterized by w and a distance function d(·, ·) : X × X → R+ , the
problem of finding a recourse x̌ = x + δ for a factual instance x is given by:
                      δω,x ∈ arg min (fwω (x + δ 0 ) − s)2 + λ · d(x, x + δ 0 ),                      (2)
                                δ 0 ∈Ad

where λ ≥ 0 is a scalar tradeoff parameter and s denotes the target score. In the optimization
from equation 2, the optimal recourse action δ usually depends on the model parameters and since
the model parameters themselves depend on the exact data weights configuration we write δω,x to
highlight this fact. The first term in the objective on the right-hand-side of equation 2 encourages the
outcome fwω (x̌) to become close to the user-defined target score s, while the second term encourages


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the distance between the factual instance x and the recourse x̌ω := x + δω,x to be low. The set of
constraints Ad ensures that only admissible changes are made to the factual x.
Recourse Robustness Through the Lens of the Right to be Forgotten. We first introduce several
key terms, namely, prescribed recourses and recourse outcomes. A prescribed recourse x̌ refers to a
recourse that was provided to an end user by a recourse method (e.g., salary was increased by $500).
The recourse outcome f (x̌) is the model’s prediction evaluated at the recourse. With these concepts
in place, we develop two recourse instability definitions.
Definition 1. (Recourse outcome instability) The recourse outcome instability with respect to a
factual instance x, where at least one data weight is set to 0, is defined as follows:

                                 ∆x (ω) = fw1 x̌1 − fwω x̌1 ,                               (3)
where fw1 (x̌1 ) is the prediction at the prescribed recourse x̌1 based on the model that uses the full
training set (i.e., fw1 ) and fwω (x̌1 ) is the prediction at the prescribed recourse for an updated model
and data deletion requests have been incorporated into the predictive model (i.e., fwω ).

The above definition concisely describes the effect of applying           x2                        f0 = 1
“outdated” recourses to the updated model. We assume that only the                           Updated boundary: fwω
model parameters are being updated while the prescribed recourses
                                                                                          x̃1 Invalidated recourse
remain unchanged. For a discrete model with Y = {0, 1}, Defi-
nition 1 captures whether the prescribed recourses will be invalid                            Original boundary: fw1
(∆x = 1) after deletion of training instances (see Fig. 1a). To                           x
obtain invalidation rates of recourses for a continuous-score model                                 f0 = 0
with target value s, we can also apply Definition 1 with a discretized
f 0 (x) = I [f (x) > s], where I denotes the indicator function.                                               x1
In Definition 2, consistent with related work (e.g., Wachter et al.        (a) Recourse Outcome Instability
(2018)), the distance function d is specified to be a p-norm and the      x2                        f0 = 1
recourse is allowed to change due to model parameter updates.                  Updated       Updated boundary: fwω
                                                                               recourse
Definition 2. (Recourse action instability) The Recourse action                   x̃ω     x̃1 Invalidated recourse
instability with respect to a factual input x, where at least one
data weight is set to 0, is defined as follows:                                               Original boundary: fw1

                                                                                          x
                     Φ(p)
                      x (ω) = x̌1 − x̌ω p ,                        (4)
                                                                                                    f0 = 0
where p ∈ [1, ∞), and x̌ω is the recourse obtained for the model                                               x1
trained on the data instances that remain present in the data set
after the deletion request.                                                 (b) Recourse Action Instability

Definition 2 quantifies the extent to which the prescribed recourses Figure 1: Visualizing the two
would have to additionally change to still achieve the desired re- key robustness notions. In Fig.
course outcome after data deletion requests (i.e., x̌ω , see Fig. 1b). 1a, recourse x̃1 for an input x is
Note that we are interested in how the optimal low cost recourse invalidated due to a model up-
changes even if the outdated recourse would remain valid. Using date. In Fig. 1b, recourse is ad-
our invalidation measures defined above, in the next section, we ditionally recomputed (i.e., x̃ω )
formally study the trade-offs between actionable explanations and to avoid recourse invalidation.
the right to be forgotten. To do so, we provide data dependent upper bounds on the invalidation
measures from Definitions 1 and 2, which practitioners can use to probe the worst-case vulnerability
of their algorithmic recourse to data deletion requests.

4    T RADE - OFFS B ETW. A LG . R ECOURSE AND THE R IGHT TO BE F ORGOTTEN
Here we relate the two notions of recourse instability presented in Definitions 1 and 2 to the
vulnerability of the underlying predictive model with respect to data deletion requests. We show that
the introduced instability measures are directly related to data points with a high influence on the
parameters after deletion.
Analyzing the Instability Measures. With the basic terminology in place, we provide upper bounds
for the recourse instability notions defined in the previous section when the underlying models are


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


linear or overparameterized neural networks. Throughout our analysis, we the term di := w1 − w−i
has an important impact. It measures the difference from the original parameters w1 to the parameter
vector w−i obtained after deleting the i-th instance (xi , yi ) from the model. In the statistics literature,
this term is also known as the empirical influence function (Cook & Weisberg, 1980). Below we
provide an upper bound for recourse outcome instability in linear models.
Proposition 1 (Upper bound on recourse outcome instability for linear models). For the linear
regression model f (x) = wL> x with model parameters wL = (X> X)−1 X> Y, an upper bound for
the recourse invalidation from Definition 1 by removing an instance from the training set is given by:
                                       ∆x ≤ kx̌1 k2 · max kdLi k2 ,                                      (5)
                                                         i∈[n]

                                        ri
where dLi := wL −wL,−i = (X> X)−1 xi · 1−h ii
                                              , ri = yi − wL> xi and hii = x>   >
                                                                            i (X X)
                                                                                   −1
                                                                                      xi .

The term (X> X)−1 xi = dw   dyi describes how sensitive the model parameters are to yi , while the
                              L


residual ri captures how well yi can be fit by the model. On the contrary, the term hii from the
denominator is known as the leverage and describes how atypical xi is with respect to all training
inputs X. In summary, data instances that have influential labels or are atypical will have the highest
impact when deleted. Next, we provide a generic upper bound on recourse action instability.
Proposition 2 (Upper bound on recourse action instability). For any predictive model with scoring
function f : Rd → R, an upper bound for the recourse instability from Definition 2 by removing an
instance zi = (x, y) from the training set is given by:
                                                  Z 1
                                                      Dδ
                                Φ(2)
                                  x  ≤  kd  i k 2         (w̃) dγ,                                  (6)
                                                   0  Dw        2
       Dδ
where Dw   denotes the Jacobian of optimal recourse with the corresponding operator matrix norm,
w̃ := γw +(1 − γ) w−i with w−i being the optimal model parameters with the i-th training instance
removed from the training set, and di = w − w−i .

The norm of the Jacobian of optimal recourse indicates the local sensitivity of optimal recourse with
respect to changes in model parameters w. High magnitudes indicate that a small change in the
parameters may require a fundamentally different recourse action. The total change can be bounded
by the integral over these local sensitivities, which means that low local sensitivities along the path
will result in a low overall change. Next, we specialize this result to the case of linear models.
Corollary 1 (Upper bound on recourse action instability for linear models). For the linear model
f (x) = wL> x with model parameters wL = (X> X)−1 X> Y, an upper bound for the recourse
action instability when s = 0, λ → 0 by removing an instance from the training set is given by:
                                                            √
                                                          4 2kxk2
                      Φ(2)
                        x   ≤    max   kdL
                                           k
                                         i 2                                      ,                 (7)
                                 i∈[n]          min(kwL k2 , mini∈[n] kwL,−i k2 )
under the condition that wL> wL,−i ≥ 0 (no diametrical weight changes), where wL,−i = wL − dLi is
                                                                            (yi −wL> xi )
the weight after removal of training instance i and dLi = (XT X)−1 xi          1−hii      .

For models trained on large data sets, the absolute value of the model parameters’ norm kwL k will
not change much under deletion of a single instance. Therefore we argue that the denominator
min(kwL k2 , mini∈[n] kwL,−i k2 ) ≈ kwL k. Thus, recourse action instability is mainly determined by
                                                                                            kxk2
the sensitivity of model parameters to deletion, maxi∈[n] kdLi k2 , scaled by the ratio of kw L k2
                                                                                                   .
Neural Tangent Kernels. Studying the relation between deletion requests and the robustness
of algorithmic recourse for models as complex as neural networks requires recent results from
computational learning theory. In particular, we also rely on insights on the behaviour of over-
parameterized neural networks from the theory of Neural Tangent Kernels (NTKs), which we will
now briefly introduce. Thus we study our robustness notions for neural network models in the
overparameterized regime with ReLU activation functions that take the following form:
                                                     k
                                              1 X
                                  fANN (x) = √       aj · relu(wj> x),                                   (8)
                                               k j=1


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where W = [w1 , . . . , wk ] ∈ Rd×k and a = [a1 , . . . , ak ] ∈ Rk . To concretely study the impact of
data deletion on recourses in non-linear models such as neural networks, we leverage ideas from the
neural tangent kernel (NTK) literature (Jacot et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019; Arora et al., 2019; Du et al.,
2019). The key insight from this literature for the purpose of our work is that infinitely wide neural
networks can be expressed as a kernel ridge regression problem with the NTK under appropriate
parameter initialization, and gradient descent training dynamics. In particular, in the limit as the
number of hidden nodes k → ∞, the neural tangent kernel associated with a two-layer ReLU network
has a closed-form expression (Chen & Xu, 2021; Zhang & Zhang, 2021) (see Appendix A.5):
                                                                  >
                                                                   x0 x
                                           x>0 x    π  − arcos   kx0 kkxk
                              ∞
                            K (x0 , x) =                                     .                          (9)
                                                           2π
Thus, the network’s prediction at an input x can be described by:
                                                               >
                                  fNTK (x) = K∞ (x, X) wNTK ,                                         (10)
where X ∈ Rn×d is the input data matrix, K∞ (X, X) ∈ Rn×n is the NTK matrix evaluated on the
                                                                                       −1
training data points: [K∞ (X, X)]ij = K ∞ (xi , xj ) and wNTK = K∞ (X, X) + βIn           Y solves
the `2 regularized minimization problem with MSE loss where Y ∈ Rn are the prediction targets.
With this appropriate terminology in place we provide an upper bound on recourse outcome instability
of wide neural network models.
Proposition 3 (Upper bound on recourse outcome instability for wide neural networks). For the
                                                −1
NTK model with wNTK = K∞ (X, X) + βIn              Y, an upper bound for the recourse invalidation
from Definition 1 by removing an instance (x, y) from the training set is given by:
                                ∆x ≤ kK∞ (x̌1 , X)k2 · max kdNTK
                                                             i   k2 ,                                   (11)
                                                           i∈[n]
                                                                                               −1
where dNTKi    = k1ii ki k>                                               ∞
                          i Y, where ki is the i-th column of the matrix K (X, X) + βIn             , and kii
is its i-th diagonal element.

Intuitively, dNTK
               i    is the linear model analog to dLi and dNTK
                                                           i   represents the importance that the point
zi = (xi , yi ) has on the model parameters wNTK .
In practical use-cases, when trying to comply with both the right to data deletion and the right to
actionable explanations, our results have practical implications. For example, instances with high
influence captured by di should be encountered with caution during model training in order to provide
reliable recourses to the individuals who seek recourse. In summary, our results suggest that the right
to data deletion may be fundamentally at odds with reliable state-of-the-art actionable explanations
as the removal of an influential data instance can induce a large change in the recourse robustness,
the extent to which is primarily measured by the empirical influence function di .

5    F INDING THE S ET OF M OST C RITICAL DATA P OINTS
The Objective Function. In this section, we present optimization procedures that can be readily
used to assess recourses’ vulnerability to deletion requests. On this way, we start by formulating
our optimization objective. We denote by m ∈ {∆, Φ(2) } the measure we want to optimize for.
P consider the summed instability of over the data set by omitting the subscript x, e.g., ∆ =
We
  x∈Dtest ∆x . Our goal is to find the smallest number of deletion requests that leads to a maximum
impact on the instability measure m. To formalize this, define the set of data weight configurations:
             Γα := {ω : Maximally bα · nc entries of ω are 0 and the remainder is 1.}.                  (12)
In equation 12, the parameter α controls the fraction of instances that are being removed from the
training set. For a fixed fraction α, our problem of interest becomes:
                                         ω ∗ = arg max m(ω).                                            (13)
                                                  ω∈Γα

Fundamental Problems. When optimizing the above objective we face two fundamental problems:
(i) evaluating m(ω) for many weight configurations ω can be prohibitively expensive as the objective


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


is defined implicitly through solutions of several non-linear optimization problems (i.e., model fitting
and finding recourses). Further, (ii) even for an objective m(ω) which can be computed in constant
or polynomial time optimizing this objective can still be NP-hard (a proof is given in Appendix A.3).
Practical Algorithms. We devise two practical algorithms which approach the problem in equa-
tion 13 in different ways. As for the problem of computing m(ω) in (i), we can either solve this
by (a) using a closed-form expression indicating the dependency of m on ω or (b) by using an
approximation of m that is differentiable with respect to ω. As for the optimization in (ii), once we
have established the dependency of m on ω we can either (a) use a gradient descent approach or (b)
we use a greedy method. Below we explain the individual steps required for our algorithms.

5.1   C OMPUTING THE O BJECTIVE

In the objective m(ω), notice the dependencies ∆x (ω) = ∆x (f (w(ω), x̌)) for the recourse outcome
                  (2)         (2)
instability, and Φx (ω) = Φx (δ(w(ω), x))) for the recourse action instability. In the following,
we briefly discuss how we efficiently compute each of these functions without numerical optimization.
Model parameters from data weights w(ω). For the linear model, an analytical solution can be
                               −1 >
obtained, wL (ω) = X> ΩX          X ΩY, where Ω = diag(ω). The same goes for the NTK model
                       1   1
                               ∞          1         −1 1
where wNTK (ω) = Ω Ω K (X, X)Ω 2 + βI
                       2   2                          Ω 2 Y (Busuttil & Kalnishkan, 2007, Eqn. 3).
When no closed-form expressions for the model parameters exist, we can resort to the infinitesimal
jackknife (IJ) (Jaeckel, 1972; Efron, 1982; Giordano et al., 2019b;a), that can be seen as a linear
approximation to this implicit function. We refer to Appendix C for additional details on this matter.
Model prediction from model parameters f (w, x̌). Having established the model parameters,
evaluating the prediction at a given point can be quickly done even in a differentiable manner with
respect to w for the models we consider in this work.
Recourse action from model parameters δ(w, x̌). Estimating the recourse action is more chal-
lenging as it requires solving equation 2. However, a differentiable solution exists for linear mod-
                                                              s−wL (ω)> x
els, where the optimal recourse action is given by δL = λ+kw              2 wL (ω). When the underly-
                                                                    L (ω)k2
ing predictor is a wide neural network we can approximate the recourse expression of the corre-
                           s−f      (x)
sponding NTK, δNTK ≈ λ+kw̄ω,NTKNTK (ω̄)k
                                        2 w̄NTK (ω), which stems from the first-order taylor expansion
                                       2
fω,NTK (x + δ) ≈ fω,NTK (x) + δ > w̄NTK (ω) with w̄NTK (ω) = ∇x K(x, X)wNTK (ω).

5.2   O PTIMIZING THE O BJECTIVE F UNCTION

The Greedy Algorithm. We consider the model on the full data set and compute the objective
function m(ω) under deletion of every instance (alone). We then select the instance that leads to the
highest increase in the objective. We add this instance to the set of deleted points. Subsequently,
we refit the model and compute the impact of deletion for every second instance, when deleted in
combination with the first one. Again, we add the instance that results in the largest increase to the set.
Iteratively repeating these steps, we identify more instances to be deleted. Computational complexity
depends on the implementation of the model weight recomputation, which is required O(αn2 ) times.
The Gradient Descent Algorithm. Because our developed computation of m(ω) can be made
differentiable, we also propose a gradient-based optimization framework. We consider the relaxation
of the problem in equation 13,

                                  ω ∗ = arg max m(ω) − k1 − ωk0 ,                                     (14)
                                           ω∈{0,1}n


where the `0 norm encourages to change as few data weights from 1 to 0 as possible while few
removals of training instances should have maximum impact on the robustness measure. The problem
in equation 14 can be further relaxed to a continuous and unconstrained optimization problem. To do
so we use a recently suggested stochastic surrogate loss for the `0 term (Yamada et al., 2020). Using
this technique, a surrogate loss for equation 14 can be optimized using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD). We refer to Appendix C for more details and pseudo-code of the two algorithms.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                       % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                                                                                   % Recourses Invalidated
                                                                            dice                                                                               scfe                                                                    cem
                               100                                                                                                 100                                                                                       100
                                 75                                                                                                         75                                                                                75
                                 50                                                                                                         50                                                                                50
                                 25                                                                                                         25                                                                                25
                                           0                                                                                                 0                                                                                    0
                                                         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                          Number Training Instances Removed                                               Number Training Instances Removed                                        Number Training Instances Removed
                                                                             greedy, linreg                                          greedy, ntk         random, linreg                                      random, ntk


                                                                                                                                                    (a) Admission
                               % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                  % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                                                                       % Recourses Invalidated
                                                                               dice                                                                            scfe                                                                   cem
                                                         100                                                                                100                                                                  100
                                                          75                                                                                75                                                                               75
                                                          50                                                                                50                                                                               50
                                                          25                                                                                25                                                                               25
                                                           0                                                                                 0                                                                                0
                                                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                                Number Training Instances Removed                                                Number Training Instances Removed                    Number Training Instances Removed
                                                                                   greedy, linreg                                           greedy, ntk         random, linreg                  random, ntk


                                                                                                                                                       (b) Heloc

Figure 2: Measuring the tradeoff between recourse outcome instability and the number of deletion
requests for both the Admission and the Heloc data sets for regression and NTK models and various
recourse methods. Results were obtained by greedy optimization; see Appendix B for SGD results.

6    E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

We experimentally evaluate our framework in terms of its ability to find significant recourse invalida-
tions using the instability measures presented in Section 3.
Data Sets. For our experiments on regression tasks we use two real-world data sets. In addition,
we provide results for two classification datasets in the Appendix B. First, we use law school data
from the Law School Admission Council (Admission). The council carried out surveys across 163
law schools in the US, in which they collected information from 21,790 law students across the US
(Wightman, 1998). The data contains information on the students’ prior performances. The task is to
predict the students’ first-year law-school average grades. Second, we use the Home Equity Line of
Credit (Heloc) data set. Here, the target variable is a score indicating whether individuals will repay
the Heloc account within a fixed time window. Across both tasks we consider individuals in need of
recourse if their scores lie below the median score across the data set.
Recourse Methods. We apply our techniques to four different methods which aim to generate
low-cost recourses using different principles: SCFE was suggested by Wachter et al. (Wachter et al.,
2018) and uses a gradient-based objective to find recourses, DICE (Mothilal et al., 2020) uses a
gradient-based objective to find recourses subject to a diversity constraint, and CEM (Dhurandhar
et al., 2018) uses a generative model to encourage recourses to lie on the data manifold. For all
methods, we used the recourse method implementations from the CARLA library (Pawelczyk et al.,
2021) and specify the `1 cost constraint. Further details on these algorithms are provided in App. C.
Evaluation Measures. For the purpose of our evaluation, we use both the recourse outcome instabil-
ity measure and the recourse action instability measure presented in Definitions 1 and 2. We evaluate
the efficacy of our framework to destabilize a large fraction of recourses using a small number of
deletion requests (up to 14). To find critical instances, we use the greedy and the gradient-based
algorithms described in Sec. 5. After having established a set of critical points, we recompute the
metrics with the refitted models and recourses to obtain a ground truth result.
For the recourse outcome instability, our metric ∆ counts the number of invalidated recourses. We
use the median as the target score s, i.e., if the recourse outcome flips back from a positive leaning
prediction (above median) to a negative one (below median) it is considered invalidated. When
evaluating recourse action instability, we identify a set of critical points, delete these points from
the train set and refit the predictive model. In this case, we also have to recompute the recourses to
evaluate Φp . We then measure the recourse instability using Definition 2 with p = 2. Additionally,
we compare with a random baseline, which deletes points uniformly at random from the train set. We
compute these measures for all individuals from the test set who require algorithmic recourse. To
obtain standard errors, we split the test set into 5 folds and report averaged results over these 5 folds.


                                                                                                                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 scfe                                                                    scfe


      Ave. absolute change


                                                                              Ave. absolute change
                             1.5                                                                     10
                             1.2                                                                      8
                             0.9                                                                      6
                             0.6                                                                      4
                             0.3                                                                      2
                             0.0                                                                      0
                                    1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14                                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
                                   Number Training Instances Removed                                      Number Training Instances Removed
                                    sgd, linreg             sgd, ntk                                       sgd, linreg              sgd, ntk
                                    random, linreg          random, ntk                                    random, linreg           random, ntk

                                         (a) Admission                                                             (b) Heloc

Figure 3: Quantifying the tradeoff between recourse action instability as measured in Definition 2
and the number of deletion requests for both the Admission and the Heloc data sets for the SCFE
method when the underlying model is linear or an NTK (results by SGD optimization).
Results. In Figure 2, we measure the tradeoff between recourse outcome instability and the number
of deletion requests. We plot the number of deletion requests against the fraction of all recourses
that become invalidated when up to k ∈ {1, . . . , 14} training points are removed from the training
set of the predictive model. When the underlying model is linear, we observe that the removal of as
few as 5 training points induces invalidation rates of all recourses that are as high as 95 % percent –
we observe a similar trend across all recourse methods. Note that a similar trend is present for the
NTK model; however, a larger number of deletion requests (roughly 9) is required to achieve similar
invalidation rates. Finally, also note that our approach is always much more effective at deleting
instances than the random baseline. In Figure 3, we measure the tradeoff between recourse action
instability and the number of deletion requests with respect to the SCFE recourse method when the
underlying predictive model is linear or an NTK model. For this complex objective, we use the
more efficient SGD optimization. Again, we observe that our optimization method significantly
outperforms the random baselines at finding the most influential points to be removed.
Additional Models and Tasks. In addition to the here presented results, we provide results for
classification tasks with (a) Logistic Regression, (b) Kernel-SVM and (c) ANN models on two
additional data sets (Diabetes and COMPAS) in Appendix B. Across all these models, we observe
that our removal algorithms outperform random guessing; often by up to 75 percentage points.
Factors of Recourse Robustness. Our empirical results shed light on which factors are influential
in determining robustness of trained ML models with respect to deletion requests. In combination
with results from Fig. 4 (see Appendix B), our results suggest that linear models are more susceptible
to invalidation in the worst-case but are slightly more robust when it comes to random removals.
Furthermore, the characteristics of the data set play a key role; in particular those of the critical
points. We perform an additional experiment where we consider modified data sets without the most
influential points identified by our optimization approaches. In Appendix B, initial results show that
this simple technique decreases the invalidation probabilities by up to 6 percentage points.

7   D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In this work, we made the first step towards understanding the tradeoffs between actionable model
explanations and the right to be forgotten. We theoretically analyzed the robustness of state-of-the-art
recourse methods under data deletion requests and suggested (i) a greedy and (ii) a gradient-based
algorithm to efficiently identify a small subset of individuals, whose data, when removed, would lead
to invalidation of a large number of recourses for unsuspecting other users. Our experimental evalua-
tion with multiple real-world data sets on both regression and classification tasks demonstrates that
the right to be forgotten presents a significant challenge to the reliability of actionable explanations.
Finally, our theoretical results suggest that the robustness to deletion increases when the model
parameter changes under data deletion remain small. This formulation closely resembles the definition
of Differential Privacy (DP) (Dwork et al., 2014). We therefore conjecture that the reliability of
actionable recourse could benefit from models that have been trained under DP constraints. As the
field of AI rapidly evolves, data protection authorities will further refine the precise interpretations
of general principles in regulations such as GDPR. The present paper contributes towards this goal
theoretically, algorithmically, and empirically by providing evidence of tensions between different
data protection principles.


                                                                          9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ethics statement. Our findings raise compelling questions on the deployment of counterfactual
explanations in practice. First of all, Are the two requirements of actionable explanations and the
right to be forgotten fundamentally at odds with one another? The theoretical and empirical results
in this work indicate that for many model and recourse method pairs, this might indeed be the case.
This finding leads to the pressing follow-up question: How can practitioners make sure that their
recourses stay valid under deletion requests? A first take might be to implement the principle of data
minimization (Biega et al., 2020; Biega & Finck, 2021; Shanmugam et al., 2022) in the first place,
i.e., exclude the k most critical data points from model training.
Acknowledgments. We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful feedback.
MP would like to thank Jason Long, Emanuele Albini, Jiāháo Chén, Daniel Dervovic and Daniele
Magazzeni for insightful discussions at early stages of this work.

R EFERENCES
Emanuele Albini, Jason Long, Danial Dervovic, and Daniele Magazzeni. Counterfactual shapley addi-
  tive explanations. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency
 (FAccT), 2022.
Julia Angwin, Jeff Larson, Surya Mattu, and Lauren Kirchner. Machine bias: There’s software used
  across the country to predict future criminals. and it’s biased against blacks, 2016.
Javier Antorán, Umang Bhatt, Tameem Adel, Adrian Weller, and José Miguel Hernández-Lobato.
  Getting a clue: A method for explaining uncertainty estimates. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On
  exact computation with an infinitely wide neural net. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems (NeurIPS), 32, 2019.
André Artelt, Valerie Vaquet, Riza Velioglu, Fabian Hinder, Johannes Brinkrolf, Malte Schilling, and
  Barbara Hammer. Evaluating robustness of counterfactual explanations. arXiv:2103.02354, 2021.
Asia J. Biega and Michèle Finck. Reviving purpose limitation and data minimisation in data-driven
  systems. Technology and Regulation, 2021.
Asia J. Biega, Peter Potash, Hal Daumé, Fernando Diaz, and Michèle Finck. Operationalizing the
  legal principle of data minimization for personalization. In ACM(43) SIGIR ’20, pp. 399–408,
  2020.
Emily Black, Zifan Wang, Matt Fredrikson, and Anupam Datta. Consistent counterfactuals for deep
  models. arXiv:2110.03109, 2021.
Steven Busuttil and Yuri Kalnishkan. Weighted kernel regression for predicting changing dependen-
  cies. In European Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 535–542. Springer, 2007.
Gavin C Cawley and Nicola LC Talbot. Fast exact leave-one-out cross-validation of sparse least-
  squares support vector machines. Neural networks, 17(10):1467–1475, 2004.
Lin Chen and Sheng Xu. Deep neural tangent kernel and laplace kernel have the same {rkhs}. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
Youngmin Cho and Lawrence Saul. Kernel methods for deep learning. Advances in neural information
  processing systems (NeurIPS), 22, 2009.
R Dennis Cook and Sanford Weisberg. Characterizations of an empirical influence function for
  detecting influential cases in regression. Technometrics, 22(4):495–508, 1980.
Lehel Csató and Manfred Opper. Sparse on-line gaussian processes. Neural computation, 14(3):
  641–668, 2002.
Susanne Dandl, Christoph Molnar, Martin Binder, and Bernd Bischl. Multi-objective counterfactual
  explanations. In International Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, pp. 448–469.
  Springer, 2020.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Amit Dhurandhar, Pin-Yu Chen, Ronny Luss, Chun-Chen Tu, Paishun Ting, Karthikeyan Shanmugam,
 and Payel Das. Explanations based on the missing: Towards contrastive explanations with pertinent
 negatives. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.

Ricardo Dominguez-Olmedo, Amir-Hossein Karimi, and Bernhard Schölkopf. On the adversarial
  robustness of causal algorithmic recourse. In International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), 2022.

Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.
  2017.

Simon S. Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2019.

Cynthia Dwork, Aaron Roth, et al. The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy. Found. Trends
  Theor. Comput. Sci., 9(3-4):211–407, 2014.

Bradley Efron. The jackknife, the bootstrap and other resampling plans. SIAM, 1982.

Michele Finck and Asia J Biega. Reviving purpose limitation and data minimisation in data-driven
 systems. Technology and Regulation, 2021:44–61, 2021.

GDPR. Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the european parliament and of the council. Official Journal of
 the European Union, 2016.

Amirata Ghorbani and James Zou. Data shapley: Equitable valuation of data for machine learning.
 In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International
 Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), volume 97, pp. 2242–2251. PMLR, 2019.

Amirata Ghorbani, Michael Kim, and James Zou. A distributional framework for data valuation. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 3535–3544. PMLR, 2020.

Antonio Ginart, Melody Y. Guan, Gregory Valiant, and James Zou. Making ai forget you: Data
  deletion in machine learning. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference on Neural Information
 Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada, 2019.

Ryan Giordano, Michael I. Jordan, and Tamara Broderick. A higher-order swiss army infinitesimal
  jackknife. ArXiv, abs/1907.12116, 2019a.

Ryan Giordano, William Stephenson, Runjing Liu, Michael Jordan, and Tamara Broderick. A swiss
  army infinitesimal jackknife. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), 2019b.

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Eternal sunshine of the spotless net:
  Selective forgetting in deep networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
 Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2020a.

Aditya Golatkar, Alessandro Achille, and Stefano Soatto. Forgetting outside the box: Scrubbing deep
  networks of information accessible from input-output observations. arXiv:2003.02960, 2020b.

Abigail Goldsteen, Gilad Ezov, Ron Shmelkin, Micha Moffie, and Ariel Farkash. Data minimization
  for gdpr compliance in machine learning models. AI and Ethics, pp. 1–15, 2021.

Sara Hooker, Dumitru Erhan, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, and Been Kim. A benchmark for interpretabil-
  ity methods in deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS), 2019.

Zachary Izzo, Mary Anne Smart, Kamalika Chaudhuri, and James Zou. Approximate data deletion
  from machine learning models. In Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu (eds.), Proceedings of
  The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), volume 130.
  PMLR, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS),
  31, 2018.
L Jaeckel. The infinitesimal jackknife. memorandum. Technical report, MM 72-1215-11, Bell Lab.
  Murray Hill, NJ, 1972.
Amir-Hossein Karimi, Gilles Barthe, Borja Balle, and Isabel Valera. Model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for consequential decisions. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
 and Statistics (AISTATS), 2020.
Richard M Karp. Reducibility among combinatorial problems. In Complexity of computer computa-
  tions, pp. 85–103. Springer, 1972.
Thibault Laugel, Marie-Jeanne Lesot, Christophe Marsala, Xavier Renard, and Marcin Detyniecki.
  Inverse classification for comparison-based interpretability in machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1712.08443, 2017.
Jaehoon Lee, Lechao Xiao, Samuel Schoenholz, Yasaman Bahri, Roman Novak, Jascha Sohl-
  Dickstein, and Jeffrey Pennington. Wide neural networks of any depth evolve as linear models
  under gradient descent. Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS), 32, 2019.
Divyat Mahajan, Chenhao Tan, and Amit Sharma. Preserving causal constraints in counterfactual
  explanations for machine learning classifiers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03277, 2019.
Rupert G Miller Jr. An unbalanced jackknife. The Annals of Statistics, pp. 880–891, 1974.
Ramaravind K. Mothilal, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. Explaining machine learning classifiers
  through diverse counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), 2020.
CA OAG. Ccpa regulations: Final regulation text. Office of the Attorney General, California
 Department of Justice, 2021.
Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji Kasneci. Learning model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for tabular data. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020 (WWW). ACM, 2020a.
Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji. Kasneci. On counterfactual explanations un-
 der predictive multiplicity. In Proceedings of the 36th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
 Intelligence (UAI), pp. 809–818. PMLR, 2020b.
Martin Pawelczyk, Sascha Bielawski, Johan Van den Heuvel, Tobias Richter, and Gjergji Kasneci.
 Carla: A python library to benchmark algorithmic recourse and counterfactual explanation al-
 gorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (Benchmark and
 Datasets Track), 2021.
Martin Pawelczyk, Chirag Agarwal, Shalmali Joshi, Sohini Upadhyay, and Himabindu Lakkaraju.
 Exploring counterfactual explanations through the lens ofadversarial examples: A theoretical and
 empirical analysis. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
 2022.
Martin Pawelczyk, Teresa Datta, Johannes van-den Heuvel, Gjergji Kasneci, and Himabindu
 Lakkaraju. Algorithmic recourse in the face of noisy human responses. In International Conference
 on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
Kaivalya Rawal and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Interpretable and interactive summaries ofactionable
  recourses. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 33, 2020.
Kaivalya Rawal, Ece Kamar, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Algorithmic recourse in the wild: Under-
  standing the impact of data and model shifts. arXiv:2012.11788, 2021.
Yao Rong, Tobias Leemann, Vadim Borisov, Gjergji Kasneci, and Enkelejda Kasneci. A consistent
  and efficient evaluation strategy for attribution methods. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning (ICML), 2022.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Divya Shanmugam, Fernando Diaz, Samira Shabanian, Michèle Finck, and Asia J. Biega. Learning
  to limit data collection via scaling laws: A computational interpretation for the legal principle of
  data minimization. In ACM FAccT ’22, 2022.
Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Himabindu Lakkaraju, and Sameer Singh. Counterfactual explanations
  can be manipulated. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34,
  2021.
Thomas Spooner, Danial Dervovic, Jason Long, Jon Shepard, Jiahao Chen, and Daniele Magazzeni.
  Counterfactual explanations for arbitrary regression models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.15212,
  2021.
Beata Strack, Jonathan P DeShazo, Chris Gennings, Juan L Olmo, Sebastian Ventura, Krzysztof J
  Cios, and John N Clore. Impact of hba1c measurement on hospital readmission rates: analysis of
  70,000 clinical database patient records. BioMed research international, 2014, 2014.
Gabriele Tolomei, Fabrizio Silvestri, Andrew Haines, and Mounia Lalmas. Interpretable predictions
  of tree-based ensembles via actionable feature tweaking. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD). ACM, 2017.
Sohini Upadhyay, Shalmali Joshi, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Towards robust and reliable algorithmic
  recourse. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), volume 34, 2021.
Berk Ustun, Alexander Spangher, and Y. Liu. Actionable recourse in linear classification. In
  Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAT*), 2019.
Arnaud Van Looveren and Janis Klaise. Interpretable counterfactual explanations guided by proto-
  types. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02584, 2019.
Eduard Fosch Villaronga, Peter Kieseberg, and Tiffany Li. Humans forget, machines remember:
  Artificial intelligence and the right to be forgotten. Computer Law & Security Review, 34(2):
  304–313, 2018.
Paul Voigt and Axel Von dem Bussche. The eu general data protection regulation (gdpr). A Practical
  Guide, 1st Ed., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 10:3152676, 2017.
Sandra Wachter, Brent Mittelstadt, and Chris Russell. Counterfactual explanations without opening
  the black box: automated decisions and the gdpr. Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, 31(2),
  2018.
Linda F Wightman. Lsac national longitudinal bar passage study. lsac research report series. 1998.
Yinjun Wu, Edgar Dobriban, and Susan Davidson. Deltagrad: Rapid retraining of machine learning
  models. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 10355–10366. PMLR,
  2020.
Bo Xie, Yingyu Liang, and Le Song. Diverse neural network learns true target functions. In Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), pp. 1216–1224. PMLR, 2017.
Yutaro Yamada, Ofir Lindenbaum, Sahand Negahban, and Yuval Kluger. Feature selection using
  stochastic gates. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning
  (ICML), volume 119, 13–18 Jul 2020.
Rui Zhang and Shihua Zhang. Rethinking influence functions of neural networks in the over-
  parameterized regime. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI),
  2021.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A PPENDIX

A     T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
A.1   U PPER B OUNDS ON R ECOURSE O UTCOME I NSTABILITY

Proposition 1 (Upper Bound on Output Robustness for Linear Models). For the linear regression
model f (x) = w> x with weights given by w = (X> X)−1 X> Y, an upper bound for the output
robustness by removing an instance (x, y) from the training set is given by:
                                      ∆x ≤ max kdi k2 · kx̌1 k2 ,                                 (15)
                                             i∈[n]
                          ri
where di = (X> X)−1 xi · 1−h ii
                                , ri = yi − w> xi and hii = x>   >
                                                             i (X X)
                                                                    −1
                                                                       xi .

Proof. By Definition 1, we have:
           ∆x = w1> x̌1 − w−i  >
                                 x̌1                                                              (16)
                                >
              = w1 − w−i x̌1
                                                 >
                                  (yi − wT xi )

              = (XT X)−1 xi                        x̌1              (by Theorem 1)                (17)
                                     1 − hii
              ≤ kdi k2 · kx̌1 k2                                    (by Cauchy-Schwartz)          (18)
              ≤ kx̌1 k2 · max kdi k2 ·,                                                           (19)
                          i∈[n]
                                  T
                          −w xi )
where di = (XT X)−1 xi (yi1−hii
                                  . This completes our proof.
Proposition 2 (Upper Bound on Output Robustness for NTK). For the NTK model with wNTK =
                     −1
  K∞ (X, X) + λIn        Y, an upper bound for the output robustness by removing an instance (x, y)
from the training set is given by:
                                  ∆x ≤ kK∞ (x̌1 , X)k2 · max kdi k2 ,                             (20)
                                                          i∈[n]
                                                                                      −1
where di = k1ii ki k>                                                ∞
                     i Y, where ki is the i-th column of the matrix K (X, X) + βIn         , and kii is
its i-th diagonal element.

Proof. By Definition 1 and the weight-update theorem by Zhang & Zhang (2021) (see Appendix
A.4) and the assumption of the over-parameterized regime, we have:
                      −i
 ∆x = fNTK (x̌1 ) − fNTK  (x̌1 )

                       >                    >                     −1    1
    = K∞ (x̌1 , X) wNTK − K∞ (x̌1 , X)          (K∞ (X, X) + βIn           ki k>

                                                                     −         i   Y              (21)
                                                                       kii
                      > 1
    = K∞ (x̌1 , X)           ki k>
                                 i Y                                                              (22)
                         kii
    ≤ kdi k2 · kK∞ (x̌1 , X)k2 (by Cauchy-Schwartz)
    ≤ kx̌1 k2 · max kdi k2 ,                                                                      (23)
                i∈[n]

where di = k1ii ki k>
                    i Y which completes our proof.


A.2   U PPER B OUNDS ON R ECOURSE ACTION I NSTABILITY

Proposition 3 (Upper Bound on Input Robustness). For the linear regression model f (x) = w> x
with weights given by w = (X> X)−1 X> Y, an upper bound for the input robustness in the setting
s = 0, λ = 0 by removing the i-th instance (xi , yi ) from the training set is given by:
                                                        √
                                 (2)                  4 2kxk2
                               Φx ≤ kdi k2                            ,                    (24)
                                             min(kwk2 , kw−i k2 )

                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


under the condition that w> w−i ≤ 0 (no diametrical weight changes), where w−i = w − di is the
                                                                    −w> xi )
weight after removal of training instance i and di = (XT X)−1 xi (yi1−h ii
                                                                             .

Proof. For a linear scoring function f (x) = w0> x with given parameters w0 , under the squared `2
norm constraint with balance parameter λ, the optimal recourse action is given by (Pawelczyk et al.,
2022):
                                                    s − w0> x
                                        δ (w0 ) =               · w0 .                              (25)
                                                    kw0 k22 + λ
Using Definition 2, we can express the total change in δ as a path integral over changes in w, times
           Dδ
the change Dw  they entail:
                     Φ(2)
                      x = δ1 − δω 2 = δ (w) − δ (w−i ) 2                                            (26)
                            Z 1
                                Dδ
                          ≤        (γw + (1 − γ)w−i ) kw − w−i k2 dγ,                               (27)
                             0  Dw
      Dδ
where Dw  denotes the Jacobian, with the corresponding operator matrix norm. Defining w̃ :=
γw + (1 − γ) w−i and using kw − w−i k2 = kdi k2 , we obtain
                                             Z 1
                                                 Dδ
                             Φ(2)
                               x  ≤ kd i k 2         (w̃) dγ.                          (28)
                                              0  Dw       2
                                                                     0>
Because of the form δ(w0 ) = f (w0 )w0 , where f (w0 ) := kw
                                                          s−w x
                                                             0 k2 +λ is a scalar function, its Jacobian
                                                                     2
                       0      0         >
has the form DwDδ
                  0 = w (∇f (w )) + f (w0 )I. We will now derive a bound on the Jacobian’s
operator norm:
              Dδ                         Dδ                        >
                  (w̃)        = max            a = max w0 (∇f (w̃)) a + f (w̃)a                     (29)
              Dw0            2  kak=1   Dw   0
                                                2   kak=1                       2
                               ≤ k∇f (w̃)k2 kw̃k2 + |f (w̃)|.                                       (30)

Additionally, we know that for s = 0, |f (w0 )| ≤ kxkkw̃k
                                                      2 kw̃k2
                                                          2   = kkxk 2
                                                                  w̃k2 . The gradient is given by
                                                             2


                  −(kw̃k22 + λ)x − 2(s − w̃> x)w̃
    k∇f (w̃)k2 =                                                                                    (31)
                           (kw̃k22 + λ)2          2
                      2
                 (kw̃k2 + λ)kxk2 + 2(s + kw̃k2 kxk2 )k2 w̃k2
               ≤                                                                                    (32)
                                    kw̃k42
                    3kxk2
                =                                                         (Using λ → 0, s = 0).     (33)
                    kw̃k22
In summary,
                             Dδ                  3kxk2          kxk2    4kxk2
                                 (w̃)        ≤          kw̃k2 +       =       .                     (34)
                             Dw0         2       kw̃k22         kw̃k2   kw̃k2
Because w̃ is a line between w and w−i , its norm is bounded from below by kw̃k2 ≥
√1 min(kwk2 , kw−i k2 ) ≥ √1 (kwk2 − kw − w−i k2 ) = √1 (kwk2 − kdi k2 ). We can thus uni-
  2                           2                               2
formly bound the integral and plug in the bound because of its positivity,
                                            Z 1
                                                 Dδ
                            Φ(2)
                              x  ≤  kd i k2          (w̃) dγ                         (35)
                                             0   Dw       2
                                            Z 1       √
                                                    4 2kxk2
                                 ≤ kdi k2                            dγ              (36)
                                             0 min(kwk2 , kw−i k2 )
                                                 √
                                                4 2kxk2
                                 = kdi k2                        ,                   (37)
                                            min(kwk2 , kw−i k2 )

which completes the proof.


                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3   C ALCULATING R ECOURSE O UTCOME I NSTABILITY FOR K D ELETIONS IS NP- HARD

We can show that, for a general scoring function f , the problem defined in equation 13 is NP-hard.
We make this proof by providing a function f for which solving the recourse outcome invalidity
problem is as hard as solving the well-known Knapsack problem, that has been shown to be NP-hard
(Karp, 1972). The knapsack problem is defined as follows:
                                             n
                                             X                  n
                                                                X
                                  max              vi qi s.t.         yi qi ≤ W,                  (38)
                                 qi ∈{0,1}
                                             i=1                i=1

where the problem considers n fixed items (vi , yi )i=1...n with a value vi and knapsack weight yi > 0,
and W is a fixed weight budget. The optimization problem consists of choosing the items that
maximize the summed values but have a weight lower than W . To solve this problem through the
recourse outcome invalidation problem, we suppose there is a data point for each item. We can
                     W
choose any k > min     yi of points to be deleted, where this condition ensures that we can remove the
number of samples maximally required to solve the corresponding knapsack problem. Note that we
can always add a number of dummy points that have no effect such that the total number of data
points is at least k. Suppose there is a classifier function:
                                   Pn                     Pn
                      fω (x) :=         i=1 vi (1 − ωi ),    i=1 yi (1 − ωi ) ≤ W .                (39)
                                     0,                   else
In this case, solving Eqn. 13 comes down to finding the set of items (i.e., removing the data points)
that have maximum value, but stay under the threshold W . Thus, if we can solve Eqn. 13, the solution
to the equivalent knapsack problem is given by q = (1 − ω).

A.4   AUXILIARY T HEORETICAL R ESULTS

We state the following classic result by Miller Jr (1974) without proof.
Theorem 1. (Leave-One-Out Estimator, Miller Jr (1974)) Define (xi , yi ) as the point to be removed
from the training set. Given the optimal weight vector w = (X> X)−1 X> Y which solves for a
linear model under mean-squared-error loss, the leave-one-out estimator is given by:
                                      (yi − wT xi )                   (yi − wT xi )
        w − w−i = (XT X)−1 xi           T
                                                      = (X T
                                                             X) −1
                                                                   xi               =: di .
                                   1 − xi (XT X)−1 xi                    1 − hii

We restate the analtical solution for the NTK weights in case of a single deletion from Zhang &
Zhang (2021).
Theorem 2. (Leave-One-Out weights for NTK models, Zhang & Zhang (2021)) Let wNTK =
                     −1
 K∞ (X, X) + λIn        Y be the weight for the NTK model on the full data Kernel model, where
K∞ (X, X) is the NTK matrix evaluated on the training data points: [K∞ (X, X)]ij = K ∞ (xi , xj ).
Then, the NTK model that would be obtained when removing instance i, could be equivalently
described by

   −i           ∞         >              ∞      >      ∞
                                                                         −1      1       >
  fNTK (x) = K (x, X) wNTK,−i = K (x, X)             K (X, X) + λIn         −       q−i q−i Y
                                                                               q−ii
                                                                          −1
where q−i is the i-th column of the matrix Q−1 = K∞ (X, X) + βIn             , and q−ii is its i-th
diagonal element of this inverse.

Proof. We begin by introducing some notation. Define:
                                  Q = K∞ (X, X) + βIn                                             (40)
                                  R = K∞ (X−i , X−i ) + βIn−1 ,                                   (41)
then the analytical NTK model when considering the dataset with one instance xi removed is given
by
                                 −i
                                fNTK (x) = K∞ (x, X−i )> R−1 Y−i ,                                (42)


                                                        16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where X−i denotes the data matrix with row i missing and Y−i denotes the label vector with the i-th
label missing. We have to show that this expression is equivalent to that stated in the theorem.
Without loss of generality, we can assume the i is the last point in the dataset (otherwise, we just
permute the data set accordingly). Therefore, we can write the matrix Q in block form:
                                               K∞ (xi , X)

                                    R                              R qi
                        Q=                                    :=                               (43)
                              K∞> (xi , X) K∞ (xi , xi )          qi> qii
Through the block matrix inversion formula (see for example Csató & Opper (2002) (eqn. 52)) we
can write Q’s inverse as
                                 −1
                                R + γ −1 R−1 qi qi> R−1 γ −1 R−1 qi

                        Q−1 =                                                             (44)
                                       γ −1 qi> R−1            γ −1
with γ = qii − qi> R−1 qi .
                                                            −1 −1
                                            −1             γ R qi
We denote the i-th (and last) column of Q as q−i =                      and the i-th and last diagonal
                                                              γ −1
                                    −1
element of the inverse as q−ii = γ . We will now show, that the form of the weights given in the
theorem (i.e., the weights for the points not removed) are equivalent to the weights that would have
been computed by plugging in the smaller kernel matrix K∞ (X−i , X−i ) in the analytical solution
and the weight for the point deleted will have a value of zero, i.e.,

                                    −1      1                              1
                K∞ (X, X) + βIn        −             >
                                                q−i q−i   Y = Q−1 −                >
                                                                              q−i q−i   Y         (45)
                                           q−ii                          q−ii
                                                                −1
                                                                R Y−i
                                                            =               .                     (46)
                                                                      0

To show this, we plug in the inversion formula Q−1 from equation 44 into equation 45 and using
q−ii = γ −1 :

      −1      1         >
    Q −          q−i q−i Y                                                                   (47)
            q−ii
         −1                                                                          !
                                                                                   >
        R + R−1 qi qi> R−1 γ −1 R−1 qi                 1 γ −1 R−1 qi γ −1 R−1 qi

                                                                                       Y−i
  =                                               −                                          (48)
              γ −1 qi> R−1             γ −1          γ −1     γ −1           γ −1       Yi
        −1
        R + γ −1 R−1 qi qi> R−1 γ −1 R−1 qi
                                                             −2 −1
                                                            γ R qi qi> R−1 γ −2 R−1 qi

                                                                                             Y−i
  =                                                   −  γ
                γ −1 qi> R−1                γ −1               γ −2 qi> R−1       γ −2        Yi
                                                                                             (49)
       −1
      R + γ −1 R−1 qi qi> R−1 − γ −1 R−1 qi qi> R−1 γ −1 R−1 qi − γ −1 R−1 qi Y−i

  =                                                                                          (50)
                  γ −1 qi> R−1 − γ −1 qi> R−1                        γ −1 − γ −1       Yi
       −1                    −1
      R       0 Y−i          R Y−i
  =                        =              .                                                  (51)
       0> 0          Yi          0
Therefore, we have equivalence between equation 42 and the formulation in the theorem.



A.5   A N A NALYTICAL NTK K ERNEL

In this section, we provide theoretical results that allow deriving the closed form solution of the NTK
for the two-layer ReLU network. First, see the paper by Jacot et al. Jacot et al. (2018) for the original
derivation of the neural tangent kernel.
A closed-form solution for two-layer ReLU networks. From (Zhang & Zhang, 2021; Du et al.,
2019, Assumption 3.1) we obtain the definition of the Kernel matrix K∞ (termed Gram matrix in the
paper Du et al. (2019)) for ReLU networks:
               K∞        ∞
                                                    >       >           >

                  ij = K (xi , xj ) = Ew∼N (0,I) xi xj I w xi ≥ 0, w xj ≥ 0


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    = x>
                                                             >            >

                                         i xj Ew∼N (0,I) I w xi ≥ 0, w xj ≥ 0
                                                          >
                                                           x x
                                              π − arcos kxiikkxjj k
                                    = x> i xj                         .
                                                        2π
The last reformulation uses an analytical result by Cho & Saul (2009). The derived result matches the
one by Xie et al. (2017), which however does not provide a comprehensive derivation.

B    A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Data sets for the Classification Tasks When considering classification tasks on the heloc and
admission data sets, we threshold the scores based on the median to obtain binary target labels. On
the Admission data set (in the classification setting), a counterfactual is found when the predicted first-
year average score switches from ‘below median’ to ‘above median’. We then count an invalidation
if, after the model update, the score of a counterfactual switches back to ‘below median’. In addition
to the aforementioned data sets, we use both the Diabetes and the Compas data sets. The Diabetes
data set which contains information on diabetic patients from 130 different US hospitals (Strack et al.,
2014). The patients are described using administrative (e.g., length of stay) and medical records (e.g.,
test results), and the prediction task is concerned with identifying whether a patient will be readmitted
within the next 30 days. We sub sampled a smaller data sets of 10000 points from this dataset. 8000
points are left to train the model, while 2000 points are left for the test set. The Compas data set
Angwin et al. (2016) contains data for more than 10,000 criminal defendants in Florida. It is used by
the jurisdiction to score defendant’s likelihood of reoffending. We kept a small part of the raw data
as features like name, id, casenumbers or date-time were dropped. The classification task consists
of classifying an instance into high risk of recidivism. Across all data sets, we dropped duplicate
instances.
Discussing the Results As suggested in Section 6, here we are discussing the remaining recourse
outcome invalidation results. We show these results for two settings. In Figure 4, we demonstrate the
efficacy of our greedy deletion algorithm across 4 data sets on the classification tasks using different
classification models (ANN, logistic regression, Kernel-SVM). For the logistic regression and the
ANN model, we use the infinitesimal jackknife approximation to calculate the probitively expensive
retraining step as described in Section 5. We observe that our method well outperforms random
guessing. The results also highlight that while the NTK theory allows to study the deletion effects
from a theoretical point of view, if one is interested in empirical worst-case approximations, the
infinitesimal jackknife can be a method of choice. As we observe this pattern across all recourse
methods, we hypothesize that this is related to the instability of the trained ANN models, and we
leave an investigation of this interesting phenomenon for future work.
Additionally, in Figure 5, we compare our SGD-based deletion algorithm to the greedy algorithm.
For the SGD-based deletion results, we observe inverse-u-shaped curves on some method-data-
model combinations. The reason for this phenomenon can be explained as follows: when the `0
regularization strength (i.e., η) is not strong enough, then the importance weights for the k-th removal
with k > 5 become more variable (i.e., SGD does not always select the most important data weight for
larger k). This drop in performance can be mitigated by increasing the strength of the `0 regularizer
within our SGD-based deletion algorithm.
In Figure 6, we study a simple removal strategy aimed at increasing the stability of algorithmic
recourse. To this end, we identified the 15 points that lead to the highest invalidation on the NTK and
linear regression models when the underlying recourse method is SCFE. Using our greedy method,
we remove these 15 points from the training data set, and we then then rerun our proposed greedy
removal algorithm. This strategy leads to an improvement of up to 6 percentage points over the initial
model where the 15 most critical points were included, suggesting that the removal of these critical
points can be used to alleviate the recourse instability issue. In future work, we plan to investigate
strategies that increase the robustness of algorithmic recourse even further.
Finally, in Figure 7 we study how well the critical points identified for the NTK model would
invalidate a wide 2-layer ReLU network with 10000 hidden nodes. To study that question, we
identified the points that lead to the highest invalidation on the NTK using our greedy method, and
we then use these identified training points to invalidate the recourses suggested by the wide ANN.
As before, we are running these experiments on the full data set across 5 folds. Figure 7 demonstrates


                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the results of this strategy for the SCFE recourse method. We see that this strategy increases the
robustness of up to 30 percentage points over the random baseline, suggesting that critical points
under NTK can be used to estimate recourse invalidation for wide ANN models.
  % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                         % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                                % Recourses Invalidated
                                               dice                                                                      scfe                                                   cem
                            100                                                                    100                                                                    100
                             75                                                                    75                                                                      75
                             50                                                                    50                                                                      50
                             25                                                                    25                                                                      25
                              0                                                                      0                                                0
                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                Number Training Instances Removed                                         Number Training Instances Removed              Number Training Instances Removed
                            greedy, logreg         greedy, kernellssvm                                     random, logreg           random, kernellssvm         greedy, ann           random, ann

                                                                                                                 (a) Admission
  % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                         % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                                % Recourses Invalidated
                                               dice                                                                      scfe                                                   cem
                            100                                                                    100                                                                    100
                             75                                                                    75                                                                      75
                             50                                                                    50                                                                      50
                             25                                                                    25                                                                      25
                              0                                                                      0                                                0
                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                Number Training Instances Removed                                         Number Training Instances Removed              Number Training Instances Removed
                            greedy, logreg         greedy, kernellssvm                                     random, logreg           random, kernellssvm         greedy, ann           random, ann

                                                                                                                    (b) Heloc
  % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                         % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                                % Recourses Invalidated
                                               dice                                                                      scfe                                                   cem
                            100                                                                    100                                                                    100
                             75                                                                    75                                                                      75
                             50                                                                    50                                                                      50
                             25                                                                    25                                                                      25
                              0                                                                      0                                                0
                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                Number Training Instances Removed                                         Number Training Instances Removed              Number Training Instances Removed
                            greedy, logreg         greedy, kernellssvm                                     random, logreg           random, kernellssvm         greedy, ann           random, ann

                                                                                                                   (c) Compas
  % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                         % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                                % Recourses Invalidated


                                               dice                                                                      scfe                                                   cem
                            100                                                                    100                                                                    100
                             75                                                                    75                                                                      75
                             50                                                                    50                                                                      50
                             25                                                                    25                                                                      25
                              0                                                                      0                                                0
                               0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                Number Training Instances Removed                                         Number Training Instances Removed              Number Training Instances Removed
                            greedy, logreg         greedy, kernellssvm                                     random, logreg           random, kernellssvm         greedy, ann           random, ann

                                                                                                                  (d) Diabetes

Figure 4: Measuring the tradeoff between recourse outcome instability and the number of deletion
requests for the Admission, Heloc, Diabetes and Compas data sets for logistic regression, kernel svm,
and ANN models across recourse methods on classification tasks. Results were obtained by greedy
optimization. The dotted lines indicate the random baselines.


C                            I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

C.1                               D ETAILS ON M ODEL T RAINING

We train the classification models using the hyperparameters given in Table 1. The ANN and the
Logistic regression models are fit using the quasi-newton lbgfs solver. We add L2-regularization to
the ANN weights. The other methods are trained via their analytical solutions. Below, in Algorithms
1 and 2, we show pseudocodes for both our greedy and sgd-based deletion methods to invalidate
the recourse outcome. In order to do the optimization with respect to the recourse action stability
measure, we slightly adjust Algorithm 2 to optimize the right metric from Definition 2.


                                                                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


% Recourses Invalidated


                                                                        % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                             % Recourses Invalidated
                                                dice                                                                 scfe                                                    cem
                          100                                                                     100                                                                  100
                          75                                                                      75                                                                   75
                          50                                                                      50                                                                   50
                          25                                                                      25                                                                   25
                           0                                                                       0                                                                    0
                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                 Number Training Instances Removed                                     Number Training Instances Removed                    Number Training Instances Removed
                                                    greedy, linreg                                greedy, ntk         random, linreg                  random, ntk

                                                                                                        (a) Admission (Greedy)
                                                dice                                                                 scfe                                                    cem
% Recourse Invalidated


                                                                        % Recourse Invalidated


                                                                                                                                             % Recourse Invalidated
                          100                                                                     100                                                                  100
                          75                                                                      75                                                                   75
                          50                                                                      50                                                                   50
                          25                                                                      25                                                                   25
                           0                                                                       0                          0
                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                 Number Training Instances Removed                   Number Training Instances Removed           Number Training Instances Removed
                                                    sgd, linreg             sgd, ntk          random, linreg         random, ntk

                                                                                                         (b) Admission (SGD)
% Recourses Invalidated


                                                                        % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                                             % Recourses Invalidated
                                                dice                                                                 scfe                                                    cem
                          100                                                                     100                                                                  100
                          75                                                                      75                                                                   75
                          50                                                                      50                                                                   50
                          25                                                                      25                                                                   25
                           0                                                                       0                                                                    0
                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                 Number Training Instances Removed                                     Number Training Instances Removed                    Number Training Instances Removed
                                                    greedy, linreg                                greedy, ntk         random, linreg                  random, ntk

                                                                                                          (c) Heloc (Greedy)
                                                dice                                                                 scfe                                                    cem
% Recourse Invalidated


                                                                        % Recourse Invalidated


                                                                                                                                             % Recourse Invalidated

                          100                                                                     100                                                                  100
                          75                                                                      75                                                                   75
                          50                                                                      50                                                                   50
                          25                                                                      25                                                                   25
                           0                                                                       0                          0
                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15              0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15        0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                 Number Training Instances Removed                   Number Training Instances Removed           Number Training Instances Removed
                                                    sgd, linreg             sgd, ntk          random, linreg         random, ntk

                                                                                                           (d) Heloc (SGD)

Figure 5: Measuring the tradeoff between recourse outcome instability and the number of deletion
requests for the Admission and Heloc data sets for linear regression and NTK models across recourse
methods on regression tasks. Results were obtained by both SGD and Greedy optimization. The
dotted lines indicate the random baselines.


C.2                              D ETAILS ON G ENERATING THE C OUNTERFACTUALS

For DICE, for every test input, we generate two different counterfactual explanations. Then we
randomly pick either the first or second counterfactual to be the counterfactual assigned to the given
input. Across all recourse methods the success rates lie above 95%, i.e., for 95% of recourse seeking
individuals the algorithms can identify recourses. The only exception is admission data set for the
NTK model, where the success rate lies at 60%. Across all recourse methods we set λ → 0. Note
that the default implementations use early stopping once a feasible recourse has been identified.


C.3                              D ETAILS ON THE `0 R EGULARIZER

Since an `0 regularizer is computationally intractable for high-dimensional optimization problems,
we have to resort to approximations. One such approximation approach was recently suggested by
Yamada et al. (2020). The underlying idea consists of converting the combinatorial search problem
to a continuous search problem over distribution parameters. To this end, recall our optimization


                                                                                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                               scfe                                                                                                              scfe
                           100                                                                                                                     100

 % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                         % Recourses Invalidated
                            75                                                                                                                      75


                                              greedy, linreg                                greedy, linreg (removal)                                50
                            50                greedy, ntk                                   greedy, ntk (removal)
                                              random, linreg                                random, linreg (removal)
                                              random, ntk                                   random, ntk (removal)
                                                                                                                                                    25
                            25
                                                                                                                                                              greedy, linreg         greedy, linreg (removal)
                                                                                                                                                     0        greedy, ntk            greedy, ntk (removal)
                             0                                                                                                                                random, linreg         random, linreg (removal)
                                                                                                                                                              random, ntk            random, ntk (removal)
                                 0   1   2   3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15                                                                             0   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                             Number Training Instances Removed                                                                                     Number Training Instances Removed


                                               (a) Heloc (Greedy)                                                                                                  (b) Admission (Greedy)

Figure 6: Measuring the efficacy of a simple removal strategy on the Heloc and Admission data set
for linear and NTK regression models. We removed the 15 critical points identified for the linear and
NTK models when the underlying recourse method is SCFE and reran the removal algorithm on the
remaining training set. Results were obtained by Greedy optimization. The dotted lines indicate the
random baselines.
                                                                % Recourses Invalidated


                                                                                                                       scfe
                                                                                          100
                                                                                           75
                                                                                           50
                                                                                           25
                                                                                            0
                                                                                                0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
                                                                                                 Number Training Instances Removed
                                                                                                greedy, annreg          random, annreg

                                                                                                     (a) Admission (Greedy)

Figure 7: Measuring the tradeoff between recourse outcome instability and the number of deletion
requests for the Admission data set for a neural network regression model. We used the critical points
identified for the NTK model to invalidate the recourses identified by a wide 2-layer ReLU network
with 10000 hidden nodes. Results were obtained by Greedy optimization. The dotted lines indicate
the random baselines.


problem from the main text:
                                                                                           ω ∗ = arg max m(ω) − η · k1 − ωk0 .                                                                           (52)
                                                                                                   ω∈{0,1}n

We will now introduce Bernoulli random variables Zi ∈ {0, 1} with corresponding parameters πi to
model the individual ωi . Instead of optimizing the objective above with respect to ω we will optimize


                                             Model                                                                                                  Parameters
                                  Linear Regression                                                         OLS, no hyperparameters.
                                  NTK Regression                                                    β = 2 (Admission), β = 5 (other data sets)
                                 Logistic Regression                                                     L2-Regularization with C = 1.0
                                   Kernel-LSSVM                                             Gaussian Kernel with γ = 1.0 (see Cawley & Talbot (2004))
                                        ANN                                               2-Layer, 30 Hidden units, Sigmoid, α = 10 (L2-Regularization)

                                                           Table 1: Model hyperparameters used in this work


                                                                                                                   21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Greedy recourse outcome invalidation
  Required: Model: fw(1) ; Matrix of Recourses: X̌1 ∈ Rq×d ; d: input dimension; q number of
  recourse points on test set; n: # train points; M : max # deleted train points; s: invalidation target
  ω (0) = 1n                                                           . All training instances present
  for m = 1 : M do
      ω (m) ← ω (m−1)
      Ỹ = 0n×q                                                                   . Recourse outcomes
      J = 0n×qn                o                                                . Invalidations present
                       (m)
      S (m) ← i ωi            6= 0                       . Set of train instances present at iteration m
                (m)
      for i ∈ S   do
            (i)            (m)                                   (m)
          wnew = update_w(ω−i )                              . ω−i has additionally set weight i to 0.
                                                              . Use analytical or IJ solution for w(ω)
          Ỹ[i, :] = fw(i) (X̌1 )                                           . New recourse outcomes
                        new

          J [i, :] = I(Ỹ[i, :] < s)                                              . Invalidation present
      end for
      index ← arg maxi∈S (m) kJ[i, :]k1                  . Find point that leads to highest invalidation
      ω (m) [index] = 0                                                        . Remove training point
  end for
  return: ω (M )                                                . data weights indicating M removals



with respect to distribution parameters π:
                              π ∗ = arg max m(Z(π)) − η · k1 − Z(π)k0 .                             (53)
                                       π

Since the above optimization problem is known to suffer from high-variance solutions, (Yamada
et al., 2020) suggest to use a Gaussian-based continuous relaxation of the Bernoulli variables:
                                     Z̃i = max(0, min(1, µi +  i )),                                (54)
where  i = N (0, σ 2 ), resulting in the following optimization problem:
                              µ∗ = arg max m(Z̃(µ)) − η · k1 − Z̃(µ)k0 .                            (55)
                                       µ

At inference time, the optimal weights are then given by Z̃i∗ = max(0, min(1, µ∗i )) ∀i ∈ [n]. To
obtain discrete weights, we take the argmax over each individual Z̃i .

C.4   D ETAILS ON THE JACKKNIFE A PPROXIMATION

When the model parameters w are a function of the data weights by solving equation 1 we can
approximate w(ω) using the infinitesimal Jackknife (IJ) without having to optimize equation 1
repeatedly (Jaeckel, 1972; Efron, 1982; Giordano et al., 2019b;a):
                                      wIJ (ω) = w1 − H−1
                                                      1 Gω−1 ,                                      (56)
where G and H1 are the Jacobian and the Hessian matrices of the loss functionP            with respect to
                                                                                            n
the data weights evaluated at the optimal model parameters w, i.e., Gω−1 = n1 i=1 (ωi − 1) ·
                            Pn    2
∂`(fw (xi ),yi )
     ∂w          and H1 = n1 i=1 ∂ `(fw (xi ),yi )
                                    ∂w∂w>
                                                   . Note that this technique computes the Hessian matrix
H1 only once. Using this Jackknife approximation, the Jacobian term Gω−1 becomes an explicit
function of the data weights which makes the Jackknife approximation amenable to optimization.


                                                   22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 SGD recourse outcome invalidation
  Required: Model: fw(1) ; Matrix of Recourses: X̌1 ∈ Rq×d ; d: input dimension; q number of
  recourse points on test set; n: # train points; M : max # deleted train points; s: invalidation target
  µ(1) = 1n                                             . Mu are soft data weights that are opimized.
  for m = 1 : Step do                                             . Perform Step number of updates.
      δ−loss=0.0
      for k = 1 : K do                          . Use K Monte-Carlo Samples for the approximation
                   (m)              2

          Sample  k ∼      N   0, σ
                                    n I
            (m)                                 (m)
           ωk     = max 0, min 1, µ(m) +  k             . Sample (soft) data weights as in Yamada et al.
  (2020)
            (m)                        (m)                         Compute model weights from data
           wk,new = update_w(ωk )                                .
                                                                   weights either analytically or with IJ
                                                                   Predict with new weights and com-

            (m)
           lk = sigmoid fw(m) (X̌1 ) − s                         .
                               k,new                               pute soft invalidation.
                                 (m)
        δ−loss = δ−loss + klk k1                                               . Add up soft inval. loss
     end for             (m)

             Pn
     r(m) = i=1 Φ 1−(µσ )i                            . Sparsity Regularizer from Yamada et al. (2020)
                                       δ−loss

      µ(m+1) = µ(m) + γ∇µ(m)             D    + λr(m)                        . Grad. Descent with lr. γ
  end for
  removed_ind = argsort(µ(Step+1) )                                           . Sort indices ascendingly
  j=0
  ω = 1n
  while j < M do                                                     . Binarize and fulfil max number M
      ω[removed_ind[j]]= 0
      j =j+1
  end while
  return: ω                                                     . data weights indicating M removals


                                                   23
