Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P ER F ED M ASK : P ERSONALIZED F EDERATED L EARN -
ING WITH O PTIMIZED M ASKING V ECTORS

 Mehdi Setayesh, Xiaoxiao Li, and Vincent W.S. Wong∗
 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
 The University of British Columbia
 {setayeshm,xiaoxiao.li,vincentw}@ece.ubc.ca



                                              A BSTRACT

            Recently, various personalized federated learning (FL) algorithms have been pro-
            posed to tackle data heterogeneity. To mitigate device heterogeneity, a common
            approach is to use masking. In this paper, we first show that using random mask-
            ing can lead to a bias in the obtained solution of the learning model. To this end,
            we propose a personalized FL algorithm with optimized masking vectors called
            PerFedMask. In particular, PerFedMask facilitates each device to obtain its opti-
            mized masking vector based on its computational capability before training. Fine-
            tuning is performed after training. PerFedMask is a generalization of a recently
            proposed personalized FL algorithm, FedBABU (Oh et al., 2022). PerFedMask
            can be combined with other FL algorithms including HeteroFL (Diao et al., 2021)
            and Split-Mix FL (Hong et al., 2022). Results based on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
            datasets show that the proposed PerFedMask algorithm provides a higher test ac-
            curacy after fine-tuning and lower average number of trainable parameters when
            compared with six existing state-of-the-art FL algorithms in the literature. The
            codes are available at https://github.com/MehdiSet/PerFedMask.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Federated learning (FL) is a distributed artificial intelligence (AI) framework, which allows multiple
edge devices to train a single model collaboratively (Konečnỳ et al., 2015; McMahan et al., 2017).
The model is trained under the orchestration of a central server. In a typical FL algorithm, each
communication round includes the following steps: (1) the edge devices download the latest model
from the server to be used as their local model; (2) each device performs multiple local update
iterations for updating the local model based on its local dataset; (3) the devices upload their updated
local models to the server; (4) the server computes the new model by aggregating the local models.
In practical systems, the devices may have diverse and limited computation, communication, and
storage capabilities. Moreover, the local datasets available to the devices may be different in size,
and contain non-independent and identically distributed (non-IID) data samples across the devices.
Under these heterogeneous settings, the performance of the conventional FL algorithms can de-
grade (Wang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2021). To handle the case when the data is non-IID, some
works (Li et al., 2020a; Karimireddy et al., 2020) have introduced new optimization frameworks
to obtain a more stable global model for the devices. Another approach to address the data het-
erogeneity issue is by designing a personalized model for each device (Arivazhagan et al., 2019;
Fallah et al., 2020; Collins et al., 2021; Oh et al., 2022). In personalized FL algorithms, instead of
obtaining a single model for all the devices, an initial model is obtained. This initial model can then
be personalized for each device using its local data samples.
To overcome the computation limitation of the heterogeneous devices, one common approach is
to use masking vectors. Masking vectors can be used to train only a sub-network of the learn-
ing model for each device based on the computational capability of that device. Masking vectors
can be combined with pruning and freezing methods. Pruning methods utilize masking vectors to
keep the important parameters of the learning model and remove those which are unimportant from
    ∗
        Corresponding author: Vincent W.S. Wong


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Illustration of an FL system using PerFedMask. The model is decoupled into a global model and a
local head model. The local head model remains unchanged during training. The devices collaboratively train
the global model. Some parts of the global model can be frozen for the devices during local updates using the
optimized masking vectors. After training, a personalized model is obtained for each device by fine-tuning.


the model architecture. However, leveraging pruning in FL may incur additional communication
overhead (Babakniya et al., 2022; Bibikar et al., 2022). Moreover, it results in different model ar-
chitectures for the devices (Guo et al., 2016). This may lead to accuracy loss, particularly when data
heterogeneity exists in the system (Hong et al., 2022). In the freezing methods, the masking vectors
are used to freeze some parts of the learning model for each device. Unlike pruning, the masked
parameters are not removed but are frozen during local updates. Hence, a more stable FL algorithm
is obtained without changing the learning model architecture. Sidahmed et al. (2021) and Pfeiffer
et al. (2022) have shown that freezing methods can reduce the computational and communication
resources required for training the learning model in FL. However, the aforementioned works use
heuristic approaches for designing the masking vectors, and do not provide a theoretical analysis for
their choice. Also, the aforementioned works do not address the data heterogeneity issue in their
proposed algorithms. In this work, we aim to answer the following question: By exploiting freezing
method in FL, what is a systematic approach to determine the masking vectors which can improve
the final test accuracy in a setting with data and device heterogeneities?
We first show that using the masking vectors to freeze the model parameters for the devices may
lead to a bias in the convergence bound. This bias can hinder the success of employing masking
vectors to tackle the device heterogeneity issue in FL. Using the insights from our analysis, we pro-
pose PerFedMask, Personalized Federated Learning with Optimized Masking Vectors (see Fig. 1).
Specifically, by decoupling the learning model into a global model and a local head model, we first
freeze the local head model for all the devices. Then, we freeze a portion of the global model for
each device based on its computational capability. In our work, the masking vectors are determined
before training through minimizing the bias term in the convergence bound. The bias can be miti-
gated by this approach. However, it may not be eliminated completely. Thus, after training of the
global model, the frozen parameters of the local head model can assist to fine-tune the entire learn-
ing model for each device. We demonstrate empirically the effectiveness of PerFedMask under the
heterogeneous settings when compared with six existing state-of-the-art FL algorithms.
PerFedMask has several distinct advantages: (1) PerFedMask generalizes the recently proposed
personalized FL algorithm, FedBABU (Oh et al., 2022). In particular, FedBABU is a special case
of PerFedMask when all the devices have the same computational capability. (2) PerFedMask is
flexible. Since PerFedMask does not change the model architecture, it can be combined with other
FL algorithms such as HeteroFL (Diao et al., 2021) and Split-Mix FL (Hong et al., 2022) to further
improve the performance. (3) PerFedMask can address the objective inconsistency problem, which
arises due to different number of local update iterations. Unlike FedNova (Wang et al., 2020) which
requires the modification of device optimizers to tackle this issue, in PerFedMask, we consider the
same number of local update iterations for all the devices, while adjusting the required number of
computations for those devices with lower computational capabilities.

2    RELATED WORK
FL Algorithms with non-IID Data. FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017) is the most popular FL algo-
rithm, which aims to find a single model for all the devices. However, the local data samples at the


                                                     2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


devices are usually non-IID, which can lead to data heterogeneity among the devices. To address
this problem, Li et al. (2020a) proposed FedProx by introducing a proximal term in the objective
function. However, this method does not attempt to find a personalized model for each device.
To tackle this issue, different personalized FL algorithms have been proposed (Arivazhagan et al.,
2019; Fallah et al., 2020; Collins et al., 2021; Oh et al., 2022) and most of them utilize fine-tuning
to obtain a higher accuracy. In particular, after training, each device uses its local data samples to
fine-tune the obtained model by performing several iterations of stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Personalization by fine-tuning may be limited if we focus on increasing the performance of a single
model across all devices (Deng et al., 2020; Oh et al., 2022). Oh et al. (2022) proposed FedBABU,
where after decoupling the learning model into a global model and a local head model, the same
randomly initialized local head model is considered for all the devices. In FedBABU, the local head
model is not updated during training. Nevertheless, the aforementioned methods are not designed
specifically to tackle the device heterogeneity issue.
FL Algorithms with Heterogeneous Devices. Since different types of devices (e.g., smartphones,
tablets, laptops) may participate in FL, the devices’ capabilities vary from one another. Pruning
method is one approach to address the device heterogeneity issue. Jiang et al. (2022); Babakniya
et al. (2022); Bibikar et al. (2022) proposed different algorithms for consistent mask adjustment at
the devices and mask aggregation at the server during training. Some works have considered static
pruning at initialization (i.e., before training). Diao et al. (2021) proposed HeteroFL, where the local
model parameters for each device are considered to be a subset of the learning model parameters.
Hong et al. (2022) proposed Split-Mix FL, where a large model is split into several small base sub-
networks according to the model width. Each device selects some of the base models for training. In
general, the efficiency of different pruning techniques for obtaining an appropriate masking vector
even in the centralized machine learning setting is still under investigation (Liu et al., 2022). Since
the pruned connections are no longer available in the model architecture, pruning at initialization
may inevitably degrade the performance of FL algorithms. Freezing method is another approach to
address the device heterogeneity issue. Sidahmed et al. (2021); Chen et al. (2021); Pfeiffer et al.
(2022) proposed different algorithms, where the masking vectors are used to freeze a portion of the
learning model for each device in FL. Hence, while the required computation and communication
resources can be reduced for each device, a more stable FL algorithm is obtained without changing
the learning model architecture. In this paper, we apply freezing method in FL. We leverage the
optimized masking vectors and fine-tuning to address both data and device heterogeneity issues.
Appendix A contains a full discussion of the related work.


3    P ROBLEM S ETTING

We consider one server and N edge devices. Each device n ∈ [N ] = {1, 2, . . . , N } has its own
set of local data samples Dn . In a supervised learning setting, each device aims to find a learning
model θn ∈ Rdθ for predicting the true label yn given the input xn , (xn , yn ) ∈ Dn , where dθ
denotes the dimension of the learning model. Let fn (θn ) represent the expected loss over the data
distribution of device n. We have fn (θn ) = E(xn ,yn )∼pn L(θn ; xn , yn ), where L(θn ; xn , yn ) is the
loss function that measures the prediction error of θn over data samples (xn , yn ) ∈ Dn , and pn is
                                                                          PN
the distribution over Dn . Formally, the optimization problem min N1 n=1 fn (θ) is solved in the
                                                                    θ
conventional FL. All our results can easily be extended to the weighted averaging case, where the
devices have different size of data samples. In this work, we study both data and device heterogeneity
issues using model personalization and masking vectors.
Model Personalization. In the heterogeneous data setting, the probability distribution pn varies
across the devices. Unlike conventional FL problems, to obtain a more personalized solution for
each device, the learning models θn , n ∈ [N ], are not equal to each other. Similar to FedBABU (Oh
et al., 2022), we decouple each learning model θn into a global representation model wg ∈ Rdw
and a device-specific head model ϕn ∈ Rdϕ , where dw and dϕ denote the dimensions of the global
model and local head model, respectively. We have dw +dϕ = dθ . To further improve accuracy after
training, we freeze the local head model parameters during training. In particular, before training,
ϕg is initialized randomly by the server to be used for initialization of all the devices’ local head
models. We have ϕn = ϕg , n ∈ [N ]. ϕn remains unchanged during training until the convergence
is reached for the global model wg . The global model is obtained by minimizing the objective


                                                    3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                              PN
function F ({wg , ϕg }) = N1 n=1 fn ({wg , ϕn }) throughout all the communication rounds, where
the operator {., .} denotes the concatenation of the learning model parameters. Since ϕg and ϕn are
never updated during training, with some abuse of notation, we consider the objective function as
             PN
F (wg ) = N1 n=1 fn (wg ). After convergence of wg , each device n obtains its personalized local
head model ϕn by fine-tuning the learning model θn using its local data samples.
Masking Vectors. In the heterogeneous device setting, devices vary in their computational and
communication capabilities. We consider that in each communication round, the devices perform τ
local update iterations. When deploying the same local models on all the devices, some devices with
limited computational capability are not able to complete τ local update iterations and send their final
local models to the server for aggregation in a timely manner. To address the device heterogeneity
issue, masking vectors are used to freeze a part of the local model parameters by customization. A
masking vector mn ∈ {0, 1}dw is selected for each device n ∈ [N ] based on its computational
capability. During local update iterations, each device n only updates those parameters in the global
model that correspond to non-zero values of the masking vector mn . Other parameters, which
correspond to the elements of mn with zero values, are frozen during local updates. Note that in
FedBABU (Oh et al., 2022), all the elements of vector mn are equal to one for all devices n ∈ [N ].
Let wni (t) denote the local model of device n at the beginning of local update iteration i in com-
munication round t. At initialization (i.e., i = 1), we set wn1 (t) = wg (t). At local update iteration
i > 1, the local model of device n is updated using SGD as follows:
                wni+1 (t) ← wni (t) − η(t)mn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)), i = 1, . . . , τ,            (1)
where ⊙ denotes the element-wise product, η(t) is the learning rate, and bin (t) is the local batch
sample chosen uniformly at random from the local dataset Dn . After performing τ local update
iterations, each device n sends its final local model, i.e., wnτ +1 (t) to the server. We have
                                                         X τ
                      wnτ +1 (t) = wg (t) − η(t)mn ⊙          ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)).           (2)
                                                             i=1
Algorithm 2 in Appendix B describes the DeviceLocalUpdate function based on (1) and (2). In the
aggregation step, we consider that the server aggregates the received final local models by taking the
masking vectors of the devices into account. The global model for the next communication round
can thus be determined through stable aggregation of unfrozen parameters, as follows:
                                                X
                                wg (t + 1) =         kn ⊙ wnτ +1 (t),                              (3)
                                                   n∈N (t)
                        (mn )l
where (kn )l =     P                denotes the l-th element of vector kn . N (t) denotes the set of
                    n′ ∈N (t) (mn′ )l
devices participating in training in communication round t. Specifically, the server selects a fraction
c of N devices at random as participating devices in each communication round. For each device n,
vector kn is obtained as a normalized masking vector using the vectors mn , n ∈ N (t). Using kn in
(3) indicates that the server only aggregates the updated parameters from the participating devices.

4    T HEORETICAL R ESULTS ON THE C ONVERGENCE R ATE OF THE G LOBAL
     M ODEL
In this section, we analyze the convergence rate of the global model when masking vectors are
used by the devices. Without loss of generality, we focus on non-convex loss functions. We also
present the convergence results for strongly convex loss functions in Appendix C. In both cases, we
assume that the loss functions are smooth. For simplicity, we obtain our convergence results for the
full device participation scenario1 (i.e., c = 1, N (t) = [N ] for all t). The analysis relies on the
following assumptions, which are commonly used for obtaining the convergence rate of different
FL algorithms in the literature (Li et al., 2020b; Reddi et al., 2021; Amiri et al., 2022).
Assumption 1. The function fn (w), n ∈ [N ], is L-smooth and satisfies:
                             2
               ∇fn (wni (t)) ≤ 2L fn (wni (t)) − fn∗ , n ∈ [N ], i = 1, . . . , τ, ∀t,

                                                                                                  (4)
where fn∗ denotes the minimum value of fn (w).
   1
     Using the techniques presented in Li et al. (2020b); Karimireddy et al. (2020), the extension to the general
case (i.e., c ≤ 1) would be straightforward.


                                                       4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Assumption 2. ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)) is an unbiased stochastic gradient of function fn (w). The vari-
ance of the masked stochastic gradients is bounded for each device n ∈ [N ]. We have
                                                             2
    E kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)) − kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t)) ≤ ξn2 , n ∈ [N ], i = 1, . . . , τ, ∀t. (5)
Assumption 3. The expected squared l2 -norm of the masked stochastic gradients for all the devices
is uniformly bounded. We have
                                                  2
                E mn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t))         ≤ G2 , n ∈ [N ], i = 1, . . . , τ, ∀t.             (6)

When the masking vectors are determined based on the computational capability of the devices, we
define the term γn = maxl (kn )l to quantify the degree of device heterogeneity in the network. Note
that in the full device participation scenario, N1 ≤ γn ≤ 1, n ∈ [N ]. In addition, γn is inversely
                                                              PN
proportional to the minimum non-zero element of the vector n′ =1 mn ⊙ mn′ . Hence, larger γn
implies a higher degree of device heterogeneity for device n ∈ [N ]. We first present the following
lemma, which is derived using Theorem 3 in Fang et al. (1994). From Lemma 1, we can quantify
the impact of freezing the parameters by masking vectors on the convergence bound.
Lemma 1. The following inequality holds for any vectors x and z ∈ Rd , for which there exists
Q > 0 satisfying |minl (x ⊙ z)l | ≤ Q, and for any vector y ∈ Rd :
                                                                        d
                                                                              !
                                                                      X
                    ⟨x, y ⊙ z⟩ ≤ max(y)l ⟨x, z⟩ + Q d max(y)l −           (y)l ,                 (7)
                                      l                           l
                                                                            l=1

where ⟨., .⟩ denotes the inner product operator in Rd .
We use Lemma 1 to prove the following theorem concerning the device heterogeneity effect on the
FL convergence bound. Devices with lower computational capability partially train the global model
due to the zero-valued elements in their masking vectors. We show that employing the masking
vectors to address the device heterogeneity issue in FL leads to a bias term in the convergence
bound. However, it does not affect the convergence rate.
Theorem 1. Under Assumptions 1−3, and for smooth and non-convex loss functions, if the total
number of communication rounds T is pre-defined and the learning rate η(t) is small enough such
that η(t) = η ≤ LN12 τ , we have
            T                                                               N
      1X                           2      2                                X
                E∥∇F (wg (t))∥ ≤              (F (wg (1)) − F ∗ ) + LN τ η     ξn2
      T t=1                              ητ T                              n=1
                                                N             dw
                                                                        !
                                               X             X                       (τ − 1)(2τ − 1)
                                         + 2Ψ        dw γn −      (kn )l + L2 η 2 G2                  , (8)
                                               n=1
                                                                                            6
                                                             l=1

where Ψ is a constant satisfying maxl ∇fn (wni (t)) ⊙ ∇F (wg (t)) l ≤ Ψ for all n ∈ [N ], i =
1, . . . , τ , and t = 1, . . . , T . F ∗ = F (w∗ ), where w∗ is the global optimal point. L, ξn2 , and G are
constants defined in Assumptions 1−3.
The proof for Lemma 1 and Theorem 1 can be found in Appendices D and E, respectively.
                                                                   PN                Pdw
Remark 1. By employing the masking vectors in FL, the term n=1 dw γn − l=1                  (kn )l ap-
pears on the right-hand side of (8). Since this term does not scale with the number of communication
rounds T , it is considered as a bias term, which remains as a residual in the convergence bound.
Hence, those FL algorithms, which use masking vectors to reduce the computational and communi-
cation costs for the devices, may converge to a local minimum of the     objective function F (wg ). In
                                                               PN                Pdw
PerFedMask, we design the masking vectors by minimizing n=1 dw γn − l=1                (kn )l to miti-
gate the performance degradation due to this bias term. In Appendix F, we present a simple example
to gain insight regarding the selection of masking vectors by minimizing the bias term.

5    O UR P ROPOSED A LGORITHM
In this section, we propose a novel algorithm called PerFedMask, which aims to mitigate the perfor-
mance degradation caused by bias described in Remark 1 through: (1) systematically designing the


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: Training Procedure of PerFedMask
 1: Input: Local datasets Dn ; maximum number of trainable parameters ψn , n ∈ [N ]; the number of local
    epochs E; the number of local batches B; participation ratio c.
 2: Initialize the learning rate η(1) and initialize randomly θg (1) : = {wg (1), ϕg }. # Model initialization
 3: “Server Operation”
 4: Select masking vector mn for each device n by solving P mask . # Optimized masking using (9a)−(9d)
 5: for each communication round t ∈ {1, . . . , T } do
 6:    N (t) ← Random subset of max (cN, 1) devices.               # Selection of participating devices
 7:    for each device n ∈ N (t) in parallel do
 8:       wnτ +1 (t) = DeviceLocalUpdate(wg (t), ϕg , mn , fn , Dn , η(t)). # Local updates using eqn. (1)
 9:    end for
       wg (t + 1) = n∈N (t) kn ⊙ wnτ +1 (t).
                       P
10:                                                         # Aggregation at the server using eqn. (3)
11:    Update η(t).
12: end for
13: “Client Operation”
14: for each device n ∈ [N ] in parallel do
15:    Fine-tune the learning model θn : = {wg (T + 1), ϕn } using training data samples Dn . # Fine-tuning
16: end for



masking vectors via an optimization framework, and (2) fine-tuning the local head models. First,
each device determines the maximum number of parameters which can be trained during local up-
date iterations based on its computational capability2 . These values are sent to the server. The server
then determines the masking vector for each device before training.
Let ψn denote the maximum number of parameters that can be trained by device n ∈ [N ], where
ψn ≤ dw . Given ψn , the server determines the masking vector mn for each device n before
training by minimizing the bias term. Here, we present the formulation of layer-wise masking3 ,
which decides whether or not to freeze all the parameters in each layer of the global model. We
adopt layer-wise masking since most of the current machine learning frameworks such as PyTorch
(PyTorch, 2022) and TensorFlow (Abadi et al., 2016) run at the granularity of a full tensor, with no
APIs which can provide parameter freezing at a finer granularity. Also, by considering layer-wise
masking, the number of optimization variables can be reduced. Thus, the complexity of obtaining
the masking vectors can also be reduced accordingly. Let Λ and |Λ| denote the set and number of
layers in the global model, respectively. Let πj and |πj | denote the set and number of parameters
in layer j ∈ Λ, respectively. We define m̃n ∈ {0, 1}|Λ| as the layer-wise masking vector. If
(m̃n )j = 1, then all the elements (mn )l , l ∈ πj are equal to one. In PerFedMask, the following
optimization problem is solved by the server to obtain the masking vectors for the devices:
                                                                                         
                                       XN                      X
              P mask : minimize            dw max (k̃n )j −        |πj ′ |(k̃n )j ′ + ϵn 
                        m̃n , ϵn , n∈[N ]               j∈Λ
                                             n=1                      j ′ ∈Λ

                                                            (m̃n )j
                          subject to        (k̃n )j = PN                , j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ],               (9a)
                                                          n′ =1 (m̃n )j
                                                                    ′
                                             X
                                                  |πj |(m̃n )j = ψn − ϵn , n ∈ [N ],                     (9b)
                                            j∈Λ

                                            (m̃n )j ∈ {0, 1}, j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ],                           (9c)
                                            ϵn ≥ 0, n ∈ [N ],                                            (9d)

where ϵn is a slack variable, which prevents to train more than ψn parameters for each device n
in the layer-wise masking. Problem P mask is a mixed-integer nonlinear program, which is NP-hard
and difficult to solve. In Appendix H, we show how to obtain a close-to-optimal solution by using
successive convex approximation (Shen et al., 2016) and MOSEK solver (MOSEK ApS, 2022).
Algorithm 1 summarizes the training procedure of PerFedMask.
    2
      Using the curves similar to those in Fig. 3 in Appendix G, each device can determine its maximum number
of trainable parameters.
    3
      Random layer-wise masking has been considered in Sidahmed et al. (2021); Pfeiffer et al. (2022).


                                                        6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6       E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

6.1     E XPERIMENT S ETUP

Datasets and Model Architectures. We conduct our experiments on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
image classification tasks4 . Our experiments are performed with ResNet (PreResNet18) (He et al.,
2016) for CIFAR-10, and with MobileNet (Howard et al., 2017) for CIFAR-100. In both cases, we
set the number of devices to 100. The data samples are uniformly divided among the devices. Each
device has 450 training data samples, 50 validation data samples, and 100 test data samples. The
batch size is set to 50. To enable non-IID data partitioning among the devices, we distribute 3 and
10 classes per device for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets, respectively. The same classes are
considered in the training, validation, and test datasets.
Implementation Details. We denote the fraction of devices with the maximum computational capa-
bility by ν. That is, ν represents the ratio of devices which can completely update the entire global
model during the local update iterations. Those devices are able to train ×1 parameters of the global
model. Since the remaining devices have lower computational capability, they should mask some
parts of the global model during the local update iterations based on their capabilities. Unless stated
otherwise, we set ν = 0.5. For all the experiments, the learning rate starts with 0.1 and is decayed
by a factor of 0.1 in communication round t ∈ { 12 T, 34 T }. Similar to FedBABU (Oh et al., 2022),
we fix the product of the local epochs E and the maximum number of communication rounds T to
320. After T communication rounds, we choose the model with the maximum validation accuracy
and perform 5 local update iterations for fine-tuning the learning model using each device’s local
training data samples. We perform the experiments using PyTorch library (PyTorch, 2022) in Python
3.7. We apply layer-wise masking in our experiments.
Baselines. We compare the performance of our proposed algorithm, PerFedMask, with the follow-
ing FL algorithms: FedBABU (Oh et al., 2022) and FedProx (Li et al., 2020a), which have been
proposed to tackle data heterogeneity; FedNova (Wang et al., 2020), which has been proposed to ad-
dress objective inconsistency problem; HeteroFL (Diao et al., 2021) and Split-Mix FL (Hong et al.,
2022), which have been proposed to tackle device heterogeneity in the non-IID data settings.
Performance Metrics. We consider the test accuracy as one of the performance metrics. Fine-
tuning steps are performed for PerFedMask and FedBABU algorithms to personalize the learning
model and obtain the local head model for each device. For fair comparison, the obtained learning
model has been also fine-tuned for each device in the other FL algorithms. Thus, we report the
test accuracy before and after fine-tuning. We also assess the average number of floating-point
operations (FLOPs) in each communication round for both the forward and backward propagation
paths to show the required computation for the algorithms. We use PyPAPI (PyPAPI, 2017) to
obtain the number of FLOPs. Since the average number of trainable parameters is equal to the
average number of parameters transmitted from the devices to the server in each communication
round, we report this number to show the communication cost of each FL algorithm.

6.2     B ENCHMARK E XPERIMENTS

We consider a heterogeneous device setting, where half of the devices (i.e., devices with maximum
computational capability) perform four local epochs (i.e., E = 4). Due to the limited computational
capability, the remaining devices perform two local epochs for updating all the parameters. Using
PerFedMask, instead of considering different local epochs for the devices, we address the device
heterogeneity issue by freezing some parts of the global model for those devices with lower compu-
tational capability. For fair comparison, the number of frozen parameters are selected in a way such
that the considered algorithms have the same number of FLOPs for each device.
Performance Comparison with the Baselines. Table 1 shows the obtained test accuracy after
fine-tuning and the number of trainable parameters for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets 5 . Our
observations are as follows: (1) our proposed algorithm, PerFedMask, has comparable performance
    4
      We also use AlexNet on DomainNet dataset (Li et al., 2021) and provide the results in Appendix I to show
the performance under feature non-IID configuration.
    5
      We show some of the training curves in Appendix J. Also, in Appendix K, we present additional statistics
for some of the results in Table 1.


                                                      7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Table 1: Test accuracy after fine-tuning and number of trainable parameters of PerFedMask and the baseline
 algorithms for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets

                                           Test accuracy after fine-tuning
       Dataset    c     PerFedMask (Ours)  FedBABU FedProx FedNova               HeteroFL    Split-Mix FL   FedAvg
                  1           88.43           88.20      84.96        84.26       87.33          85.56       84.99
   CIFAR-10
                 0.1          83.60           84.27      74.55        71.88       73.34          77.76       71.19
                  1           72.40           69.01      64.63        65.24       68.65          65.95       65.27
  CIFAR-100
                 0.1          67.47           66.32      59.36        60.42       65.87          62.35       59.12
                                          Number of trainable parameters
    Dataset             PerFedMask (Ours) FedBABU FedProx FedNova                HeteroFL    Split-Mix FL    FedAvg
  CIFAR-10                   6.138M         11.167M 11.172M 11.172M              5.674M        0.793M       11.172M
  CIFAR-100                  1.803M          3.207M     3.309M       3.309M      1.774M        0.223M        3.309M



to FedBABU and outperforms the other baselines in terms of test accuracy after fine-tuning. (2) By
increasing the number of devices participating in FL (i.e., by increasing c), a higher test accuracy can
be achieved. (3) PerFedMask, HeteroFL, and Split-Mix FL can provide lower number of trainable
parameters. Split-Mix FL has the lowest number of trainable parameters because it trains several
low-width base models instead of the original learning model. (4) Different number of local update
iterations for the devices may lead to the objective inconsistency problem. PerFedMask, HeteroFL,
and Split-Mix FL algorithms can address this problem by decreasing the number of FLOPs for the
less capable devices. Thus, the same number of local update iterations can be considered for all the
devices. Also, this problem is tackled in FedNova through modifying the optimizer. However, other
algorithms suffer from the objective inconsistency problem, which may degrade their performance.
Combining PerFedMask with HeteroFL and Split-Mix FL. Table 2 shows the performance re-
sults for PerFedMask and its combination with HeteroFL and Split-Mix FL algorithms. Table 2 also
shows the performance results for FedBABU, HeteroFL, and Split-Mix FL algorithms. The number
of FLOPs for forward and backward indicates the number of required computations in the forward
and backward propagation paths, respectively. In general, backpropagation dominates the computa-
tional cost during training of a learning model (Xu et al., 2022). In PerFedMask, by using masking
vectors, there is no need to compute the partial derivative of the objective function with respect to the
frozen parameters. Although PerFedMask has reduced the number of trainable parameters and the
backward FLOPs, it can still achieve higher test accuracy compared to other algorithms including
FedBABU. Since PerFedMask does not change the architecture of the learning model, it can easily
be combined with other FL algorithms. Table 2 shows that combining PerFedMask with Split-Mix
FL and HeteroFL algorithms can further reduce the number of FLOPs in the backward path and the
number of trainable parameters. This combination provides a higher test accuracy after fine-tuning
than Split-Mix FL and HeteroFL algorithms.

Table 2: Performance comparison on CIFAR-10 dataset when c = 1. Results for CIFAR-100 dataset can be
found in Appendix L.

                                            Test accuracy                                              # of FLOPs
            Algorithm                                                  # of trainable parameters
                                Before fine-tuning After fine-tuning                               Forward Backward
 PerFedMask + Split-Mix FL            51.88               87.74                0.691M              0.178G     0.514G
  PerFedMask + HeteroFL               69.44               87.79                5.473M              1.111G     1.721G
       PerFedMask                     70.14               88.43                6.138M              2.182G     2.697G
       Split-Mix FL                   57.96               85.56                0.793M              0.178G     0.541G
        HeteroFL                      62.58               87.33                5.674M              1.111G     1.749G
        FedBABU                       69.27               88.20               11.167M              2.182G     3.466G



6.3      A BLATION S TUDIES

Effect of Fine-Tuning Steps. We investigate the impact of the number of fine-tuning steps on the
final test accuracy of PerFedMask and FedBABU 6 . Fine-tuning steps equal to zero means the test
accuracy is obtained before fine-tuning. Also, since the number of batches for each device’s training
dataset is equal to 9, increasing the fine-tuning steps by one leads to 9 more local update iterations.
Results from Table 3 show that similar to FedBABU, PerFedMask can achieve better accuracy with
   6
       We also investigate the effect of freezing the local head models in Appendix M.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


a small number of fine-tuning steps. This characteristic is important when fine-tuning is restricted
or costly for the devices.

                        Table 3: Performance according to fine-tuning steps when c = 1

                                                                    Fine-tuning steps
                        Dataset      Algorithm
                                                     0        2        4        6     8          10
                                    PerFedMask     70.14    88.78    88.69 88.35 88.25          88.30
                    CIFAR-10
                                     FedBABU       69.27    88.63    88.38 88.43 88.12          87.92
                                    PerFedMask     32.04    72.62    72.84 72.48 72.11          72.40
                   CIFAR-100
                                     FedBABU       29.70    69.03    69.15 68.86 68.83          68.81


Effect of Increasing the Number of Devices with Maximum Computational Capability. We
investigate the impact of increasing ν on the performance of PerFedMask in Table 4. More devices
in the network are able to train the entire global model as ν increases. This leads to an increase in the
number of trainable parameters and number of backward FLOPs in PerFedMask. We can observe
that by increasing ν, the test accuracy before fine-tuning is improved. Note that PerFedMask can
provide a comparable test accuracy after fine-tuning even for ν = 0.2, when compared with the case
in which all devices have the maximum computational capability (i.e., ν = 1).

                    Table 4: Results of increasing ν for CIFAR-100 dataset when c = 1.

                                      Test accuracy
      Algorithm    ν                                                # of trainable parameters   # of backward FLOPs
                          Before fine-tuning After fine-tuning
                  0.2           29.29               72.07                   0.941M                      0.617G
                  0.4           32.31               74.33                   1.518M                      0.675G
     PerFedMask   0.6           32.79               72.82                   2.095M                      0.741G
                  0.8           33.59               72.64                   2.647M                      0.803G
                  1.0           34.73               73.76                   3.207M                      0.863G

Effect of Masking Vectors Design. In Table 5, we consider three masking approaches: in sequential
masking, the layers are masked sequentially; in random masking, the layers are masked randomly;
and in optimized masking, the layers are masked by solving problem P mask . Optimized masking
minimizes the bias described in Remark 1. As shown in Table 5, optimized masking can provide
lower training loss and higher training and test accuracies. These results are compatible with our
theoretical analysis. As shown in Table 5, PerFedMask enhances FL performance before fine-tuning
by employing optimal masking vectors. The final test accuracy can then be improved by fine-tuning.

        Table 5: Results of different approaches for masking vectors design for CIFAR-100 dataset
        when c = 1 and ν = 0.2.

          Design approach           Bias   Training loss   Training accuracy    Test accuracy before fine-tuning
         Sequential masking       3.364M      2.324              50.11                       27.02
          Random masking          0.609M      1.706              64.40                       28.88
         Optimized masking        0.204M      1.648              66.63                       29.84



7   C ONCLUSION
In this work, we proposed a flexible and easy to implement personalized FL algorithm called PerFed-
Mask. We provided theoretical and empirical grounds to justify the utility of PerFedMask in het-
erogeneous data and device settings. In particular, PerFedMask employs (1) optimized masking
vectors obtained by minimizing the bias term in the convergence bound, and (2) fine-tuning. The
masking vectors are exploited to freeze some parts of the global model for each device based on its
computational capability. Fine-tuning is performed by each device after training to improve the final
test accuracy. When compared with some existing state-of-the-art FL algorithms, PerFedMask can
achieve higher test accuracy. It can also decrease the average number of trainable parameters and
the average number of FLOPs in each communication round without changing the learning model
architecture. A future direction is to consider freezing priority for different layers in the neural net-
work architecture. For example, in Frankle et al. (2021), it has been shown that batch normalization
layers in convolutional networks are important to be considered as the trainable parameters. Also,
the approach of masking vectors design in this work can be emulated in pruning methods.


                                                           9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by Rogers Communications Canada Inc., Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and Public Safety Canada (NS-5001-22170).

R EFERENCES
Martı́n Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu
 Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. TensorFlow: A system for large-
 scale machine learning. In Proc. of USENIX Symp. on Operating Systems Design and Implemen-
 tation (OSDI), Savannah, GA, Nov. 2016.
Andrei Afonin and Sai Praneeth Karimireddy. Towards model agnostic federated learning using
  knowledge distillation. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), Apr. 2022.
Mohammad Mohammadi Amiri, Deniz Gündüz, Sanjeev R. Kulkarni, and H. Vincent Poor. Con-
 vergence of federated learning over a noisy downlink. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., 21(3):
 1422–1437, Mar. 2022.
Manoj Ghuhan Arivazhagan, Vinay Aggarwal, Aaditya Kumar Singh, and Sunav Choudhary. Fed-
 erated learning with personalization layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00818, Dec. 2019.
Sara Babakniya, Souvik Kundu, Saurav Prakash, Yue Niu, and Salman Avestimehr. Federated sparse
  training: Lottery aware model compression for resource constrained edge. In Proc. of NeurIPS
  Workshop on Federated Learning: Recent Advances and New Challenges, New Orleans, LA, Dec.
  2022.
Sameer Bibikar, Haris Vikalo, Zhangyang Wang, and Xiaohan Chen. Federated dynamic sparse
  training: Computing less, communicating less, yet learning better. In Proc. of AAAI Conf. on
  Artif. Intell., Feb. 2022.
Chen Chen, Hong Xu, Wei Wang, Baochun Li, Bo Li, Li Chen, and Gong Zhang. Communication-
  efficient federated learning with adaptive parameter freezing. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Distributed
  Computing Systems (ICDCS), Jul. 2021.
Liam Collins, Hamed Hassani, Aryan Mokhtari, and Sanjay Shakkottai. Exploiting shared repre-
  sentations for personalized federated learning. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML), Jul.
  2021.
Yuyang Deng, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Adaptive personalized federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13461, 2020.
Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. HeteroFL: Computation and communication efficient
  federated learning for heterogeneous clients. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), May 2021.
Alireza Fallah, Aryan Mokhtari, and Asuman E. Ozdaglar. Personalized federated learning with
  theoretical guarantees: A model-agnostic meta-learning approach. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Inf.
  Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Vancouver, Canada, Dec. 2020.
Yuguang Fang, Kenneth A. Loparo, and Xiangbo Feng. Inequalities for the trace of matrix product.
  IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, 39(12):2489–2490, Dec. 1994.
Jonathan Frankle, David J. Schwab, and Ari S. Morcos. Training BatchNorm and only BatchNorm:
  On the expressive power of random features in CNNs. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Repre-
  sentations (ICLR), May 2021.
Yiwen Guo, Anbang Yao, and Yurong Chen. Dynamic network surgery for efficient DNNs. In Proc.
  of Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Barcelona, Spain, Dec. 2016.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recog-
  nition. In Proc. of IEEE Conf. on Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV, Jun.
  2016.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Junyuan Hong, Haotao Wang, Zhangyang Wang, and Jiayu Zhou. Efficient Split-Mix federated
  learning for on-demand and in-situ customization. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), Apr. 2022.

Samuel Horvath, Stefanos Laskaridis, Mario Almeida, Ilias Leontiadis, Stylianos I. Venieris, and
  Nicholas D. Lane. FjORD: Fair and accurate federated learning under heterogeneous targets with
  ordered dropout. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Dec. 2021.

Andrew G. Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang, Tobias Weyand,
  Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam. MobileNets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for
  mobile vision applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861, Apr. 2017.

Yuang Jiang, Shiqiang Wang, Victor Valls, Bong Jun Ko, Wei-Han Lee, Kin K. Leung, and Leandros
  Tassiulas. Model pruning enables efficient federated learning on edge devices. IEEE Trans. on
  Neural Networks and Learning Systems, Apr. 2022.

Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. SCAFFOLD: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning.
  In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Machine Learning (ICML), Jul. 2020.

Jakub Konečnỳ, Brendan McMahan, and Daniel Ramage. Federated optimization: Distributed opti-
  mization beyond the datacenter. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.03575, Nov. 2015.

Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. In Proc. of Machine Learning and Systems
  (MLSys), Austin, TX, Mar. 2020a.

Xiang Li, Kaixuan Huang, Wenhao Yang, Shusen Wang, and Zhihua Zhang. On the convergence of
  FedAvg on non-IID data. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), Apr. 2020b.

Xiaoxiao Li, Meirui Jiang, Xiaofei Zhang, Michael Kamp, and Qi Dou. FedBN: Federated learning
  on non-IID features via local batch normalization. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Represen-
  tations (ICLR), May 2021.

Tao Lin, Lingjing Kong, Sebastian U. Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Ensemble distillation for robust model
  fusion in federated learning. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Vancouver,
  Canada, Dec. 2020.

Shiwei Liu, Tianlong Chen, Xiaohan Chen, Li Shen, Decebal Constantin Mocanu, Zhangyang
  Wang, and Mykola Pechenizkiy. The unreasonable effectiveness of random pruning: Return
  of the most naive baseline for sparse training. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), Apr. 2022.

Yishay Mansour, Mehryar Mohri, Jae Ro, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Three approaches for
  personalization with applications to federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10619, Jul.
  2020.

Othmane Marfoq, Giovanni Neglia, Aurélien Bellet, Laetitia Kameni, and Richard Vidal. Federated
  multi-task learning under a mixture of distributions. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
  (NeurIPS), Dec. 2021.

Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Proc. of Int’l
  Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS), Ft. Lauderdale, FL, Apr. 2017.

MOSEK ApS. MOSEK modeling cookbook. Available: https://docs.mosek.com/
 MOSEKModelingCookbook-letter.pdf, Aug. 2022.

Jaehoon Oh, Sangmook Kim, and Se-Young Yun. FedBABU: Towards enhanced representation for
  federated image classification. In Proc. of Int’l Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), Apr.
  2022.


                                                 11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kilian Pfeiffer, Martin Rapp, Ramin Khalili, and Jörg Henkel. CoCo-FL: Communication-and
  computation-aware federated learning via partial NN freezing and quantization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2203.05468, Aug. 2022.

PyPAPI. PyPAPI’s documentation [Online].              Available: https://flozz.github.io/
  pypapi/, 2017.

PyTorch. PyTorch documentation [Online].          Available: https://pytorch.org/docs/
  stable/index.html, 2022.

Sashank Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečnỳ,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and H. Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. In Proc. of Int’l
  Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), May 2021.

Xinyue Shen, Steven Diamond, Yuantao Gu, and Stephen Boyd. Disciplined convex-concave pro-
  gramming. In Proc. of IEEE Conf. on Decision and Control (CDC), Las Vegas, NV, Dec. 2016.

Hakim Sidahmed, Zheng Xu, Ankush Garg, Yuan Cao, and Mingqing Chen. Efficient and pri-
  vate federated learning with partially trainable networks. In Proc. of NeurIPS Workshop on New
  Frontiers in Federated Learning, Dec. 2021.

Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H. Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective
   inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. In Proc. of Conf. Neural Inf.
   Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Vancouver, Canada, Dec. 2020.

Daliang Xu, Mengwei Xu, Qipeng Wang, Shangguang Wang, Yun Ma, Kang Huang, Gang Huang,
  Xin Jin, and Xuanzhe Liu. Mandheling: Mixed-precision on-device DNN training with DSP
  offloading. In Proc. of ACM Int’l Conf. Mobile Comput. Netw. (MobiCom), Sydney, Australia,
  Oct. 2022.

Tien-Ju Yang, Dhruv Guliani, Françoise Beaufays, and Giovanni Motta. Partial variable training for
  efficient on-device federated learning. In Proc. of IEEE Int’l Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process.
  (ICASSP), Singapore, Singapore, May 2022.


                                                 12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    R ELATED W ORK
FL Algorithms with non-IID Data. In FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), the edge devices perform
multiple local update iterations on their local models before sending them to the server for aggre-
gation. In this way, the communication cost can be reduced. When there is data heterogeneity,
conventional FL algorithms such as FedAvg may have slow and unstable convergence (Karimireddy
et al., 2020). To handle the case when the data is non-IID, some works (Li et al., 2020a; Karim-
ireddy et al., 2020) have introduced new optimization frameworks to obtain a more stable model
for the devices. Although the obtained model may still perform well on average across the devices,
some of the devices may not be satisfied with the obtained final accuracy (Collins et al., 2021). To
address this issue, more personalized models are required for the devices. The personalized models
can be obtained by using different methods such as meta-learning (Fallah et al., 2020), multi-task
learning (Marfoq et al., 2021), clustering (Mansour et al., 2020), and decomposition. In the decom-
position method, the learning model is decomposed into a global model and a device-specific head
model (Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Collins et al., 2021). In each communication round, the global
model is updated by the devices and is aggregated by the server, whereas the head model is updated
by each device but is not transmitted to the server. Oh et al. (2022) proposed FedBABU using the
decomposition method. To improve the personalization ability, in FedBABU, the local head model
parameters are frozen during training. After convergence to a global model, each device updates the
local head model parameters during the fine-tuning steps by using its local data samples.
FL Algorithms with Heterogeneous Devices. Given the disparities in devices’ hardware, it is cru-
cial to address device heterogeneity in FL. In general, this problem can be tackled by reducing the
computational complexity of model training based on the devices’ hardware capabilities. Lin et al.
(2020); Afonin & Karimireddy (2022) proposed FL algorithms using knowledge distillation, which
aim to generate compact models by transferring knowledge of a large model to smaller ones. Prun-
ing method, where a compact model for each device can be obtained by removing the parameters
with little impact on the performance of the original learning model, is another approach to accom-
modate device heterogeneity in FL. Due to the dynamic sparse training, pruning method may suffer
from instability in convergence for finding the sparse masking vectors, which are used for training
the sparse sub-networks at the devices. This issue can be resolved by consistent mask adjustment
procedure at the devices, at the expense of additional communication overhead (Jiang et al., 2022;
Babakniya et al., 2022; Bibikar et al., 2022). The ordered dropout technique has been proposed in
Horvath et al. (2021) to dynamically adapt the model size used by each device based on its capabil-
ities. Another pruning method that does not require additional communication cost is to use a fixed
masking vector for each device before training based on its computational capability. This would
result in training of the heterogeneous local models for the devices. In this regard, HeteroFL (Diao
et al., 2021) aims to facilitate efficient training and stable aggregation of devices’ local models.
However, the available local data samples at the devices may not be used efficiently in HeteroFL.
In particular, HeteroFL considers different model architectures as the local models for the devices.
Thereby, the available data samples at each device can be used only for training a specific model
architecture. In Split-Mix FL (Hong et al., 2022), based on its computational capability, each device
randomly selects some of the base models in each communication round to train them. After train-
ing, by using ensemble learning approach, each device mixes the selected base models to construct
its desired model size. The potential drawback of this approach is that none of the devices train the
original learning model.
Another line of research is related to the objective inconsistency problem in FL. Due to the differ-
ent size of the devices’ local dataset and their computational capability, some of the devices may
finish their local update iterations faster. To prevent the devices from being idle, Wang et al. (2020)
proposed to let those faster devices continue their local update iterations until the slowest device
finishes its local update. FedNova is proposed by Wang et al. (2020) to resolve the objective incon-
sistency problem due to different number of local update iterations. Another approach is to consider
the same number of local update iterations for all the devices. However, to enable all the devices to
finish their local update iterations in a timely manner, the required number of computations should
be adjusted for those devices with lower computational capabilities. Our proposed algorithm as well
as other FL algorithms which aim to adjust the required computations for each device based on its
computational capability can be employed to address the objective inconsistency problem. This part
is for aligning the last page of References. This part is for aligning the last page of References. This
part is for aligning the last page of References. This part is for aligning the last page of References.


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B    L OCAL U PDATES AT D EVICES

Algorithm 2: Local Update Function
 1: function DeviceLocalUpdate(wg , ϕg , m, f, D, η) # Local update iterations for each device
 2:   B ← Split local data samples D into B local batches.
 3:   i := 1, and wi ← wg .
 4:   for each local epoch e ∈ {1, . . . , E} do # The total number of local update iterations τ = E × B
 5:      for each batch b ∈ B do
 6:         wi+1 ← wi − ηm ⊙ ∇f (wi , b).
 7:         i := i + 1.
 8:      end for
 9:   end for
10:    Return wi
11: end function



C    C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS FOR S TRONGLY C ONVEX L OSS F UNCTIONS
To show the convergence of PerFedMask for smooth and strongly convex loss functions, in addition
to Assumptions 1−3, we make the following assumption:
Assumption 4. fn (w), n ∈ [N ], is µ-strongly convex and satisfies:
                                                            µ        2
             fn (v) ≥ fn (w) + (v − w)T ∇fn (w) +             ∥v − w∥ , ∀v, w, n ∈ [N ].                        (10)
                                                            2

To quantify the degree of data heterogeneity at each device n ∈ [N ], the term Γn = fn (w∗ ) − fn∗ is
                                                       2
defined (Li et al., 2020b). Let δ(t) = E∥wg (t) − w∗ ∥ . We first prove the following useful lemma.
Lemma 2. Under Assumptions 1−4, if the learning rate is small enough, i.e., η(t) ≤ L(N1τ +1) , for
all t = 1, . . . , T , we have
                         δ(t + 1) ≤ (1 − q0 η(t)) δ(t) + q1 η(t) + q2 η 2 (t),                                  (11)
where
               N
         1 X
    q0 ≜   µτ     γn ,                                                                                          (12)
         2 n=1
               N                     N          dw
                                                         !
              X          1          X           X
    q1 ≜ 2τ Υ       γn −     + 2τ Ω     dw γn −    (kn )l ,                                                     (13)
              n=1
                         N          n=1                     l=1
                                           N                N                                     N
           2 τ (τ − 1)(2τ − 1)
                                           X                X                                     X
                                                                                              2
    q2 ≜ G                       (2 + µ)         γn + 2Lτ         γn (2 + N τ γn ) Γn + N τ             ξn2 ,   (14)
                     6                     n=1              n=1                                   n=1

and Ω and Υ should satisfy minl w∗ − wni (t) ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t)) l ≤ Ω, for all n ∈ [N ], i =


1, . . . , τ, t = 1, . . . , T and minn∈[N ] (fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ )) ≤ Υ, t = 1, . . . , T , respectively.

Proof. See Appendix N.

Using Lemma 2, we can state the following theorem for the convergence rate of smooth and strongly
convex loss functions:
Theorem 2. Given Assumptions 1−4, if we choose κ = 2L       q0 (N τ + 1) and the learning rate η(t) =
    2
q0 (t+κ) , under the full device participation scenario (i.e., c = 1), after T communication rounds,
we have

                                     ∗    Lq1         L         4q2
                   EF (wg (T )) − F ≤          +                    + (κ + 1) δ(1) .             (15)
                                           q0     2 (T + κ) q02

                                                     14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. See Appendix O.
Remark 2. The first term on the right-hand side of (15) appears in the convergence bound due
to the device heterogeneity. In particular, Theorem 2 shows that for q1 ̸= 0, the FL algorithm
converges to a local optimal solution at the rate of O(1/T ). This convergence rate is similar to the
results presented in Li et al. (2020b); Amiri et al. (2022), where device heterogeneity has not been
considered. Hence, using the masking vectors in FL do not degrade the convergence rate of FL.
Remark 3. The result in Theorem 2 shows that when q1 → 0, the FL algorithm converges to the
global optimal solution for the smooth and strongly convex functions. Based on (13), it is straight-
forward to verify that without device heterogeneity in the network (i.e., when all the devices have
the maximum computational capability and can update all the parameters of the global model), all
the elements of vector kn , n ∈ [N ] are equal to N1 . Hence, in this case, we have γn = N1 , and
q1 = 0. In general, based on (13), one way to reduce the bias incurred by the device heterogeneity
is to design the masking vectors   by minimizing q1 . For
                                                          example, one can search for the masking
                          PN               Pdw
vectors, which minimize n=1 dw γn − l=1           (kn )l .


D    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1
Given vectors x, y, and z, we form diagonal matrices X, Y , and Z, respectively. Note that we
can write ⟨x, y ⊙ z⟩ as the form of the trace of matrices X, Y , and Z product, i.e., ⟨x, y ⊙ z⟩ =
Tr(XY Z). By using Theorem 3 in Fang et al. (1994), we have the following inequality:
                 Tr(XY Z) ≤ λ1 (Y ) Tr(XZ) − λd (XZ) (dλ1 (Y ) − Tr(Y )) ,                                       (16)
where λ1 (Y ) and λd (XZ) are the largest eigenvalue of matrix Y and the smallest eigenvalue of
matrix XZ, respectively. Since the considered matrices are diagonal, we have λ1 (Y ) = maxl (y)l
and λd (XZ) = minl (x ⊙ z)l . Hence, we have
                                                                          d
                                                                                 !
                                                                         X
            ⟨x, y ⊙ z⟩ ≤ max(y)l ⟨x, z⟩ − min (x ⊙ z)l d max(y)l −          (y)l .          (17)
                              l                           l                       l
                                                                                                       l=1
                      Pd
Since d maxl (y)l −     l=1 (y)l ≥ 0, by considering minl (x ⊙ z)l ≥ −Q, Lemma 1 is proved using
inequality (17).

E    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Considering the smoothness of fn (w), n ∈ [N ], in each communication round t ≥ 1, we have
    EF (wg (t + 1)) ≤
                                                                               L                        2
        EF (wg (t)) + E ⟨wg (t + 1) − wg (t), ∇F (wg (t))⟩ +                     E ∥wg (t + 1) − wg (t)∥ .       (18)
                                                                               2
                                                                      2
We first find an upper bound for ∥wg (t + 1) − wg (t)∥ as follows:
                                                N              τ                                   2
                           2 (a)
                                                X              X
                                    2
 E ∥wg (t + 1) − wg (t)∥ = η (t)E                      kn ⊙          ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t))
                                                n=1            i=1
                                                    N X
                                                      τ                                                              2
                             (b)    2
                                                    X
                             = η (t) E                        kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)) − kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                                                n=1 i=1
                                            |                                         {z                             }
                                                                                  A1
                                                    N X
                                                      τ                                    2
                                                    X
                                        2
                                   + η (t)                    kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))               ,                 (19)
                                                    n=1 i=1
                                                |                    {z                    }
                                                                   A2
                                                                                                                 2
where equality (a) results from (2) and (3). Equality (b) is obtained via basic equality E ∥z∥ =
           2          2
E ∥z − Ez∥ + ∥Ez∥ for any random vector z.


                                                              15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By using Assumption 2, we can obtain an upper bound of A1 as follows:
                          N X
                            τ                                                                              2
                          X
              A1 = E                  kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)) − kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                          n=1 i=1
                           N X
                             τ
                           X                                                                                     2
                  ≤ Nτ                  E kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)) − kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                          n=1 i=1
                              N
                              X
                  ≤ Nτ2             ξn2 .                                                                                         (20)
                              n=1

                                                2
By considering the convexity of ∥·∥ and by using γn = maxl (kn )l , we can obtain an upper bound
of A2 as follows:
                                                    N X
                                                      τ                              2
                                                    X
                                A2 =                          kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                                                    n=1 i=1
                                                      N X
                                                        τ
                                                      X                                      2
                                        ≤ Nτ                     kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                                                      n=1 i=1
                                                        τ
                                                      N X
                                                      X                              2
                                        ≤ Nτ                    γn2 ∇fn (wni (t))        .                                        (21)
                                                      n=1 i=1

By combining (19), (20), and (21), we have the following inequality:
                                            N                   N Xτ
                           2
                                            X                   X                      2
    E ∥wg (t + 1) − wg (t)∥ ≤ N τ 2 η 2 (t)   ξn2 + N τ η 2 (t)      γn2 ∇fn (wni (t)) .                                          (22)
                                                         n=1                   n=1 i=1

Now, we aim to obtain an upper bound of E ⟨wg (t + 1) − wg (t), ∇F (wg (t))⟩. We have
 E ⟨wg (t + 1) − wg (t), ∇F (wg (t))⟩
      *        N X τ
                                                               +
 (a)          X
 = E −η(t)            kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)), ∇F (wg (t))
                n=1 i=1
              τ
            N X
 (b)        X
 = η(t)E               kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t)), −∇F (wg (t))
            n=1 i=1
            N X
              τ                                                                      N                     dw
                                                                                                                              !
  (c)       X                                                                        X                     X
  ≤ η(t)E             (−γn )   ∇fn (wni (t)), ∇F (wg (t))                + η(t)τ Ψ               dw γn −             (kn )l
            n=1 i=1                                                                  n=1                   l=1
            τ
                 *        N
                                                                     +               N                     dw
                                                                                                                              !
 (d)        X   1 X                                                                  X                     X
 ≤ − η(t)     E       ∇fn (wni (t)), ∇F (wg (t))                         + η(t)τ Ψ               dw γn −             (kn )l , (23)
          i=1
                N n=1                                                                n=1                       l=1
where equality (a) results from (2) and (3). Equality (b) follows from E∇fn (wni (t), bin (t))
= ∇fn (wni (t)). Inequality (c) holds by using Lemma 1. Inequality (d) follows from γn ≥ N1 .
                                 D P                                E
                                       N
To find an upper bound for −E N1 n=1 ∇fn (wni (t)), ∇F (wg (t)) , we first represent it as fol-
lows:                    *                                   +
                                N
                            1 X            i
                     −E            ∇fn (wn (t)), ∇F (wg (t))
                           N n=1
                                            N                                                2
                        1  1 X
                                 ∇fn (wni (t)) − ∇fn (wg (t))

                       = E
                        2  N n=1
                                                N                    2
                           1  1 X                                         1               2
                          − E       ∇fn (wni (t))                        − E ∥∇F (wg (t))∥ .                                      (24)
                           2  N n=1                                       2


                                                                16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           1
               PN                                           2
Then, E    N       n=1     ∇fn (wni (t)) − ∇fn (wg (t))               is bounded as follows:

               N                                         2                N
       1 X                                                    (a) 1       X                                                2
             ∇fn (wni (t)) − ∇fn (wg (t))                                     E ∇fn (wg (t)) − ∇fn (wni (t))

     E                                                        ≤
       N n=1                                                      N n=1
                                                                     N
                                                              (b) L2 X                                       2
                                                              ≤                   E wg (t) − wni (t)             ,             (25)
                                                                  N n=1
                                                                      2
where inequality (a) results from the convexity of ∥·∥ . Inequality (b) results from Assumption 1.
                                           2
Now, we aim to bound E wg (t) − wni (t) for i = 2, . . . , τ . By using (1), we have
                                                                                                       2
                                                                  i−1
                                       2                          X
               E       wg (t) − wni (t) = E        η(t)mn ⊙               ∇fn (wnj (t), bjn (t))
                                                                  j=1
                                                              i−1
                                                              X                                                       2
                                           ≤ η 2 (t)(i − 1)           E mn ⊙ ∇fn (wnj (t), bjn (t))
                                                              j=1

                                           ≤ η (t)(i − 1) G2 ,
                                               2              2
                                                                                                                               (26)
where the last inequality results from Assumption 3. By combining (25) and (26), we have
                                N                                             2
                         1 X
                               ∇fn (wni (t)) − ∇fn (wg (t))                       ≤L2 η 2 (t)(i − 1)2 G2 .

                       E                                                                                                       (27)
                         N n=1

By combining (18) and (22)−(27), we have
                                                   N                 N          dw
                                                                                                                           !
                                   L              X                 X           X
    EF (wg (t + 1)) ≤ EF (wg (t)) + N τ 2 η 2 (t)     ξn2 + η(t)τ Ψ     dw γn −    (kn )l
                                   2              n=1               n=1                                              l=1
                                  η(t)τ                2               τ (τ − 1)(2τ − 1)
                                −       E ∥∇F (wg (t))∥ + L2 η 3 (t)G2
                                    2                                          12
                                        N   τ
                                  η(t) X X 1                                        2
                                −                  − LN τ γn2 η(t) ∇fn (wni (t)) .                                             (28)
                                   2 n=1 i=1 N
                                           PN Pτ                                                                           2
Since η(t) = η ≤ LN12 τ , we have − η(t)                                    1         2

                                        2   n=1 i=1                         N − LN τ γn η(t)               ∇fn (wni (t))       ≤ 0.
By rearranging the terms in (28), we obtain
                                                                                 N
                            2        2                                          X
      E ∥∇F (wg (t))∥ ≤                (EF (wg (t)) − EF (wg (t + 1))) + LN τ η     ξn2
                                    ητ                                          n=1
                                          N             d
                                                                 !
                                                         w
                                         X             X                      (τ − 1)(2τ − 1)
                                    + 2Ψ       dw γn −     (kn )l + L2 η 2 G2                 .                                (29)
                                         n=1
                                                                                       6
                                                         l=1

Finally, we multiply both sides of (29) by T1 and sum over t = 1, . . . , T . Then, Theorem 1 is
concluded by considering that the first term on the right-hand side of (29) is a telescoping series. We
have
                   T
           2 X                                        2
                   (EF (wg (t)) − EF (wg (t + 1))) =      (F (wg (1)) − EF (wg (T + 1)))
          ητ T t=0                                   ητ T
                                                                       2
                                                                  ≤        (F (wg (1)) − F ∗ ),                                (30)
                                                                      ητ T
where the last inequality is obtained by considering that EF (wg (t + 1)) ≥ F ∗ .


                                                         17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Illustration of masking vectors selection in a network with three devices. Device 3 has the maximum
computational capability to train ×1 parameters of the learning model. We consider different scenarios for
computational capability of devices 1 and 2. (a) Devices 1 and 2 can train ×0.25 parameters of the learning
model. (b) Devices 1 and 2 can train ×0.25 and ×0.5 parameters of the learning model, respectively. (c)
Devices 1 and 2 can train ×0.25 and ×0.75 parameters of the learning model, respectively. (d) Devices 1 and
2 can train ×0.5 parameters of the learning model. (e) Devices 1 and 2 can train ×0.5 and ×0.75 parameters
of the learning model, respectively. (f) Devices 1 and 2 can train ×0.75 parameters of the learning model. (g)
All three devices have the maximum computational capability.



F    S ELECTION OF M ASKING V ECTORS IN A T OY E XAMPLE

In a heterogeneous device setting, devices with lower computational capability partially train the
learning model. Those devices use masking vectors to freeze a portion of the learning model during
training based on their computational capability. As shown in Theorem 1, employing masking
vectors lead to a bias term in the convergence bound. In this section, we demonstrate how the bias
value is impacted by the design of masking vectors using a simple example. We consider three
devices. One device has the maximum computational capability. However, different scenarios are
considered for the computational capability of the other two devices. The devices aim to train a
model with four parameters. Hence, their masking vectors have four elements. Fig. 2 shows the
considered scenarios and the possible masking vectors selections, which may lead to different bias
values.
For each scenario and for each possible selection, Table 6 shows vector kn and the value of γn
for each device as well as the obtained bias value. For this example, the results in Table 6 illus-
trate that the bias value is minimized by freezing the same parameters for two devices with lower
computational capability, in case each parameter cannot be trained at least by one of those devices
(Figs. 2(a) and 2(b)). However, when each parameter can be trained at least by one of those less
capable devices, the bias value is minimized by freezing distinct parameters for the devices (Figs.
2(c)−2(f)). These results are compatible with the empirical results obtained by Pfeiffer et al. (2022)
and Yang et al. (2022), where random selection is used by the devices to prevent freezing of the
same parameters.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              Table 6: kn , γn , and the bias value for the possible masking vectors selections of the
              scenarios shown in Fig. 2. The selection with the minimum bias value is chosen based
              on Remark 1.

               Scenario    Possible selections                kn                                γn          Bias value
                                                    k1 = k2 = [ 31 , 0, 0, 0]              γ1 = γ2 = 13         8
                              Selection 1
                                                       k3 = [ 13 , 1, 1, 1]                   γ3 = 1            3
               Fig. 2(a)                               k1 = [ 12 , 0, 0, 0]                   γ1 = 21
                              Selection 2              k2 = [0, 12 , 0, 0]                    γ2 = 21           4
                                                       k3 = [ 12 , 12 , 1, 1]                 γ3 = 1
                                                       k1 = [ 13 , 0, 0, 0]                   γ1 = 31          10
                              Selection 1              k2 = [ 13 , 12 , 0, 0]                 γ2 = 21           3
               Fig. 2(b)                               k3 = [ 13 , 12 , 1, 1]                 γ3 = 1
                                                       k1 = [ 12 , 0, 0, 0]                   γ1 = 21
                              Selection 2              k2 = [0, 12 , 12 , 0]                  γ2 = 12           4
                                                       k3 = [ 12 , 12 , 12 , 1]               γ3 = 1
                                                       k1 = [ 13 , 0, 0, 0]                   γ1 = 31           10
                              Selection 1              k2 = [ 13 , 12 , 12 , 0]               γ2 = 21            3
               Fig. 2(c)                               k3 = [ 13 , 12 , 12 , 1]               γ3 = 1
                                                       k1 = [ 12 , 0, 0, 0]                   γ1 = 21
                              Selection 2              k2 = [0, 12 , 12 , 12 ]                γ2 = 12           2
                                                      k3 = [ 21 , 12 , 12 , 12 ]              γ3 = 12
                                                    k1 = k2 = [ 13 , 13 , 0, 0]            γ1 = γ2 = 31         8
                              Selection 1
                                                       k3 = [ 13 , 13 , 1, 1]                 γ3 = 1            3

                                                       k1 = [ 12 , 13 , 0, 0]                 γ1 = 21
               Fig. 2(d)      Selection 2              k2 = [0, 13 , 12 , 0]                  γ2 = 12           4
                                                       k3 = [ 12 , 13 , 12 , 1]               γ3 = 1
                                                       k1 = [ 12 , 12 , 0, 0]                 γ1 = 21
                              Selection 3              k2 = [0, 0, 12 , 12 ]                  γ2 = 12           2
                                                      k3 = [ 21 , 12 , 12 , 12 ]              γ3 = 12
                                                       k1 = [ 13 , 13 , 0, 0]                 γ1 = 31           10
                              Selection 1              k2 = [ 13 , 13 , 12 , 0]               γ2 = 21            3
               Fig. 2(e)                               k3 = [ 13 , 13 , 12 , 1]               γ3 = 1
                                                       k1 = [ 12 , 13 , 0, 0]                 γ1 = 21
                              Selection 2              k2 = [0, 13 , 12 , 12 ]                γ2 = 12           2
                                                      k3 = [ 21 , 13 , 12 , 12 ]              γ3 = 12
                                                    k1 = k2 = [ 13 , 13 , 13 , 0]          γ1 = γ2 = 31         8
                              Selection 1
                                                       k3 = [ 13 , 13 , 13 , 1]               γ3 = 1            3
               Fig. 2(f)                               k1 = [ 12 , 13 , 13 , 0]               γ1 = 21
                              Selection 2              k2 = [0, 13 , 13 , 12 ]                γ2 = 12           2
                                                      k3 = [ 21 , 13 , 13 , 12 ]              γ3 = 12
               Fig. 2(g)                         k1 = k2 = k3 = [ 13 , 13 , 13 , 13 ]   γ1 = γ2 = γ3 = 13       0


The results in Table 6 also show that by increasing the computational capability of the devices,
the bias value can be decreased. In the extreme case that all three devices have the maximum
computational capability (i.e., Fig. 2(g)), the bias value is zero.



G        E FFECT OF M ASKING R ATE ON THE C OMPUTATIONS

By increasing the masking rate (i.e., 1 − dψwn ), each device can reduce the number of trainable
parameters and the number of FLOPs based on its computational capability. Fig. 3 shows the
reduction percentage7 , which can be obtained for the number of trainable parameters and the number
of FLOPs versus the masking rate. For the results in Fig. 3, we have considered that a device
performs each local update iteration on a batch containing 50 data samples of CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-
100 datasets using ResNet (PreResNet18) and MobileNet, respectively.


    7
        Reduction percentage is the percentage change in a value compared to its maximum value.


                                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  100                                                                                                                                                       100
                                                            Number of Trainable Parameters                                                                                                                            Number of Trainable Parameters


                                                                                                                                                          Reduction Percentage per Local Update Iteration
Reduction Percentage per Local Update Iteration
                                                            Number of FLOPs                                                                                                                                           Number of FLOPs
                                                   90                                                                                                                                                       90

                                                   80                                                                                                                                                       80

                                                   70                                                                                                                                                       70

                                                   60                                                                                                                                                       60

                                                   50                                                                                                                                                       50

                                                   40                                                                                                                                                       40

                                                   30                                                                                                                                                       30

                                                   20                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                   10                                                                                                                                                       10

                                                    0                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                        0     0.1     0.2    0.3     0.4     0.5   0.6   0.7       0.8    0.9       1                                                                             0     0.1     0.2     0.3    0.4     0.5   0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1
                                                                                       Masking Rate                                                                                                                                              Masking Rate


                        (a)                                                      (b)
Figure 3: Reduction percentage for the number of trainable parameters and number of FLOPs versus masking
rate for (a) ResNet (PreResNet18) and (b) MobileNet.


H                                                           S OLVING P ROBLEM P MASK BY SCA
In this section, we first transform the non-convex constraints in optimization problem P mask into
convex functions or a difference of two convex functions. Then, by using successive convex approx-
imation (SCA) method, we can obtain a suboptimal solution for problem P mask in polynomial time.
We first rewrite constraint (9a) in the form of the following inequalities:
                                                                                                                       (m̃n )j
                                                                                                           (k̃n )j ≤ PN             , j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ],                                                                                                                                        (31a)
                                                                                                                      n′ =1 (m̃n )j
                                                                                                                                ′


                                                                                                                       (m̃n )j
                                                                                                           (k̃n )j ≥ PN             , j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ].                                                                                                                                        (31b)
                                                                                                                      n′ =1 (m̃n )j
                                                                                                                                ′


Since (m̃n )j is a binary variable, the non-convex constraint (31b) can be expressed as the following
convex constraint:
                                           (m̃n )2j
                             (k̃n )j ≥ PN               , j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ].                       (32)
                                          n′ =1 (m̃n )j
                                                    ′


The non-convex constraint (31a) can be rewritten as follows:
                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                         X
                                                                                                         (k̃n )j                    (m̃n′ )j ≤ (m̃n )j , j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ].                                                                                                                      (33)
                                                                                                                         n′ =1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                   PN                                           1
                                                                                                                                                     PN                                                                                                            PN
Equality (k̃n )j                                                                           n′ =1 (m̃n )j
                                                                                                               ′         =      2        (k̃n )j +    n′ =1 (m̃n )j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ′             − (k̃n )2j − (                    n′ =1 (m̃n )j )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ′
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2

can be used to express the left-hand side of (33) as a difference of two convex functions. We have
     
                   N
                                !2                N
                                                                 
   1              X                              X
         (k̃n )j +     (m̃n′ )j    − (k̃n )2j − (    (m̃n′ )j )2  ≤ (m̃n )j , j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ]. (34)
   2               ′                              ′                                        n =1                                                n =1

Next, we relax the binary constraint (9c) in the form of the difference of two convex functions as
follows:
                              XN X               XN X
                                      (m̃n )j −         (m̃n )2j ≤ 0,                        (35a)
                                                                                                                     n=1 j∈Λ                     n=1 j∈Λ

                                                                                                                    0 ≤ (m̃n )j ≤ 1, j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ].                                                                                                                                         (35b)

Finally, we define the following functions:
                                                                                                               Θ((m̃n )j ) = (m̃n )2j ,                                                                                                                                                       (36a)
                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                             X
                                                                                                               ϑ((k̃n )j , M̃j ) = (k̃n )2j + (                                                                        (m̃n′ )j )2 ,                                                          (36b)
                                                                                                                                                                           n′ =1



                                                                                                                                                 20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where vector M̃j = ((m̃n′ )j , n′ ∈ [N ]).
Algorithm 3 describes the SCA algorithm for solving problem P mask . Let i denote the iteration
index. In Line 1, we initialize the maximum number of iterations imax . In Line 2, the decision
              (1)        (1)
variables m̃n and k̃n , n ∈ [N ] are initialized in iteration i = 1 with a feasible solution of
problem P    mask
                  . In Line 4, the optimal solution of problem P mask-SCA (i.e., m̃∗n and k̃n∗ , n ∈ [N ])
                                                                 (i+1)         (i+1)
are determined. In Line 5, using m̃∗n and k̃n∗ , we update m̃n         and k̃n , n ∈ [N ] to be used for
obtaining the first-order approximations Θ̂((m̃n )j ) and ϑ̂((k̃n )j , M̃j ) of functions Θ((m̃n )j ) and
ϑ((k̃n )j , M̃j ), respectively. The iteration index is updated in Line 6. The steps within Lines 3 to
7 are repeated until the algorithm converges to a solution or we reach to imax . The convex problem
P mask-SCA , which is solved in each iteration i, is as follows:
                                                                                           
                                       XN                         X
  P mask-SCA : minimize                     dw max (k̃n )j −         |πj ′ |(k̃n )j ′ + ϵn 
                  m̃n , k̃n , ϵn , n∈[N ]               j
                                             n=1                       j ′ ∈Λ

                  subject to constraints (9b), (32), (35b), and (9d),
                    
                                   N
                                                !2                         
                  1              X                                    (i)
                        (k̃n )j +      (m̃n′ )j    − ϑ̂((k̃n(i) )j , M̃j ) ≤ (m̃n )j , j ∈ Λ, n ∈ [N ],
                  2                ′   n =1
                  N X
                  X                         N X
                                            X
                             (m̃n )j −             Θ̂((m̃(i)
                                                         n )j ) ≤ 0.
                  n=1 j∈Λ                   n=1 j∈Λ



Algorithm 3: SCA Algorithm for Solving Problem P mask
 1: Set i := 1 and initialize the maximum number of iterations imax .
                              (1)        (1)
 2:   Initialize variables m̃n and k̃n , n ∈ [N ].
 3:   Repeat
 4:       Determine the optimal solution m̃∗n and k̃n∗ , n ∈ [N ] of problem P mask-SCA .
                                (i+1)
 5:       Update variables m̃n        := m̃∗n and k̃n(i+1) := k̃n∗ , n ∈ [N ].
 6:       Set i := i + 1.
 7:   Until i = imax or m̃n and k̃n , n ∈ [N ] converge.
                            (i)               (i)
 8:   Return m̃opt                    opt
                  n := m̃n and k̃n := k̃n , n ∈ [N ].


I   P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON FOR D OMAIN N ET DATASET
Different from the considered class non-IID configuration for CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets,
in this section, we evaluate the performance of our proposed algorithm under feature non-IID con-
figuration. We perform our experiment with AlexNet on DomainNet dataset. The dataset contains
images of six distinct domains including Clipart, Infograph, Painting, Quickdraw, Real, and Sketch.
We consider 30 devices in the network, and split each domain among 5 devices. We set the number
of communication rounds and the learning rate to be 100 and 0.01, respectively. Table 7 shows
the obtained test accuracy after fine-tuning and the number of trainable parameters for PerFedMask
compared to other baseline algorithms. The results in Table 7 indicate that PerFedMask can achieve
a higher test accuracy compared to HeteroFL and Split-Mix FL algorithms, while the number of
trainable parameters is much less than FedBABU, FedProx, FedNova, and FedAvg algorithms.

          Table 7: Test accuracy after fine-tuning and number of trainable parameters of PerFed-
          Mask and the baseline algorithms for DomainNet dataset

                                             Test accuracy after fine-tuning
            PerFedMask (Ours)       FedBABU FedProx FedNova HeteroFL             Split-Mix FL   FedAvg
                  70.68               72.29       71.95      72.85       67.68       68.44       72.24
                                            Number of trainable parameters
            PerFedMask (Ours)       FedBABU FedProx FedNova HeteroFL             Split-Mix FL    FedAvg
                 31.221M             57.022M 57.063M 57.063M 28.983M               4.058M       57.063M



                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


J                                          C OMPARISON OF T RAINING C URVES
This section includes some of the training curves for our experiments. Fig. 4 illustrates the train-
ing loss over communication rounds for PerFedMask and the baseline algorithms on CIFAR-100
and DomainNet datasets. In Fig. 4, we have considered the full device participation scenario. The
difference between the training loss of PerFedMask and FedBABU is the bias resulted by the de-
vice heterogeneity. Although we have minimized this bias through solving P mask , it has not been
completely eliminated. Fine-tuning after training helps to improve the performance of PerFedMask.
When c = 0.1, Fig. 5 shows the evolution of the validation accuracy over communication rounds
for PerFedMask, FedBABU, FedAvg, and Split-Mix FL algorithms on CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100
datasets.
                                      10           1.6                                                                                                  3.5
                                                                                                      PerFedMask                                                                                                    PerFedMask
                                                                                                      HeteroFL                                                       0.6                                            Split-Mix FL
                                                   1.4                                                Split-Mix FL                                           3                                                      FedNova
                                           8                                                                                                                                                       Bias due to
                                                                                                      FedProx                                                        0.4                                            FedProx
                                                                                  Bias due to                                                           2.5                                          device
                                                                                                      FedNova                                                                                                       FedAvg
                  Training Loss


                                                                                                                      Training Loss
                                                   1.2                              device                                                                                                        heterogeneity
                                                                                                      FedAvg                                                         0.2                                            HeteroFL
                                           6                                     heterogeneity                                                               2
                                                                                                      FedBABU                                                                                                       FedBABU
                                                    1                                                                                                                 0
                                                     70         75          80                                                                                         85       90      95     100
                                           4                                                                                                            1.5

                                                                                                                                                             1
                                           2
                                                                                                                                                        0.5

                                           0                                                                                                                 0
                                               0          20               40                    60             80                                               0         20            40          60            80          100
                                                               Communication Round                                                                                              Communication Round

                                                                              (a)                                                                                                                 (b)
Figure 4: Training loss evolution over communication rounds for (a) CIFAR-100 and (b) DomainNet datasets.
c is set to 1.


                                                                              (a)                                                                                                                 (b)
Figure 5: Validation accuracy evolution over communication rounds for (a) CIFAR-10 and (b) CIFAR-100
datasets. c is set to 0.1.


K                                              P ERFORMANCE C OMPARISON U SING B OX P LOTS

                                                                                                                                                        70

                                      85
    Test Accuracy after Fine-Tuning


                                                                                                                      Test Accuracy after Fine-Tuning


                                                                                                                                                        68


                                      80                                                                                                                66


                                                                                                                                                        64
                                      75
                                                                                                                                                        62


                                      70                                                                                                                60


                                                                                                                                                        58
                                           PerFedMask FedBABU    FedProx   FedNova    HeteroFL Split-Mix FL FedAvg                                           PerFedMask FedBABU      FedProx   FedNova   HeteroFL Split-Mix FL FedAvg



                                                                              (a)                                                                                                                 (b)
                                       Figure 6: Test accuracy after fine-tuning for (a) CIFAR-10 and (b) CIFAR-100 datasets. c is set to 0.1.


                                                                                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L     C OMBINATION OF P ER F ED M ASK WITH H ETERO FL AND S PLIT-M IX FL

                     Table 8: Performance comparison on CIFAR-100 dataset when c = 1

                                          Test accuracy                                                       # of FLOPs
         Algorithm                                                       # of trainable parameters
                              Before fine-tuning After fine-tuning                                       Forward Backward
 PerFedMask + Split-Mix FL          29.66               70.78                       0.204M               17.182M     0.122G
  PerFedMask + HeteroFL             30.94               71.56                       1.611M                0.122G     0.464G
       PerFedMask                   32.04               72.40                       1.803M                0.220G     0.711G
       Split-Mix FL                 23.09               65.95                       0.223M               17.182M     0.127G
        HeteroFL                    30.13               68.65                       1.774M                0.122G     0.473G
        FedBABU                     29.70               69.01                       3.207M                0.220G     0.863G



M      E FFECT OF F REEZING THE L OCAL H EAD MODELS D URING T RAINING

In this section, we investigate the impact of freezing the local head models on the test accuracy of
PerFedMask. In particular, we compare the test accuracy of PerFedMask with (w/) and without
(w/o) freezing the local head models. In the w/o head freezing scenario, the learning model is not
decoupled into the global model and the local head model. Table 9 shows that the test accuracy of
PerFedMask is improved by keeping the local head models frozen during training.

                             Table 9: Test accuracy of PerFedMask with and without
                             freezing the local head models

                                                  CIFAR-10 dataset       CIFAR-100 dataset
                                PerFedMask
                                                  c = 0.1  c=1           c = 0.1   c=1
                              w/ head freezing     83.60   88.43          67.47    72.40
                              w/o head freezing    71.56   85.76          54.85    67.89


N     P ROOF OF L EMMA 2
                                                       PN                    Pτ         i
                                                                                                                       PN
    Pτ two auxiliary sequences ḡ(t) =
We define                                                n=1 kn ⊙             i=1 ∇fn (wn (t)) and g(t)            =    n=1
kn ⊙ i=1 ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)). We have

                                     N                                   2
                                     X
                       ∗ 2
    E ∥wg (t + 1) − w ∥ = E               kn ⊙ wnτ +1 (t) − w∗
                                    n=1
                                     N                             N                τ                                    2
                                     X                             X                X
                             =E           kn ⊙ wg (t) − η(t)                 kn ⊙         ∇fn (wni (t), bin (t)) − w∗
                                    n=1                            n=1              i=1
                                                                  ∗ 2
                             = E ∥wg (t) − η(t)g(t) − w ∥
                                                                                                     2
                             = E ∥wg (t) − η(t)g(t) − w∗ + η(t)ḡ(t) − η(t)ḡ(t)∥
                                                                     2                                    2
                             = E ∥wg (t) − w∗ − η(t)ḡ(t)∥ + η 2 (t)E ∥g(t) − ḡ(t)∥
                                 |          {z            }           |     {z      }
                                                  A1                                           A2

                                 − 2η(t)E ⟨wg (t) − w∗ − η(t)ḡ(t), g(t) − ḡ(t)⟩ .                                     (37)
                                          |               {z                    }
                                                                     A3


Since Eg(t) = ḡ(t), we have EA3 = 0. Next, we focus on bounding A1 .
                                      2                       2                           2
A1 = ∥wg (t) − w∗ − η(t)ḡ(t)∥ = ∥wg (t) − w∗ ∥ + η 2 (t) ∥ḡ(t)∥ −2η(t) ⟨wg (t) − w∗ , ḡ(t)⟩ .
                                                          | {z } |            {z             }
                                                                                    B1                        B2
                                                                                                                        (38)


                                                         23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     2
By considering the convexity of ∥·∥ and by using Assumption 1, we can bound B1 as follows:
                                               N X
                                                 τ                             2
                                         2
                                               X
                           B1 = ∥ḡ(t)∥ =                 kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                                               n=1 i=1
                                     N X
                                       τ
                                     X                                   2
                              ≤ Nτ              kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                                     n=1 i=1
                                     N X
                                       τ
                                     X                               2
                              ≤ Nτ             γn2 ∇fn (wni (t))
                                     n=1 i=1
                                         N X
                                         X τ
                                                   γn2 fn (wni (t)) − fn∗ .

                              ≤ 2LN τ                                                        (39)
                                         n=1 i=1


Next, we aim to bound B2 . We have
           B2 = − 2η(t) ⟨wg (t) − w∗ , ḡ(t)⟩
                        *                 N X τ
                                                                  +
                                         X
                                    ∗                      i
              = − 2η(t) wg (t) − w ,            kn ⊙ ∇fn (wn (t))
                                             n=1 i=1
                           N X
                           X τ
               = − 2η(t)             wg (t) − wni (t) + wni (t) − w∗ , kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                           n=1 i=1
                        N X
                        X τ
               = η(t)           (−2) wg (t) − wni (t), kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                        n=1 i=1
                                |                  {z                     }
                                                         C1
                           N X
                           X τ
                 + 2η(t)           (−1) wni (t) − w∗ , kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t)) .                  (40)
                           n=1 i=1
                                   |                {z                   }
                                                          C2

We first obtain an upper bound of C1 . We have
                 C1 ≤ 2 wg (t) − wni (t), kn ⊙ ∇fn (wni (t))
                     (a)
                     ≤ 2γn wg (t) − wni (t)         ∇fn (wni (t))
                    (b)   γn                  2                        2
                    ≤         wg (t) − wni (t) + η(t)γn ∇fn (wni (t))
                         η(t)
                      (c) γn                  2
                              wg (t) − wni (t) + 2Lη(t)γn fn (wni (t)) − fn∗ ,

                      ≤                                                                      (41)
                         η(t)
where inequality (a) results from triangle and Hölder’s inequalities. Inequality (b) results from
the inequality of arithmetic and geometric means (AM-GM) inequality. For inequality (c), we use
Assumption 1.
Next, we obtain an upper bound of C2 by using Lemma 1. In particular, by considering x =
w∗ − wni (t), y = kn , and z = ∇fn (wni (t)) in Lemma 1, we can bound C2 as follows:
                                                       dw
                                                                 !
                                                       X
               ∗    i           i
  C2 ≤ γn w − wn (t), ∇fn (wn (t)) + Ω dw γn −            (kn )l
                                                               l=1
                                                                           dw
                                                                                            !
                                      µγn                  2
                                                                           X
      ≤ − γn fn (wni (t)) − fn (w∗ ) +      − wni (t) − w∗     + Ω dw γn −     (kn )l           ,
                                       2 |         {z        }             l=1
                                                               D
                                                                                             (42)
where the last inequality results from Assumption 4. Now, we focus on bounding D. Considering
                       2          2       2
the inequality ∥x + y∥ ≤ 2 ∥x∥ +2 ∥y∥ for any x, y ∈ Rd , and by replacing x with wni (t)−w∗


                                                    24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and y with wg (t) − wni (t) we have

                                                            2       1               2
                          D ≤ wg (t) − wni (t)                  −     ∥wg (t) − w∗ ∥ .                   (43)
                                                                    2

By combining (38)−(43), we obtain
                                                 N
                                                       !
                            µη(t)τ X                                               2
                  EA1 ≤ 1 −          γn                     E∥wg (t) − w∗ ∥
                              2 n=1
                                                 N X
                                                   τ
                                                 X                                     2
                            + (1 + µη(t))                  γn E wg (t) − wni (t)
                                                n=1 i=1
                                           N X
                                           X τ
                            + 2Lη 2 (t)                N τ γn2 + γn E fn (wni (t)) − fn∗

                                           n=1 i=1
                                       N X
                                       X τ
                                                  γn E fn (wni (t)) − fn (w∗ )

                            − 2η(t)
                                       n=1 i=1
                                           N                    dw
                                                                             !
                                           X                    X
                            + 2η(t)τ Ω               dw γn −            (kn )l .                         (44)
                                           n=1                  l=1

By rearranging the terms in (44), we have
                                      N
                                             !
                    µη(t)τ X                                             2
          EA1 ≤ 1 −          γn                  E∥wg (t) − w∗ ∥
                      2 n=1
                                      N X
                                        τ
                                      X                                        2
                  + (1 + µη(t))                  γn E wg (t) − wni (t)
                                      n=1 i=1
                            N X
                            X τ
                                       γn (1 − Lη(t) (N τ γn + 1)) E fn (wni (t)) − fn (w∗ )

                  − 2η(t)
                            n=1 i=1
                                N
                                X
                            2
                                          N τ γn2 + γn E(fn (w∗ ) − fn∗ )

                  + 2Lτ η (t)
                                n=1
                                N                    dw
                                                                    !
                                X                    X
                  + 2η(t)τ Ω              dw γn −          (kn )l .                                      (45)
                                n=1                  l=1


Now, we aim to bound fn (wni (t)) − fn (w∗ ) as follows:

        fn (wni (t)) − fn (w∗ ) = fn (wni (t)) − fn (wg (t)) + (fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ ))


                                (a)
                                ≥ ∇fn (wg (t)), wni (t) − wg (t) + (fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ ))
                                (b)     η(t)                2      1                    2
                                ≥−           ∥∇fn (wg (t))∥ −          wg (t) − wni (t)
                                          2                      2η(t)
                                      + (fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ ))
                                (c)                                             1                    2
                                ≥ − Lη(t) (fn (wg (t)) − fn∗ ) −                    wg (t) − wni (t)
                                                                              2η(t)
                                      + (fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ )) ,                                       (46)

where inequality (a) results from the convexity of fn (w), inequality (b) is obtained by using Cauchy-
Schwarz and AM-GM inequalities, and inequality (c) is due to Assumption 1.


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By combining (26), (45), and (46), we have
                            N
                                  !
                   µη(t)τ X                      2
     EA1 ≤ 1 −                 γn E∥wg (t) − w∗ ∥
                     2 n=1
                                                      N
                            τ (τ − 1)(2τ − 1) X
              + η 2 (t)G2                         γn (2 + µη(t) − Lη(t) (N τ γn + 1))
                                    6         n=1
                                          N
                                          X
              − 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t))              γn (1 − Lη(t) (N τ γn + 1)) E(fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ ))
                                          n=1
                              N
                              X
              + 2Lτ η 2 (t)         γn (1 + (1 − Lη(t)) (N τ γn + 1)) E(fn (w∗ ) − fn∗ )
                              n=1
                            N                   dw
                                                             !
                            X                   X
              + 2η(t)τ Ω            dw γn −           (kn )l .                                          (47)
                            n=1                 l=1

Lemma 3. For η(t) ≤ L(N1τ +1) , for all t = 1, . . . , T , we have

                               N
                               X
     − 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t))            γn (1 − Lη(t) (N τ γn + 1)) E(fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ ))
                               n=1
                                    N
                                    X          1                                     1
     ≤ 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) Υ               γn −             − Lη(t) γn (N τ γn + 1) −   (τ + 1) .        (48)
                                    n=1
                                               N                                     N


Proof. See Appendix P.

Using Lemma 3, we can simplify (47) as follows:
                                     N
                                              !
                                 1 X                          2
                        EA1 ≤ 1 − µτ   γn η(t) E∥wg (t) − w∗ ∥
                                 2 n=1
                                                                         N
                                              τ (τ − 1)(2τ − 1)         X
                                    + η 2 (t)G2                 (2 + µ)     γn
                                                      6                 n=1
                                                N
                                               X           1
                                    + 2η(t)τ Υ       γn −
                                               n=1
                                                          N
                                                      N
                                                      X
                                    + 2Lτ η 2 (t)           γn (2 + N τ γn ) Γn
                                                      n=1
                                                  N                   dw
                                                                                  !
                                                  X                   X
                                    + 2η(t)τ Ω              dw γn −         (kn )l .                    (49)
                                                  n=1                 l=1


Finally, we use (20) to bound EA2 in (37). Lemma 2 is concluded by combining (20), (37), and
(49).


O    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
                                                                             2
First, through induction, we show that for a diminishing stepsize η(t) = q0 (t+κ) , we have δ(t) ≤
β(t)                   2q1           4q2
t+κ , where β(t) = max{ q0 (t + κ) + q02 , (κ + 1) δ(1)}. Note that the considered η(t) satisfies
the mentioned condition in Lemma 2. Moreover, the definition of β(t) ensures that the inequality


                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


holds for δ(1). Now, we assume that the inequality holds for t. We show that it also holds for t + 1.
From Lemma 2, we have
                  δ(t + 1) ≤ (1 − q0 η(t)) δ(t) + q1 η(t) + q2 η 2 (t)

                                       2      β(t)          2q1          4q2
                           ≤ 1−                    +                + 2
                                    t + κ t + κ q0 (t + κ) q0 (t + κ)2
                              t+κ−1              2q0 q1 (t + κ) + 4q2       β(t)
                           =           2 β(t) +                   2    −          2
                               (t + κ)                q02 (t + κ)         (t + κ)
                              t+κ−1
                           ≤           2 β(t)
                               (t + κ)
                                t+κ−1
                           ≤          2     β(t)
                              (t + κ) − 1
                                 β(t)
                           ≤             .                                                       (50)
                              t+κ+1
Finally, by the L-smoothness assumption for F , we have
                                                   L       L β(T )
                            EF (wg (T )) − F ∗ ≤ δ(T ) ≤           .                     (51)
                                                   2       2 T +κ
From the definition of β(t), we have β(T ) ≤ 2q             4q2
                                               q0 (T + κ) + q02 + (κ + 1) δ(1). Combining this
                                                 1


with (51) completes the proof of Theorem 2.

P    P ROOF OF L EMMA 3
First, we define two vectors x and y ∈ RN , where (x)n = γn (1 − Lη(t) (N τ γn + 1)) and (y)n =
fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ ), n ∈ [N ], respectively. Let X and Y , respectively, denote the corresponding
diagonal matrices of vectors x and y. By using Theorem 3 in Fang et al. (1994), we have the
following inequality:
                    Tr(XY ) ≥ λN (X) Tr(Y ) + λN (Y ) (Tr(X) − N λN (X)) ,                      (52)
where λN (X) and λN (Y ) are the smallest eigenvalue of matrices X and Y , respectively. Since
X and Y are diagonal matrices, we have λN (X) = minn∈[N ] (x)n and λN (Y ) = minn∈[N ] (y)n .
By considering η(t) ≤ L(N1τ +1) , all the elements of vector x including λN (X) are nonnegative.
Also, (x)n is a quadratic function with respect to γn . For N1 ≤ γn ≤ 1, by considering that
η(t) ≤ L(N1τ +1) , it can be verified that the minimum value of (x)n is obtained at γn = N1 . Thus,
λN (X) is lower bounded as λN (X) ≥ N1 (1 − Lη(t) (τ + 1)). Hence, we have
                            N
                            X
    − 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t))          γn (1 − Lη(t) (N τ γn + 1)) (fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ ))
                            n=1
                                          N
     (a)                                  X
     ≤ − 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) λN (X)             fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ )
                                         n=1
           − 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) min (fn (wg (t)) − fn (w∗ )) (Tr(X) − N λN (X))
                               n∈[N ]
     (b)
     ≤ − 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) λN (X)N (F (wg (t)) − F ∗ )
       + 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) Υ (Tr(X) − N λN (X))
                                  N
                                                                                           !
     (c)                          X
     ≤ 2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) Υ             γn (1 − Lη(t) (N τ γn + 1)) − (1 − Lη(t) (τ + 1)) ,        (53)
                                  n=1
where for inequality (a), we use (52). We also use the fact that −2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) ≤ 0. Note
that since η(t) ≤ L(N1τ +1) , ∀t, the quadratic function −2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) is always nonpositive.
Inequality (b) results from the definition of F (w). For inequality (c), since F (wg (t)) ≥ F ∗ , we use
the fact that −2η(t)τ (1 − Lη(t)) λN (X)N (F (wg (t)) − F ∗ ) ≤ 0. Finally, Lemma 3 is concluded
by using the obtained lower bound for λN (X) and by rearranging the terms in (53).


                                                     27
