Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I M A G E N E T -X: U NDERSTANDING M ODEL M ISTAKES
WITH FACTOR OF VARIATION A NNOTATIONS

 Badr Youbi Idrissi, Diane Bouchacourt, Randall Balestriero, Ivan Evtimov, Caner Hazirbas
 Nicolas Ballas, Pascal Vincent, Michal Drozdzal, David Lopez-Paz, Mark Ibrahim∗
 Fundamental AI Research (FAIR), Meta AI
 {byoubi,marksibrahim}@meta.com



                                              A BSTRACT
            Deep learning vision systems are widely deployed across applications where re-
            liability is critical. However, even today’s best models can fail to recognize an
            object when its pose, lighting, or background varies. While existing benchmarks
            surface examples that are challenging for models, they do not explain why such
            mistakes arise. To address this need, we introduce ImageNet-X–a set of six-
            teen human annotations of factors such as pose, background, or lighting for the
            entire ImageNet-1k validation set as well as a random subset of 12k training im-
            ages. Equipped with ImageNet-X, we investigate 2,200 current recognition
            models and study the types of mistakes as a function of model’s (1) architecture
            – e.g. transformer vs. convolutional –, (2) learning paradigm – e.g. supervised
            vs. self-supervised –, and (3) training procedures – e.g. data augmentation. Re-
            gardless of these choices, we find models have consistent failure modes across
            ImageNet-X categories. We also find that while data augmentation can improve
            robustness to certain factors, they induce spill-over effects to other factors. For
            example, color-jitter augmentation improves robustness to color and brightness,
            but surprisingly hurts robustness to pose. Together, these insights suggests that to
            advance the robustness of modern vision models, future research should focus on
            collecting additional diverse data and understanding data augmentation schemes.
            Along with these insights, we release a toolkit based on ImageNet-X to spur
            further study into the mistakes the image recognition systems make: https:
            //facebookresearch.github.io/imagenetx/site/home.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Despite deep learning surpassing human performance on ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015; He
et al., 2015), even today’s best vision systems can fail in spectacular ways. Models are brittle to
variation in object pose (Alcorn et al., 2019), background (Beery et al., 2018), texture (Geirhos et al.,
2018), and lighting (Michaelis et al., 2019).
Model failures are of increasing importance as deep learning is deployed in critical systems spanning
fields across medical imaging (Lundervold and Lundervold, 2019), autonomous driving (Grigorescu
et al., 2020), and satellite imagery (Zhu et al., 2017). One example from the medical domain raises
reasonable worry, as “recent deep learning systems to detect COVID-19 rely on confounding factors
rather than medical pathology, creating an alarming situation in which the systems appear accurate,
but fail when tested in new hospitals” (DeGrave et al., 2021). Just as worrisome is evidence that model
failures are pronounced for socially disadvantaged groups (Chasalow and Levy, 2021; Buolamwini
and Gebru, 2018; DeVries et al., 2019; Idrissi et al., 2021).
Existing benchmarks such as ImageNet-A,-O, and -V2 surface more challenging classification
examples, but do not reveal why models make such mistakes. Benchmarks don’t indicate whether a
model’s failure is due to an unusual pose or an unseen color or dark lighting conditions. Researchers,
instead, often measure robustness with respect to these examples’ average accuracy. Average accuracy
captures a model’s mistakes, but does not reveal directions to reduce those mistakes. A hurdle to
research progress is understanding not just that, but also why model failures occur.
    *
        hands-on and advising contributions


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To meet this need, we introduce ImageNet-X, a set of human annotations pinpointing failure types
for the popular ImageNet dataset. ImageNet-X labels distinguishing object factors such as pose,
size, color, lighting, occlusions, co-occurences, and so on for each image in the validation set and
a random subset of 12,000 training samples. Along with explaining how images in ImageNet vary,
these annotations surface factors associated with models’ mistakes (depicted in Figure 1).

  a) ImageNet-X annotation form
                                                                     Prototypes                                                                                                    Sample


  Given the group of Prototypical images to the left and Sample image to the right, please
  answer the following questions in blue:
                       1. Select all factors that make the Prototypical images different from the Sample
                          image: □✓ pose / positioning; □✓ object is partially present; □
                                                                                        ✓ object partially blocked
                          by another object; □ object partially blocked by a person; □ another object is present;
                          ✓ object is small relative to the image frame; □ object is large relative to the image
                          □
                                                                                 ✓ background; □
                          frame; □ lightning is brighter; □ lightning is darker; □              ✓ color; □ shape;
                          □ texture; □ pattern; □ media style; □ subcategory.
                       2. Describe more about your selections in question 2: cow in water at the beach
                       3. Describe in one word what the primary difference is between the left images and right
                          image: beach, far-away


  b) Robustness analysis enabled by ImageNet-X
                                                Supervised on more data                              Self-supervised
                 2.5
                                                Supervised on ImageNet-1K                            Robustness intervention
   Error ratio

                        less robust →


                 2.0

                 1.5

                 1.0


                       po
                         se
                                          tte
                                             rn        ter       vie
                                                                     w         nd   col
                                                                                          or      ger      rke
                                                                                                              r          ller   sty
                                                                                                                                    le         pe       jec
                                                                                                                                                            ts           g
                                                                                                                                                                    kin ockin
                                                                                                                                                                                g
                                                                                                                                                                                       gor
                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                                                                                                                                                                                 tur
                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                        pa        bri
                                                     gh       al           rou                 lar       da          sm
                                                                                                                        a                 sha        ob         lo c                ate      tex
                                                           rti         ckg                                                                        le          nb         tb
                                                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                                                                 bc
                                                        pa         ba                                                                       l ti p
                                                                                                                                                         rs o        j ec    s u
                                                                                                                                         mu           pe         ob


Figure 1: Models, regardless of architecture, training dataset size, and even robustness inter-
ventions all share similar failure types. ImageNet-X annotations allow us to group images into
Factors of Variation such as pose, pattern or texture (subfigure a and full definitions in Appendix
A.2). A model can be evaluated on each of these factors, revealing where it makes the most mistakes.
                             1−acc(f actor)
We compare error ratios = 1−acc(overall)    on each factor for 4 wide groups of models. Subfigure b
shows that differences in texture, subcategories (e.g., breeds), and occlusion are most associated with
models’ mistakes. Transparent bars show the factors where there is no significant difference between
the 4 groups (p value > 0.05 with Alexander Govern test).

By analyzing the ImageNet-X labels, in section 3, we find that in ImageNet pose and background
commonly vary, that classes can have distinct factors (such as dogs more often varying in pose
compared to other classes), and that ImageNet’s training and validation sets share similar distributions
of factors. We then analyze, in section 4, the failure types of more than 2,200 models. We find that
models, regardless of architecture, training dataset size, and even robustness interventions all share
similar failure types in section 4.1. Additionally, differences in texture, subcategories (e.g., breeds),


                                                                                                                 2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Dataset             Description                     ImageNet   Natural   Entire     Human                              Ref.
                                                      images    images    val. set    FoV

 ImageNet-C          algorithmic corruptions            ✗         ✗         ✓          ✗     Hendrycks and Dietterich (2019)
 ImageNet-P          animated perturbations             ✗         ✗         ✓          ✗     Hendrycks and Dietterich (2019)
 ImageNet-R          artistic renditions                ✗         ✗         ✗          ✗             Hendrycks et al. (2021)
 ImageNet-A          natural adversarial examples       ✗         ✓         ✗          ✗             Hendrycks et al. (2021)
 ImageNet-O          out-of-distribution examples       ✗         ✓         ✗          ✗             Hendrycks et al. (2021)
 ImageNet-V2         new validation set                 ✗         ✓         ✗          ✗                 Recht et al. (2019)
 ImageNet-Sketch     drawn sketches                     ✗         ✗         ✗          ✗                 Wang et al. (2019)
 ImageNet-ML         human multi-labels                 ✗         ✓         ✗          ✗               Shankar et al. (2020)
 ImageNet-ReaL       human multi-labels                 ✓         ✓         ✓          ✗                Beyer et al. (2020a)
 ImageNet-ReLabel    machine pixelwise multilabels      ✓         ✓         ✓          ✗                   Yun et al. (2021)
 ImageNet-Stylized   randomly-textured images           ✓         ✗         ✓          ✗                Geirhos et al. (2018)
 ImageNet-X          human FoV annotations              ✓         ✓         ✓         ✓                                 ours

Table 1: Extensions of the ImageNet benchmark extensions designed to inspect failure modes of the
ImageNet trained models. We characterize each dataset by looking whether : (1) the dataset images
are only coming from the ImageNet validation set — ImageNet images —; (2) the dataset images are
natural images or are created with algorithmic and artistic perturbations of natural images — Natural
images —; (3) the dataset annotates the entire ImageNet validation set — Entire val. set —; and (4)
whether the dataset contains human annotations of image factors of variations — Human FoV —.
Our proposed ImageNet-X is the first dataset based on ImageNet to include human annotations of
multiple factors of variation for the entire ImageNet validation set.


and occlusion are most associated with models’ mistakes (See Figure 1 and section 4.3.1). Among
modeling choices such as architecture, supervision, data augmentations, and regularization methods,
we find data augmentations can boost models’ robustness. Common augmentations such as cropping
and color-jittering however, can have unintended consequences by affecting unrelated factors (see
section 4.3.2). For example, cropping improves robustness to pose and partial views, as expected,
all the while affecting unrelated factors such as pattern, background, and texture. Together these
findings suggests that to advance the robustness of modern vision models, future research should
focus on improving training data – by collecting additional data and improving data augmentation
schemes – and deemphasize the importance of other aspects such as choice of architecture and
learning paradigm.
We release all the ImageNet-X annotations along with an open-source toolkit to probe existing or
new models’ failure types. The data and code are available at

           https://facebookresearch.github.io/imagenetx/site/home.

With ImageNet-X we equip the research community with a tool to pin-point a models’ failure
types. We hope this spurs new research directions to improve the reliability of deep learning vision
systems.

2    R ELATED WORK
The research community has developed approaches for testing models’ robustness on extended
versions of the ImageNet dataset – see Figure 3 for a visual on different levels of evaluation granularity
and Table 1 for an overview of datasets created to test the failure modes of the models trained on
the ImageNet data. One common approach is to introduce artificial augmentations , e.g. image
corruptions and perturbations (Hendrycks and Dietterich, 2019), renditions (Hendrycks et al., 2021),
sketches (Wang et al., 2019; Bordes et al., 2021), etc. These artificial variations capture changes
arising from corruptions, but are unlikely to capture changing arising from natural distribution shifts
or variation such as changes in pose, lighting, scale, background etc. Consequently, researchers
also collected additional natural images to study the performance of the classification models under
moderate to drastic distribution shifts Hendrycks and Dietterich (2019); Recht et al. (2019). However,
most of these datasets are built to assess the model performance when going away from training data
distribution and, thus, provide almost no understanding about the nature of the in-distribution errors.
Currently, the only ImageNet extensions that help analyzing the in-distribution model errors are the
multiclass relabelling or saliency of the validation set (Shankar et al., 2020; Beyer et al., 2020a; Yun
et al., 2021; Singla and Feizi, 2021). However, this relabelling only explains one type of model error


                                                            3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that is caused by the co-occurrences of other objects in the scene. Our contribution, ImageNet-X,
builds on this line of work to provide granular labels for naturally occurring factors such as changes
in pose, background, lighting, scale, etc. to pinpoint the underlying modes of failure.

3     I M A G E N E T -X: ANNOTATING I MAGE N ET WITH VARIATION LABELS
ImageNet-X contains human annotations for each of the 50,000 images in the validation set of the
ImageNet dataset and 12,000 random sample from the training set. Since it’s difficult to annotate
factors of variations by looking at a single image in isolation, we obtain the annotation by comparing
a validation set image to the three class-prototypical images and ask the annotators to describe the
image by contrasting it with the prototypical images. We define the prototypical images as the most
likely images under ResNet-50 model1 (He et al., 2015). Trained annotators select among sixteen
distinguishing factors, possibly multiple, and write a text description as well as one-word summaries
of key differences. The form is illustrated in Figure 1. The factors span pose, various forms of
occlusion, styles, and include a subcategory factor capturing whether the image is of a distinct type
or breed from the same class (full definitions in Appendix A.2). The text descriptions account for
factors outside the sixteen we provide. After training the annotators and verifying quality with
multi-review on a subset, each image is annotated by one trained human annotator. For example, the
annotator marks whether the object depicted in the Sample image is larger or more occluded than
Prototypical images. We provide a datasheet following Gebru et al. (2021) in Appendix A.1.

One word summaries confirm the list of factors considered. Since our pre-selected list of 16
factors may not encompass every type of variation needed to account for model bias, we also asked
annotators to provide one-word summaries to best distinguish a given image from its prototypes. We
assess whether these free-form responses are encompassed within the pre-defined categories. We
find the top-20 one-word annotation summaries are: pattern, close-up, top-view, front-view, grass,
black, angle, white, color, background, brown, blue, red, position, facing-left, trees, person, side-view,
low-angle, all falling within the 16 categories defined. For example top-view, front-view, facing-left,
low-angle, side-view are captured by the pose factor.

3.1    W HAT I M A G E N E T -X REVEALS ABOUT I MAGE N ET

To better understand the proposed annotations, we explore the distribution of the different factors
among ImageNet images. We identify the most common varying factors in ImageNet, confirm factor
training and validation set distributions match, and find factors can vary in ways that are class-specific.

                                                      train all factors          val all factors               train top factor              val top factor


                                                              10.0%                                    4.00%
                                                                                                                                                0.75%
                        75%
           Percentage


                        50%                                                                                                                     0.50%
                                                               5.0%                                    2.00%
                        25%                                                                                                                     0.25%

                        0%                                     0.0%                                    0.00%                                    0.00%
                                se   d      n      or                    er     e     w
                                                                      all shap l vie tegor
                                                                                           y                     e
                                                                                                              tur darke
                                                                                                                        r         le    ts                 ger   ing  ing ter
                              po roun atter     col                                                                           sty b jec               lar lock lock brigh
                                 ckg   p                           sm             a
                                                                               rti ubca                   tex                     le
                                                                                                                                     o                       b      b
                              ba                                            pa      s                                        ltip                      j ect rson
                                                                                                                        mu                          ob        pe


Figure 2: Some factors are selected for most images; choosing the top factor allows to focus
on the main change in the image. Figure shows the distribution of each factor in the training and
validation set both with all factors selected and only top factor selected.

Pose and background are commonly selected factors. As we can see in Figure 2, when aggre-
gating all the annotations, pose, background, pattern, and color factors are commonly selected. For
instance, pose and background are active for around 80% of the validation images. Since images are
not likely to share a background and the objects within are unlikely to share the same pose, annotators
selected these factors for many images. Pattern and color, which are the next most common, are also
unlikely to be identical across images.
   1
     The prototypical images for a class are those correctly classifed with the highest predicted probability by
ResNet-50. For 115 models with accuracies better than ResNet-50’s, the average accuracy on the prototypical
examples is 99.4%. Therefore all good models seem to agree on this set of prototypes.


                                                                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Selecting the top factor per image. While the annotators could select multiple factors, we select
a unique, top factor per image. To do so, we use the free-from text justification that the annotator
provided. We embed the text justification using a pretrained language model provided by Spacy
(Honnibal and Montani, 2017), and we compare it to that of selected factors’ embeddings. This
selection allows us to extract the main change in each image, thus avoiding over-representing factors
that are triggered by small changes, such as pose or background. We see a clear reduction of those
factors in Figure 2 (all vs top factors).

Training and validation sets have similar distributions of factors To see if there is a distribution
shift between training and validation, we annotate a subset of 12k training samples in a similar fashion
as the validation2 . Figure 2 reports the counts of each factor in this subset (denoted train all and train
top). Comparing with the validation dataset, we see most represented factors are very similar to the
validation set. We confirm this statistically by performing a χ2 -test on the factor distribution counts,
confirming we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the two distributions differ (with p < 0.01).
Similarly, in Appendix A.3 we see that the distribution of factors ticked by the human annotator
(referred to as active) per image are close.
To ease our analysis, we consider for each image its meta-label. A meta-label regroups many ImageNet
classes into bigger classes. We consider 17 meta-labels that we extract using the hierarchical nature of
ImageNet classes: we select 16 common ancestors in the wordnet tree of the original ImageNet 1000
classes. These chosen meta-labels are : device, dog, commodity, bird, structure, covering, wheeled
vehicle, food, equipment, insect, vehicle, furniture, primate, vessel, snake, natural object, and other
for classes that don’t belong to any of the first 16.

Classes can have distinct variation factors. In Appendix A.4 (right) we also observed statistically
significant correlations between factors and meta-labels. For instance, the dog meta-label is negatively
correlated with pattern, color, smaller, shape, and subcategory while being positively correlated with
pose and background. This suggests that the images of dogs in the validation set have more variation
for pose and background while having less variation for pattern, color, smaller, shape, and subcategory.
The commodity meta-label, which contains clothing and home appliances, is positively correlated
with pattern and color and negatively correlated with pose.
In addition to revealing rich information about ImageNet, ImageNet-X can be used to probe at
varying levels of granularity a model’s robustness (see Figure 3).


                                Previous work:
                               Distribution shifts                     ImageNet-X (Ours)
ImageNet                        ImageNet-A, O, R,                                              Justifications;
validation       Classes         V2, Sketch, etc..         Factors       Classes x Factors   1-word differences


                                    Performance evaluation granularity

Figure 3: Performance can be evaluated at different levels of granularity. ImageNet-X pro-
vides factors of variation – aspects that makes an image different from typical images of its class.
ImageNet-X allows to more precisely pinpoint models’ weaknesses and compare them.


4     P ROBING MODEL ROBUSTNESS

By measuring when factors appear among a model’s mistakes relative to the overall dataset, we can
characterize any ImageNet model’s robustness across the 16 ImageNet-X factors. Robustness
    2
      In the training annotation scheme, we separated “pose” into two factors: “pose” and ”subject location”,
where the latter covers cases where the subject in the same pose but a different part of the image. We reconcile
the two here into a unique “pose” to compare with the validation annotations.


                                                       5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


via ImageNet-X goes beyond revealing model mistakes to pinpointing the underlying factors
associated with each mistake.
Here we systematically study the robustness of 2,200 trained models – including many models
from the ImageNet test bed Taori et al. (2020a) and additional self-supervised architectures such as
DINO and SimCLR – to reveal the limitations of average accuracy, understand model biases, and
characterize which choices in architecture, learning paradigm, data augmentation, and regularization
affect robustness. For our analysis we focus on the most salient factor for each image by ranking the
selected factors by their similarity to the text-justification.

4.1                             M ANY DEEP LEARNING MODELS HAVE THE SAME WEAKNESSES AND STRENGTHS

                                          Supervised on more data         Supervised on ImageNet-1K          Self-supervised          Robustness intervention

                                 worst 100 classes         worst factor          subcategory               texture              object blocking        multiple objects
Top 1 Accuracy (Factor)


                          80%

                          60%

                          40%

                          20%

                          0%

                                      shape                    style                smaller            person blocking              darker                  larger
Top 1 Accuracy (Factor)


                          80%

                          60%

                          40%

                          20%

                          0%

                                       color               background            partial view             brighter                 pattern                      pose
Top 1 Accuracy (Factor)


                          80%

                          60%

                          40%

                          20%

                          0%
                                 40% 60% 80%            40% 60% 80%            40% 60% 80%            40% 60% 80%              40% 60% 80%            40% 60% 80%
                                  Top 1 Accuracy         Top 1 Accuracy         Top 1 Accuracy         Top 1 Accuracy           Top 1 Accuracy         Top 1 Accuracy


Figure 4: Most deep learning models, when trained, finetuned or evaluated on ImageNet, have
the same biases. We plot top-1 accuracy for the subset of images labeled with the given factor (y-axis)
relative to overall top-1 accuracy (x-axis). The dashed line is an ideal robust models’ performance, i.e.
performance on each factor is the same as the overall performance. We show the performance of 209
models. We also show the accuracy for the worst factor, and for the images of the worst 100 classes.

To what extent does the commonly reported average accuracy capture a model’s robustness? To
answer this, we inspect 209 models from the ImageNet testbed Taori et al. (2020a) which includes
many architectures (most of which are convolutional, with a few vision transformers), training
procedures (losses, optimizers, hyperparameters), and pretraining data. We include additional self
supervised models for completeness.

Models with similar overall accuracies have very similar per factor accuracies. With all this
variety, the scatter plots in Figure 4 exhibit surprising consistency; overall accuracy is a good
predictor of per factor accuracies. Most models, even with improving overall accuracy, seem to
struggle with the same set of factors: subcategory, texture, object blocking, multiple objects and
shape. Conversely, they seem to do well on the same set of factors: pose, pattern, brighter, partial
view, background, color, larger, and darker. There are some factors where state-of-the-art models
seem to have closed the robustness gap such as person blocking or style.

More training data helps, but robustness interventions do not. Models trained with larger
datasets (blue circles in Figure 4) exhibit higher accuracy across the factors suggesting larger training
datasets do help as others have shown Taori et al. (2020b). Surprisingly, models trained with


                                                                                                6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


robustness interventions (such as CutMix, AdvProp, AutoAugment, etc...), which are directly aimed
at improving robustness don’t show a significant improvement in per factor accuracy as prior work
also shows Taori et al. (2020b).

Model weaknesses coincide with labeling errors. The ImageNet labels are known to contain
labeling errors Beyer et al. (2020b). With new labels from previous work, we assess the accuracy of
the original ImageNet labels and study the distribution of errors across factors. Interestingly, we find
that the original label accuracies on all factors coincide with the state of the art models. This offers a
potential explanation for the model biases. We leave it to future work to investigate if training on
more accurate labels leads to more robust models. We provide details in appendix A.8.

Is accuracy enough? Since our annotations are on the ImageNet validation set, a 100% overall
accuracy necessarily means a 100% per factor accuracy. So as models get better overall, they
necessarily get better per factor accuracies. To disentangle performance from robustness we need to
investigate the distribution of errors across factors for a given model.

                                                                    Robust              Susceptible
                         vessel                            snake                  commodity                                dog                              overall
object blocking                   person blocking                         style                   multiple objects                          texture
        texture                   object blocking                       darker                    person blocking                      subcategory
          larger                            darker                       larger                      subcategory                    object blocking
         darker                            pattern                         pose                            pattern                          pattern
       brighter                               pose                     pattern                                pose                         brighter
           style                  multiple objects                     brighter                       partial view                             pose
                   0.0      2.5                      0.0     2.5                  0.0    2.5                         0.0    2.5                       0.0      2.5
                    Error ratio                       Error ratio                  Error ratio                        Error ratio                      Error ratio


Figure 5: An illustration of how ImageNet-X can identify robustness weaknesses and strengths
for Vision Transformers (ViT). Here we visualize the 3 most susceptible, and 3 most robust factors
for the three worst-performing metalabels along with dog. We also include the overall validation
set for comparison. We see ViT is susceptible to texture, occlusion, and subcategory, but is robust
to pattern, brightness, and pose. While those overall types also show up across metalabels, we see
robustness can be distinct by metalabel.


4.2      M OVING BEYOND AVERAGE ACCURACY: ASSESSING FAILURE TYPES WITH I MAGE N ET-X

With ImageNet-X we can go beyond average accuracy, to identify the types of mistakes a model
makes. To do so we measure the error ratio across each of the 16 ImageNet-X factors: Specifically,


                                                           1 − accuracy(factor, model)   P̂ (factor|correct(model) = 0)
      Error ratio(factor, model) =                                                     =                                .
                                                              1 − accuracy(model)                    P̂ (factor)
This quantifies how many more mistakes a model makes on a given factor relative to its overall
performance. It also measures the increase or decrease in likelihood of a factor when selecting a
model’s errors vs the overall validation set. A perfectly robust model would have the same error rate
across all factors, yielding error ratios of 1 across all factors.

4.2.1       A N EXAMPLE OF V ISION T RANSFORMER ’ S M ISTAKES
We illustrate how the error ratio can be used to identify the types of failures and strengths for the
popular Vision Transformer (ViT) model. Despite impressive 84% average top-1 accuracy, we find
ViT’s mistakes are associated with texture, occlusion, and subcategory (appearing 2.02-2.11x more
times among misclassified samples than overall) as shown in Figure 5. On the other hand we find
ViT are robust to pose, brightness, pattern, and partial views. We also see that these strenghts or
weaknesses can vary by metalabel. For example, ViT is susceptible to occlusion for vessel and snake,
but not the commodity metalables where mistakes are associated with style, darkness, and texture.
For the dog metaclass, ViT is quite robust to different poses. Instead, ViT’s mistakes for dogs are
associated with the presence of multiple objects and differences among dog breeds (subcategory).
The full list of failure types across meta-labels is in Appendix A.12.


                                                                             7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3                       W HICH LEVERS CAN AFFECT MODEL ROBUSTNESS ?

In practice model developers have many choices from architecture, learning paradigm, and training
regularization to data augmentations. What impact do each of these choices have on model robustness?
We systematically examine how each choice affects robustness.

4.3.1                           ROLE OF SUPERVISION

We first group models into supervised (1k and with more data), self-supervised, and trained with ro-
bustness interventions in Figure 1. We measure the error ratio for each factor across in ImageNet-X.
We find all model types have comparable error ratios, meaning models make similar types of mistakes.
There are a few minor differences. For instance, self supervised models seem to be slightly more
robust to the factors: color, larger, darker, style, object blocking, subcategory and texture. Supervised
models trained on more data are more robust to the person blocking factor. We isolate whether some
of the effects may be due to difference in data augmentation next.

4.3.2                           DATA AUGMENTATION

                                    pose                             pattern                         partial view                      subcategory                    background           1.6            smaller
              0.775                                                                     1.4                                                            1.100
                                                  0.95
Error ratio


                                                                                                                          2.0
              0.750                                                                                                                                    1.075
                                                  0.90                                  1.2                                                                                                1.4
              0.725                                                                                                       1.8                          1.050
                                                  0.85
              0.700                                                                     1.0                                                            1.025
                                Crop strength                     Crop strength                     Crop strength                     Crop strength                  Crop strength                     Crop strength

                                    color                            darker                             larger           1.06
                                                                                                                                       background       1.55            smaller        0.82                pose
                                                      1.6
                                                                                        1.4
     Error ratio


                   1.15
                                                                                                                                                        1.50                           0.80
                                                      1.4
                                                                                                                         1.04
                   1.10                                                                 1.2                                                             1.45
                                                      1.2                                                                                                                              0.78
                                                                                                                                                        1.40
                                Color strength                    Color strength                    Color strength                    Color strength                 Color strength                    Color strength

                   1.75          subcategory                          color                            texture            1.2            brighter                     background           1.0             pose
                                                                                        2.0
     Error ratio


                   1.50                                                                                                                                 1.04
                                                      1.1                                                                 1.0                                                              0.9
                                                                                        1.5
                   1.25
                                                                                                                          0.8                           1.02
                                                      1.0                                                                                                                                  0.8
                   1.00                                                                 1.0
                          0          50         100         0          50         100         0          50         100         0          50         100      0          50         100         0          50         100
                              Smoothing strength                Smoothing strength                Smoothing strength                Smoothing strength             Smoothing strength                Smoothing strength



Figure 6: Evaluation of the impact of DA towards robustness of the trained model. We experiment
with random crop (top row), color jittering (middle row) and Gaussian blur (bottom row); in all cases,
we vary the strength of the respective DA (x-axis) and train multiple independent models for each
setting. We observe that decreasing the random crop lower-bound (i.e. increasing the DA strength
going from left to right) leads to more robust performance when pose varies, or partial views of
the objects are present. Interestingly this also reduce the model robustness to objects that appear
smaller and to background variations i.e. the random crop augmented models become robust
towards background and texture. Color jittering improves robustness to darker objects and to
objects with varying color. Surprisingly, color jittering also increases robustness to larger objects.
Gaussian blur also presents a dual effect i.e. benefits towards subcategory and color changes and
increases sensitivity to change in pose. In short, it seems that regardless of the DA, the benefits are
always accompanied by detrimental impacts on unexpected factors hinting at a possible limitation of
DA to produce improved robustness throughout all factors.

Data-augmentation (DA) is an ubiquitous technique providing significant average test performance
gains (Shorten and Khoshgoftaar, 2019). In short, DA leverages a priori knowledge to artificially
augment a training set size. The choice of DA policies e.g. image rotations, color jittering, translations
is rarely questioned as it is given by our a priori understanding of which transformations will produce
nontrivial new training samples whilst preserving their original semantic content. Although intuitive
at first glance, DA has recently seen much attention as it can unfairly impact different classes
(Balestriero et al., 2022), affect invariance (Deng et al., 2022), and potential to improve various forms
of robustness (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Mintun et al., 2021). Equipped with ImageNet-X, we now
propose a more quantitative and principled understanding of the impact of DA.


                                                                                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To that extend, we propose the following controlled experiment. We employ a ResNet50 —which is
one of the most popular architecture employed by practitioners— and perform multiple independent
training runs with varying DA policy. Each run across all policies share the exact same optimizer
(SGD), weight-decay (1e-5), mini-batch size (512), number of epochs (80), and data ordering through
training. For each DA setting, multiple runs are performed to allow for statistical testing. Only the
strength of the DAs and the random seed vary within those runs. In all scenarios, left-right flip is
used both during training and testing.

Data augmentations can improve robustness, but with spill-over effects to unrelated factors.
We report in Fig. 6 the statistically significant effects on error ratio due to three data augmentations:
random crop, color jittering and Gaussian blur. For each setting, we measure prevalence shifts i.e.
how much more or less likely a factor is to appear among a models’ misclassifications.
For random crop, we vary the random crop area lower-bound i.e. how small of a region can the
augmented sample be resized from the original image (varying from 0.08 which is the default value,
to 1 which is synonym of no DA). We find the prevalence shift decreases for pose and partial view
as expected. We also find that pattern, which is unrelated to random cropping, improves as well.
However, we also observe a decrease in robustness for subcategory, an unrelated factor.
For color jittering, we vary both the probability to apply some standard color transformations and
their strength. In particular, for any given value t ∈ (0, 1) we employ the composition of ColorJitter
with probability 0.8t with brightness strength 0.4t, contrast strength 0.4t, saturation strength 0.1t,
and hue strength 0.1t, followed by random grayscale with probability 0.5t, and finally followed by
random solarization with probability 0.3t. Those parameters are found so that when t nears 1, the
DA is similar to most aggressive DA pipelines used in recent methods. We naturally observe that the
predictions become more robust to change in color and brightness. Interestingly, the model becomes
more sensitive to pose variations.
For Gaussian blur, we vary the standard deviation of the Gaussian filter between 0.1 and 0.1 + 3.5t
for a filter size of 13 × 13. Note that when t approaches 1 the strength of this DA goes beyond
the standard setting used, for example, in SSL. In supervised training, GaussianBlur DA is rarely
employed on ImageNet. We observe that the model becomes more robust to texture which might
come from blurring removing most of the texture information and forcing the model to rely on other
features. Surprisingly, subcategory is also much less of an impact on performances while change in
pose becomes more problematic for the Gaussian blur trained model.

5    C ONCLUSION
We introduced ImageNet-X, an annotation of the validation set and 12,000 training samples of
the ImageNet dataset across 16 factors including color, shape, pattern, texture, size, lightning, and
occlusion. We showed how ImageNet-X labels can reveal how images in popular ImageNet dataset
differ. We found that images commonly vary in pose and background, that classes can have distinct
factors (such as dogs more often varying in pose compared to other classes), and that ImageNet’s
training and validation sets share similar distributions of factors. Next, we showed how models
mistakes are surprisingly consistent across architectures, learning paradigms, training data size, and
common robustness interventions. We identified data augmentation as a promising lever to improve
models’ robustness to related factors, however, it can also affect unrelated factors. These findings
suggest a need for a deeper understanding of data augmentations on model robustness. We hope that
ImageNet-X serves as an useful resource to build a deeper understanding of the failure modes of
computer vision models, and as a tool to measure their robustness across different environments.


                                                   9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Reproducibility Statement The results and figures in the paper can be reproduced using the
open-source code and the ImageNet-X annotations, which we also release. The annotations were
collected by training annotators to contrast three prototypical images from the same class. This setup
that can be replicated using the questionnaire we provide here as well as the freely available ImageNet
dataset. For a detailed description of the ImageNet-X dataset, please see A.1.

R EFERENCES
Michael A Alcorn, Qi Li, Zhitao Gong, Chengfei Wang, Long Mai, Wei-Shinn Ku, and Anh Nguyen.
 Strike (with) a pose: Neural networks are easily fooled by strange poses of familiar objects. In
 CVPR, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.11553.
Randall Balestriero, Leon Bottou, and Yann LeCun. The effects of regularization and data augmenta-
  tion are class dependent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03632, 2022.
Sara Beery, Grant Van Horn, and Pietro Perona. Recognition in terra incognita. In ECCV, 2018. URL
  https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.04975.
Lucas Beyer, Olivier J Hénaff, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, and Aäron van den Oord. Are
  we done with imagenet? arXiv, 2020a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07159.
Lucas Beyer, Olivier J. Hénaff, Alexander Kolesnikov, Xiaohua Zhai, and Aäron van den Oord. Are
  we done with imagenet? (arXiv:2006.07159), Jun 2020b. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2006.07159. URL
  http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07159. arXiv:2006.07159 [cs].
Florian Bordes, Randall Balestriero, and Pascal Vincent. High fidelity visualization of what your
  self-supervised representation knows about. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09164, 2021.
Diane Bouchacourt, Mark Ibrahim, and Ari Morcos. Grounding inductive biases in natural images:
  invariance stems from variations in data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:
  19566–19579, 2021.
Joy Buolamwini and Timnit Gebru. Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy disparities in commercial
  gender classification. In Conference on fairness, accountability and transparency, 2018. URL
  https://proceedings.mlr.press/v81/buolamwini18a.html.
Kyla Chasalow and Karen Levy. Representativeness in statistics, politics, and machine learning. In
  Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.03827.
Alex J DeGrave, Joseph D Janizek, and Su-In Lee. Ai for radiographic covid-19 detection selects
  shortcuts over signal. Nature Machine Intelligence, 2021. URL https://www.nature.com/
  articles/s42256-021-00338-7.
Weijian Deng, Stephen Gould, and Liang Zheng. On the strong correlation between model invariance
 and generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.07065, 2022.
Terrance DeVries, Ishan Misra, Changhan Wang, and Laurens van der Maaten. Does object recogni-
  tion work for everyone? download pdf. arXiv, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.
  02659.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé Iii, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12):
  86–92, 2021.
Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and
  Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves
  accuracy and robustness. arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.12231, 2018.
Sorin Grigorescu, Bogdan Trasnea, Tiberiu Cocias, and Gigel Macesanu. A survey of deep learning
  techniques for autonomous driving. Journal of Field Robotics, 2020. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1910.07738.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Delving deep into rectifiers: Surpassing
  human-level performance on imagenet classification. In ICCV, 2015. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/1502.01852.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common
  corruptions and perturbations. arXiv, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.12261.
Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul
  Desai, Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, et al. The many faces of robustness: A critical
  analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. In ICCV, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2006.16241.
Matthew Honnibal and Ines Montani. spaCy 2: Natural language understanding with Bloom
 embeddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. To appear, 2017.
Badr Youbi Idrissi, Martin Arjovsky, Mohammad Pezeshki, and David Lopez-Paz. Simple data
  balancing achieves competitive worst-group-accuracy. CLeaR, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
  org/abs/2110.14503.
Alexander Selvikvåg Lundervold and Arvid Lundervold. An overview of deep learning in medical
  imaging focusing on mri. Zeitschrift für Medizinische Physik, 2019. URL https://link.
  springer.com/article/10.1007/s12194-017-0406-5.
Claudio Michaelis, Benjamin Mitzkus, Robert Geirhos, Evgenia Rusak, Oliver Bringmann, Alexan-
  der S Ecker, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Benchmarking robustness in object detection:
  Autonomous driving when winter is coming. arXiv, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1907.07484.
Eric Mintun, Alexander Kirillov, and Saining Xie. On interaction between augmentations and
  corruptions in natural corruption robustness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  34:3571–3583, 2021.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In ICML, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.10811.
Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang,
  Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet
  Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. IJCV, 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1409.0575.
Vaishaal Shankar, Rebecca Roelofs, Horia Mania, Alex Fang, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt.
  Evaluating machine accuracy on imagenet. In ICML, 2020. URL https://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v119/shankar20c.html.
Connor Shorten and Taghi M Khoshgoftaar. A survey on image data augmentation for deep learning.
  Journal of big data, 6(1):1–48, 2019.
Sahil Singla and Soheil Feizi. Salient imagenet: How to discover spurious features in deep learning?
  In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig
  Schmidt. Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. In Ad-
  vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, page 18583–18599. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2020a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/
  d8330f857a17c53d217014ee776bfd50-Abstract.html.
Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt.
  Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:18583–18599, 2020b.
Haohan Wang, Songwei Ge, Zachary Lipton, and Eric P Xing. Learning robust global representations
  by penalizing local predictive power. NeurIPS, 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  1905.13549.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sangdoo Yun, Seong Joon Oh, Byeongho Heo, Dongyoon Han, Junsuk Choe, and Sanghyuk Chun.
  Re-labeling imagenet: from single to multi-labels, from global to localized labels. In CVPR, 2021.
  URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.05022.
Xiao Xiang Zhu, Devis Tuia, Lichao Mou, Gui-Song Xia, Liangpei Zhang, Feng Xu, and Friedrich
  Fraundorfer. Deep learning in remote sensing: A comprehensive review and list of resources. IEEE
  Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.
  03959.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A PPENDIX

We include additional experiments and dataset details in this appendix. In the first several sections,
we provide additional information regarding the ImageNetX dataset: annotation details in A.1, factor
definitions in A.2, number of factors selected in A.3, and factor co-occurence in A.4. Finally, we
show sample annotations in Appendix A.5.
Next, we show additional experiments. First in A.6 we show details of ImageNet-X robustness
analysis for additional architectures and learning paradigms. We show how such comparisons can
inform modeling choices in A.10. In Appendix A.7 we detail our experiments in applying tailored
augmentations per class and show in A.8 how label bias measured in ImageNet-ReaL correspond to
ImageNet-X factors. Next we show how ImageNet-X factors can probe downstream performance on
OOD datasets in Appendix A.9. Then, we replicate our analysis using multi-factor labels in A.11.
Finally, in A.12 we illustrate how ImageNet-X factors can reveal granular model robustness strengths
and weaknesses for specific class categories.


A.1   DATA S HEET

We follow the recommendations from by constructing a datasheet (Gebru et al., 2021) for
ImageNet-X below.


For what purpose was the dataset created? We created ImageNet-X to enable research on
understanding the biases and mistakes of computer vision classifiers on the popular ImageNet
benchmark.


What do the instances that comprise the dataset represent? Each instance represent a set of
binary labels and free-form text descriptions of variation for each ImageNet validation image.


How many instances are there in total?         There are 50,000 validation and randomly sampled
12,000 training image labels.


What data does each instance consist of Each data point is a json string indicated whether each
of the 16 factors was selected and two free-form text fields.


Are there any errors, sources of noise, or redundancies in the dataset? Each sample was labeled
by a single human annotator. There are no other redundancies or sources of errors.


Is the dataset self-contained? The full annotations each corresponding ImageNet filename will
be provided in a self-contained repo. The original ImageNet images however, must be downloaded
separately.


Does the dataset identify any subpopulations (e.g., by age, gender)? No.


Is the software that was used to preprocess/clean/label the data available?        Yes, the data was
preprocessed using Pandas and Numpy, both freely available Python packages.


                                                 13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2    FACTOR OF VARIATION D EFINITIONS

      Factor of variation          Description
                                   The object has a different pose or is placed in
      Pose
                                   different location within the image.
                                   The object is visible only partially due to the camera field of view
      Partial view
                                   that did not contain the full object – e.g. cropped out.
      Object blocking              The object is occluded by another object present in the image.
                                   The object is occluded by a person or human body part
      Person blocking
                                   – this might include objects manipulated by human hands.
                                   There is, at least, one another prominent object present in the
      Multiple objects
                                   image.
      Smaller                      Object occupies only a small portion of the entire scene.
      Larger                       Object dominates the image.
                                   The lighting in the image is brighter when compared to the
      Brighter
                                   prototypical images.
                                   The lightning in the image is darker when compared to the
      Darker
                                   prototypical images.
                                   The background of the image is different from backgrounds
      Background
                                   of the prototypical images.
      Color                        The object has different color.
      Shape                        The object has different shape.
      Texture                      The object has different texture – e.g., a sheep that’s sheared.
      Pattern                      The object has different pattern – e.g., striped object.
      Style                        The overall image style is different– e.g., a sketch.
                                   The object is a distinct type or breed from the same class
      Subcategory
                                   – e.g., a mini-van within the car class.


A.3    N UMBER OF IMAGES WITH X ACTIVE FACTORS

Figure 7 shows the count of samples depending on how many factors are selected by the annotator.


                                                         train           val
                               4
                             10
                             103
                     Count


                             102
                             101
                             100
                                   0    1   2    3   4      5    6   7    8    9   10   11

Figure 7: Many images have multiple factors selected. Very few have no factors selected since
some factors are sensitive Distribution of the per image number of factors annotated as active, in
validation vs train.



A.4    FACTOR CO - OCCURRENCES AND CORRELATIONS .

Table 2 reports the exact count of each factor. Furthermore, Figure 8 (left) shows the spearman
correlation between each factor and meta-class and (right) between each pair of factors for the
validation set. Figure 9 shows the same for the training set for comparison. The major correlations
are the same between the two heatmaps (for instance pattern and color or pattern and dog). We can
see that some factors are slightly correlated, for example color and pattern, larger and partial view,
subcategory and shape are positively correlated.


                                                          14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           pose      -3.7               10.2        -5.7     5.7            -2.9       -5.8                -5.9     -3.5     4.0    1.3   -2.1   4.3     -4.6        3.3                   1.5
    background                          9.2         2.1      -2.3           -2.8               1.3         1.6      -1.7    -1.9   -5.9          -2.3    1.8                           -3.2                 3.4                                                                                                                                      40
        pattern      7.0               -16.9        10.7     -9.5             3.9     11.3     7.2         -4.4     4.5             3.5   7.3    -6.0    4.1         -1.5     -6.8     -3.7                -8.4
           color     4.5               -11.0        12.9     -9.9           -2.4       6.2     6.0         -4.2                           6.5    -3.5    3.0                  -4.8                         -8.5                21.3
        smaller      4.1                -5.5                                                                        1.8             1.3                                                                             5.1        -4.4        -3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
          shape      6.3                -7.5                 -5.0                      2.6     -1.4        4.2      1.9     -2.5   -2.5   1.9    -2.7    8.4         -2.2                  1.4             -6.9     -2.3       10.9        9.5
    partial view                                             -2.5           -2.2                                                          2.2    -1.4    1.7                  -1.5                         -1.6     -4.8                   -1.4     -4.4           -1.9
    subcategory      3.3                -5.3        -2.1                    -2.3                           -1.6     4.5      2.4   -2.0   -1.4   1.6     1.9         2.9      -2.7         2.2             -4.4                10.2        12.6     -2.2           13.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
        texture                         -4.0                 -3.2                      3.0     -1.9        3.9              -1.6   -1.7   1.7    -1.6    4.8                               2.4             -4.5                5.0         8.7      -1.3            7.5               8.3
          larger     1.4                -1.9                                  1.5                          -1.2     1.7             1.3                                                                             -2.6                            -2.4                  17.7                   1.8
         darker      2.9                -2.5                 -1.5             3.0                                           -1.3                                                                           -1.6     -1.4                   -1.3         2.3
object blocking                                                                                            2.6                                                                             1.6                                 -2.9        -1.9                                                                                                      −20

person blocking      3.7                                                                                                                                                                                                       -1.4                                                                       2.3
           style     1.6                -1.4                 -1.7             1.6      1.2                 -1.4                                                      -1.3                                  -1.3                            8.4                                    -1.4
        brighter                                                                                                                                                                           1.4                      -1.7                                2.0         1.7               1.7        2.5      1.8       1.8                              −40

multiple objects     4.6                                     -2.6           -2.7               -2.2                 1.6            -2.6          -1.7                          4.0                                  2.1        -2.9                     6.4         2.1               1.6        1.4      3.6       4.2     -1.3           2.5

                                                                                                              nt                               l
                   vic
                         e
                                       do
                                         g        ity      bir
                                                                 d
                                                                         tu
                                                                            re            g
                                                                                      rin ehic
                                                                                               le        d
                                                                                                      foo pme        ect hicle iture mate esse                    ak
                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                           jec
                                                                                                                                                                               t        er                  se     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                          po roun atte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rn               lor       all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     er         ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e       w    ry        re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        vie tego extu ocki ocki
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ng   ng
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                le        ter
               de                              od                      uc          ve                            ins    ve       n    i   v                     sn      ob           oth                                              co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              sm              sh     al                                                                igh
                                            mm                   str             co          v             ui                 fur   pr                              ral                                       ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 g   p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  rti ubc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a     t        bl    bl                                 br
                                                                                          ed            eq
                                       co                                             eel                                                                          tu                                      ba                                                  pa        s            j ect rson
                                                                                  w h                                                                           na                                                                                                                 ob        pe

Figure 8: Factor/factor and factor/meta-label spearman correlation heatmaps for validations set. The
heatmap shows only significant correlations (p value ≤ 0.05).


             pose                                9.2       -3.5               3.1       -8.7        -4.7                   -4.3           3.1                               3.3      -3.5           4.1
     background                3.3               4.4        5.5                         -3.6                                       -3.7   -2.9    -4.6                      -5.1                                                                  3.7                                                                                               40
          pattern              5.4             -18.2        7.5                                     8.1           6.3      -6.2    3.1             4.0      6.6             -3.0      5.1           2.5      -9.6                                 -3.3
             color                               -5.8      11.4                         -7.6        3.0           6.6      -5.1                             5.9                                              -4.6                                                         20.3
          smaller              8.4               -4.0                         3.0       -3.6        4.4                                                                              -3.0                                 -3.2                    5.8              6.7    -12.6       -6.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
            shape              6.8               -8.3      -4.2               -3.2                                         3.2     3.8                                      -2.8      5.3           -3.4                   2.9                    -4.0                    8.9          8.2        -4.1
     partial view                                                                       -2.8                                                                                          2.9                                  2.9                                                                    -4.3
     subcategory               2.9               -7.1      -3.7                         -4.8                                       11.8   4.6              -3.3                                                            3.7                                            12.6         5.9                      7.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0
          texture              -3.7              -4.0                                               2.6                                                                               6.6                                  6.0                                            2.7          9.5        -3.1          5.0                       4.4
            larger                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -3.0                    14.4
           darker                                -2.5                                                                                              5.4                                                                                                                    -6.0        -3.8
 object blocking                                                                                                                                            2.8                                                                                                           -5.9        -3.1          3.6                                             −20

person blocking                3.9                                                                  3.6                                                                                                                                                                   -4.9
             style             2.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                -2.6         -3.0       -7.2        19.1
         brighter                                                                                                                                                                                             2.9                                                                                                                                   −40

multiple objects               6.2               -3.6                                   -2.7                                                                                         -2.9                                  3.5                                                                    10.2                    2.6

                                                                                                                                nt                               l
                             vic
                                   e
                                             do
                                                g      ity              bir
                                                                              d
                                                                                     tu
                                                                                        re       g
                                                                                              rin ehic
                                                                                                       le                  d
                                                                                                                        foo pme        ect hicle iture mate esse                                  ak
                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                           jec
                                                                                                                                                                                                              t           er                    se     d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              po roun atte
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rn                      lor        all
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  er           ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e       w
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       vie tego
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ry
                    de                              od                             uc cove                                         ins    ve        n    i  v                                sn         ob          oth                                                          co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            sm            sh        al
                                                 mm                            str                 d
                                                                                                     v                       ui                 fur   pr                                             al                                           ck
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     g   p
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rti ubc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            a
                                              co                                               ele                        eq                                                                         r                                         ba                                                          pa
                                                                                             e                                                                                                   atu                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                           wh                                                                                                n

Figure 9: Factor/factor and factor/meta-label spearman correlation heatmaps for training set. The
heatmap shows only significant correlations (p value ≤ 0.05).


 Split                         Factor selection                                          factor                                    count          factor                                           count             factor                                                count                    factor                                       count
                                                                                         pose                                      39862          background                                      35467              pattern                                              15401                     color                                        12995
                                                                                         subcategory                                3606          smaller                                          2866              shape                                                 1889                     multiple objects                              1837
                               All factors
                                                                                         partial view                               1504          texture                                           878              style                                                  574                     darker                                         515
                                                                                         larger                                      390          object blocking                                   219              person blocking                                        105                     brighter                                        95
 Validation
                                                                                         pose                                      15031          background                                      14743              color                                                  6138                    pattern                                      5938
                                                                                         smaller                                    1449          shape                                             675              partial view                                            640                    subcategory                                   586
                               Top factor
                                                                                         texture                                     283          larger                                            151              darker                                                  123                    object blocking                                80
                                                                                         person blocking                              60          brighter                                           45              style                                                    44                    multiple objects                               41
                                                                                         pose                                      10349          background                                         9618            pattern                                                6871                    color                                        3750
                                                                                         smaller                                    1192          subcategory                                         717            shape                                                   514                    multiple objects                              462
                               All factors
                                                                                         partial view                                362          style                                               357            texture                                                 293                    darker                                         99
                                                                                         larger                                       82          object blocking                                      69            person blocking                                          34                    brighter                                        7
 Training
                                                                                         pose                                        3250         background                                         2936            pattern                                                2525                    color                                        1438
                                                                                         smaller                                      494         subcategory                                         128            shape                                                   127                    partial view                                  118
                               Top factor
                                                                                         texture                                       93         larger                                               35            darker                                                   26                    style                                          17
                                                                                         object blocking                               17         person blocking                                      16            multiple objects                                          5                    brighter                                        4


                                                                            Table 2: Counts of each factor of variation in ImageNet-X.



A.5           E XAMPLE A NNOTATIONS

In Figure 11 we present some sample annotations. We show the prototypical images for each class
along with the sample annotators labeled.


                                                                                                                                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



(a) Factor/factor co-occurrence in the training subset.


                                                                                       Artichoke
   A.                                                                                    pose
                                                                                      background

                                                                                       “top-view”

                             left                                right
                                                                                        Sea Lion

                                                                                        pose
                                                                             object is small (relative to frame)
   B.                                                                                background

                                                                                 “Far-view, red ball”


                             left                                right
                                                                                         Pitcher

                                                                                         color
                                                                                        pattern
      C.                                                                              background

                                                                                 “Antique, Victorian”


                             left                                right


Figure 11: ImageNet-X Annotations Examples illustrates three annotation examples from the
ImageNet validation set. In panel, A. we see an example of background and pose for Artichoke.
In panel B., we see the effect of an object being small and in panel C. we see color and pattern as
distinctive varying factors. We provide the full set of annotations with their image paths in our repo.


A.6        R ESULTS ON POPULAR MODELS AND METHODS

A.6.1       A SSESSING THE ROBUSTNESS OF V ISION T RANSFORMERS

To move beyond average accuracy, we can probe model robustness with varying levels of granularity
by measuring bias towards or against ImageNet-X factors. Here we walk through the biases of a
ViT (vision transformer model) trained on ImageNet-21k. While the average accuracy is > 80%, we
probe further to uncover ViT biases towards texture, occlusion, and subcategory.

Assessing ViT’s bias modes We first examine the prevalence shift of each factor among a models’
misclassified samples relative to their overall prevalence. Despite impressive average top-1 accuracy,
we find ViT is susceptible to several factors with texture, occlusion, and subcategory appearing
+1.02-1.11x more times among misclassified samples than overall as shown in Figure 12. On the
other hand we find ViT are robust to naturally occurring pose, brightness, pattern, and partial views.

Granular biases by meta-label We further probe robustness by examining how model bias differs
among meta-labels of classes groups. We find, as shown in Figure 13, the three meta-labels with the
lowest accuracies are vessel, snake, and commodity. We find ViT is most bias towards occlusion
(+2.0x-2.6x) for vessel and snake and style for commodity. While ViT is robust to darkness and
brightness (-1.0x) for vessel, it’s susceptible to darkness (+1.2-1.6x) for snakes and the commodity
meta-labels. Among these three meta-labels ViT is susceptible to shape (+1.4x) for the snake
meta-label. Model bias across all 16 meta-labels is in Appendix Figure 12.


                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                 model
                1                                                                                                                     ViT



                    less robust →
   shift


              0.5


                0


                                       tex      o    su   p     d     sm m     st     sh    la co b p      p    b  p
                                             tu bjec bca erso arke all ultip yle ape rger lor ackg artia atte right ose
                                               re   t_    t e   n _   r     er l e                  r o    l_  rn  er
                                                      blo go        b             _o                    un vie
                                                         ck ry lock                  bje                  d    w
                                                            ing         ing             cts

                                                                                    factor

                                                                  Figure 12: ViT model bias



       ViT
                                    vessel                    snake                   commodity                       dog
                         (67.16% top-1)                     (72.40% top-1)            (72.98% top-1)            (75.69% top-1)
  object_blocking                              person_blocking                      style        multiple_objects
                                                                                                                                 robust
              texture                          object_blocking                    darker               subcategory
                larger                                  darker                   texture                    darker               susceptible
       subcategory                                       shape                     larger        person_blocking
              smaller                              subcategory                   smaller          object_blocking
           background                              partial_view         object_blocking                      larger
                shape                                  smaller               subcategory                   brighter
       partial_view                                    texture               partial_view                  smaller
 multiple_objects                                         color              background                       color
  person_blocking                                  background                      shape                   texture
                 pose                                  brighter        multiple_objects                background
                 color                                    style                     color                     style
               darker                                    larger        person_blocking                       shape
              pattern                                  pattern                      pose                      pose
              brighter                                    pose                   pattern                   pattern
                 style                         multiple_objects                  brighter              partial_view
                                    −1 0 1 2                                                                          0 1 2 3
                                                              −1
                                                              0
                                                              1
                                                              2


                                                                                        −1
                                                                                        0
                                                                                        1
                                                                                        2


Figure 13: Robustness by meta-label shows robustness of the three worst meta-labels for ViT (vision
transformer) as well as the dog class which encompases a large number of ImageNet classes.


A.6.2         A RCHITECTURE AND LEARNING PARADIGM

Convolution and transformer-based models exhibit similar overall biases : As shown in Figure
14, ResNet-50 and ViT exhibit similar prevalence in factors among their misclassified samples
suggesting both models exhibit robustness to similar factors. Both ViT and ResNet-50 show a bias
among misclassifications towards texture, occlusion by a person or object, subcategory, darkness and
the prescence of multiple objects. For example, texture is more likely to appear among misclassified
compared to the overall validation set by +1.48x for ResNet-50 and +1.1x for ViT. This confirms
finding in Geirhos et al. (2018) illustrating CNNs are bias towards texture. We extend this finding by
illustrating transformer based models are also biased towards texture. The overall similarity between
CNN and transformer based models matches the findings in Bouchacourt et al. (2021) for invariance
to augmentations by illustrating the similarity holds even for natural factors of variation. While the


                                                                                 17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


            1.5                                                                                    model
                                                                                                        ViT
             1                                                                                          ResNet50

                  less robust →
   shift


            0.5

             0


                                  tex      p   su      o     m   d    st     sh sm la co b   p     b     p    p
                                        tu erso bca bjec ultip arke yle ape all rger lor ackg artia right atte ose
                                          re   n_      teg t_b   le   r            er        ro    l_v er rn
                                                  blo          l    _                           un
                                                           o
                                                      ck ry ocki obje                             d iew
                                                         ing       ng    cts

                                                                     factor

Figure 14: Comparison of factor error ratios for ViT (transformer-based) and ResNet-50 (CNN-
based) models. The y-axis measures the shift in how likely a factor is to appear in a model’s
misclassified samples relative to their overall prevalence. A shift greater than zero measures the
likelihood a factor is model bias towards a factor suggesting a model is susceptible to the factor. A
shift below zero implies a factor is less likely to appear among misclassified suggesting the model is
robust to the factor.


overall trends are similar we observe the largest difference between ViT and ResNet-50 in their biases
towards texture, the presence of multiple objects, and style with ViT exhibiting a smaller bias.


Role of learning supervision is important for SimCLR versus ResNet-50, but not transformer
based ViT versus DINO : In Figure 15b, we compare the factor bias in self-supervised versus
supervised learning for both ResNet-based and transformer-based models. We observe remarkably
similar biases when comparing ViT versus DINO in 15a. For ResNet based models, we observe
self-supervised learning in SimCLR leads to less bias towards the presence of multiple objects, style,
and darkness. Specifically, for a supervised ResNet-50 the prevalence with multiple objects is +1.03x
(versus +0.22x for SimCLR), among misclassified samples. This suggests while learning paradigm
leads to simlar biases for transformers, standard supervised training does lead to differences in bias
towards texture, multiple objects, and darkness. We isolate the effect of data augmentation in next
Section.
A more granular comparison of learning paradigm for transformers by meta-label: We compare the
worst meta-labels for ViT versus DINO, finding both more share the worst three meta-labels with
remarkably similar biases: occlusion and texture for vessel, style and darkness for commodity, and
occlusion for snake. There is a difference in the magnitude of some factors. For example, DINO
is more susceptible to partial views for snakes compared to ViT (+1.76x versus +0.81x). Aside
from minor differences, the granular meta-labels analysis confirms DINO and ViT exhibit similar
robustness for their worst meta-labels.


A.7        I MPROVING TRAINING

A.7.1       TAILOR AUGMENTATIONS BY CLASS

To test whether tailoring augmentations by class improves robustness, we identify meta-labels
benefiting from the robustness induced by two types of augmentations: color jitter and random
resized crop. For color jittering, we select meta-labels with a prevalence shift ¿ 1.0 for either darker,
color, or larger factors (whose robustenss improves with color jittering). The resulting 402 classes
belonging to those meta-labels are then augmented with additional color jittering augmentations on
top of the standard training recipe with random resized cropping. We show results against baselines
of only cropping, only color jittering, and both augmentations applied to all classes in Figure 17.


                                                                   18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                   model
             1                                                                                                           ViT



                  less robust →
                                                                                                                         DINO
   shift


            0.5


             0


                                  tex      o    p      su    d      st sm sh    m     la     c     b p      b    p   p
                                        tu bjec erso bca arke yle        all ape ulti rge olor ackg artia righ atte ose
                                          re   t_      n _   t e    r       er       ple r           r o    l_  ter rn
                                                  blo      b    g                        _o              un vie
                                                      ck lock ory                           bje            d    w
                                                        ing in                                 cts
                                                                  g

                                                                           factor
                                            (a) Supervised versus self-supervised vision transformer



            1.5                                                                                                model
                                                                                                                     ResNet50
             1                                                                                                       SimCLR
                  less robust →
   shift


            0.5

             0


                                  tex      p   o     su  sh  m    sm st        d la co  b    p      b    p     p
                                        tu erso bjec bca ape ultip all yle arke rger lor ackg artia right atte ose
                                          re   n_ t_b te          l e   er       r           r o    l_   e r  rn
                                                 blo lo go           _o                          un vie
                                                    ck cki ry           bje                        d    w
                                                      ing ng               cts

                                                                           factor
                                               (b) Supervised versus self-supervised ResNet-50.

Figure 15: Comparison of error ratios across self-supervised and supervised learning. The y-axis
measures the shift in how likely a factor is to appear in a model’s misclassified samples relative to
their overall prevalence. A shift greater than zero measures the likelihood a factor is model bias
towards a factor suggesting a model is susceptible to the factor. A shift below zero implies a factor is
less likely to appear among misclassified suggesting the model is robust to the factor.



A.8        E VALUATING LABEL BIAS

In Figure 18 we measure the ReAL accuracy relative to the original validation accuracy.


A.9        C ORRELATION WITH I MAGENET DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS

Imagenet-X provides fine grained labels to evaluate model robustness. To link the performance of
this work with related work in Imagenet robustness, we provide a pearson correlation score between
factor error ratios and distribution shift error ratios in figure 19.

    ImageNet-R                           ObjectNet-1.0-beta   ImageNet-A       Greyscale                ImageNet-Vid-Robust pm0
    texture (0.93)                       texture (0.98)       texture (0.96)   color (0.79)             texture (0.77)
    shape (0.90)                         subcategory (0.97)   shape (0.96)     smaller (0.74)           smaller (0.77)
    subcategory (0.90)                   shape (0.96)         smaller (0.94)   person blocking (0.72)   style (0.77)

Table 3: We show the Pearson correlation (shown in parenthesis) between factor error ratios and
performance on distribution shifts of ImageNet for the 3 most correlated factors.


                                                                        19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         1.5                                                                                                                                                             model
                                                                                                                                                                                                   ViT
                                     1                                                                                                                                                             ResNet50

                                         less robust →
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SimCLR
        shift


                         0.5                                                                                                                                                                       DINO

                                     0


                                                               tex        p   o     su  sh  sm st  m     d      la     co b p      b    p     p
                                                                       tu erso bjec bca ape all yle ultip arke rger lor ackg artia right atte ose
                                                                         re   n_ t_b te        er        l e    r           r o    l_   e r  rn
                                                                                blo lo go                   _o                  un vie
                                                                                   ck cki ry                   bje                d    w
                                                                                     ing ng                        cts

                                                                                                                                factor

Figure 16: Models tend to have similar biases for the measured factors. The largest difference
being between ResNet and SimCLR likely to color jitter.

                                                         Crop                      Full Color+Crop
                                                         Color                     Per class color jitter + crop
Error ratio

                     less robust →


              2.0

              1.5

              1.0


                    po
                      se                                 rn           ter          nd   col
                                                                                           or
                                                                                                    vie
                                                                                                        w      ger     rke
                                                                                                                             r          cts    all
                                                                                                                                                   er
                                                                                                                                                        sty
                                                                                                                                                           le       pe            ng          ry         ng    tur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                             tte                    gh         rou                          lar      da            b je                         sha           cki         ego        cki    tex
                                     pa                       bri          ckg                rti
                                                                                                 al
                                                                                                                              l eo          sm
                                                                                                                                                                        t blo       b cat        blo
                                                                         a                  a                               p                                         c           u            n
                                                                       b                  p                             lti                                     ob
                                                                                                                                                                   je           s          rso
                                                                                                                     mu                                                                 pe


Figure 17: Prevalence shift comparison of tailored versus universal color jittering augmentation


In Table 3, we show the three most correlated factors with each OOD dataset. We compute the
Pearson correlation between each factor’s error ratio (shown in parenthesis) and the performance
on each OOD dataset. We find an intuitive correspondence between the factors in ImageNet-X and
downstream OOD performance. For example, ImageNet-R, which contains renditions such as art,
cartoons, embroidery, graphics, origami, paintings, patterns of ImageNet classes, is most correlated
with shape and texture as well as subcategory. On the other hand, Greyscale which discards color
information is most influence by each model’s reliance on color, smaller objects, and occlusion.
ImageNet-A, which contains natural images explicitly mined to be challenging for standard vision
models, often contains images where the object is small or blends in with the background. We see the
top factors for ImageNet-A are texture, shape, and whether an object can be identified even if it’s
small. We hope this analysis reveals the potential for ImageNet-X factors to better probe downstream
performance. This unlocks for example the potential for future work to assess/optimize downstream
OOD performance only by tuning model performance on the ImageNet-X factors.

A.10                 I NFLUENCE OF ARCHITECTURE CHOICES

Although the general conclusion of our per factor performance analysis indicates consistent perfor-
mances across architectures, training data and losses, there are still some differences that arise. We
study some model choices to shed some light on where those differences might arise in Figures 20,
21 and 22.

A.11                 M ULTI FACTOR RESULTS

In the paper we chose to select the top factor per image. In this section we present the main figures
of the paper with multiple factors per image selected. The main conclusions remain valid, and the


                                                                                                                           20
   Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              Supervised on more data             Self-supervised             Robustness intervention       Original validation annotations
                                              Supervised on ImageNet-1K

        ReaL Accuracy (Factor)           worst 100 classes       worst factor                texture                  subcategory             shape               person blocking

                                 80%
                                 60%
                                 40%
                                 20%



                                               style                larger                partial view              multiple objects         smaller                   darker
        ReaL Accuracy (Factor)


                                 80%
                                 60%
                                 40%
                                 20%



                                               color            object blocking            background                   pattern               pose                    brighter
        ReaL Accuracy (Factor)


                                 80%
                                 60%
                                 40%
                                 20%

                                        40% 60% 80%           40% 60% 80%             40% 60% 80%                 40% 60% 80%           40% 60% 80%             40% 60% 80%
                                          ReaL Accuracy         ReaL Accuracy           ReaL Accuracy               ReaL Accuracy         ReaL Accuracy           ReaL Accuracy


   Figure 18: We measure the ReAL accuracy Beyer et al. (2020b) of the original validation labels and
   show that these labels have consistent errors on the same factors as models shown previously.

                                                                objectnet-1.0-beta                     imagenet-r                                     greyscale
                                                                imagenet-a                             imagenet-vid-robust_pm0
Pearson correlation


                                  1

                                  0

                                  1
                                          e      n      r              r      y      s     d      g    e      e    e        r   g    r      r
                                       pos patter righte ial_view large ategor object groun lockin styl textur shap darke lockin colo smalle
                                                  b art                c       _    c k    _b                              _ b
                                                     p              sub ultiple ba object                              son
                                                                       m                                           per
                                                                                                          Factor
   Figure 19: Pearson correlation between factor error ratios and distribution shifts of ImageNet. The
   correlation strengths change depending on the distribution shift. For instance for greyscale images,
   the color factor is maximally correlated with relative performance.


   results don’t drastically change. We include the multifactor setting for completeness. The provided
   code allows generating figures and loading annotations both in top and multi factor settings. See
   figures 23 and 24

   A.12                                  G RANULAR M ODEL B IASES BY META - LABELS

   In Table 4 we show the robustness susceptibility of factors for DINO, ResNet50, SimCLR and
   ViT for each meta-label. We see while many factors are shared, some meta-labels are especially
   susceptible to distinct factors. For example, ViT is susceptible to style for vehicles and insects.


                                                                                                         21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 20: We measure the error ratios for multiple resnets (ResNet50, ResNet101, ResNet152) and
for multiple Transformers (ViT small/16, base/16, large/16). The main differences are in the factors
partial view, darker and multiple objects, with transformers having an advantage. The better handling
of multiple objects in Transformers might be due to the lack of average pooling.


Figure 21: We measure the error ratios for multiple resnets (ResNet50, ResNet101, ResNet152) to
study the effect of depth. For most factors, the deeper the resnet the better, except for the ”object
blocking” factor that gets considerably worse as the model gets deeper.


Figure 22: We measure the error ratios for 6 scales of EfficienNet models from b0 to b5. As the
model grows in size, the error ratios grow, especially for the b5 scale.

                                        Supervised on more data                         Self-supervised
                                        Supervised on ImageNet-1K                       Robustness intervention
Error ratio

                   less robust →


              2



              1

                  po
                    se
                                     tte
                                        rn        un
                                                     d
                                                         sty
                                                            le
                                                                     vie
                                                                         w      ger   col
                                                                                         or        all
                                                                                                      er      rke
                                                                                                                 r         ter
                                                                                                                                    cki
                                                                                                                                        ng        pe       kin
                                                                                                                                                               g
                                                                                                                                                                       jec
                                                                                                                                                                          ts        e
                                                                                                                                                                                 tur tegor
                                                                                                                                                                                           y
                                   pa         gro                ial         lar              sm           da        bri
                                                                                                                        gh                    sha       loc         ob       tex
                                           ck                 r t                                                             t blo                   b          le                  b ca
                                        ba                 pa                                                             jec                   rso
                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                                                            ltip                  su
                                                                                                                       ob                    pe         mu


                                                  Figure 23: Model comparison with multiple factors per image.


                                                                                                         22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         Supervised on more data           Supervised on ImageNet-1K         Self-supervised          Robustness intervention

                                worst 100 classes         worst factor            subcategory              texture             multiple objects             shape
Top 1 Accuracy (Factor)


                          80%

                          60%

                          40%

                          20%

                          0%

                                person blocking          object blocking            brighter               darker                  smaller                      color
Top 1 Accuracy (Factor)


                          80%

                          60%

                          40%

                          20%

                          0%

                                     larger               partial view             background              pattern                  pose                        style
Top 1 Accuracy (Factor)


                          80%

                          60%

                          40%

                          20%

                          0%
                                40% 60% 80%             40% 60% 80%             40% 60% 80%            40% 60% 80%             40% 60% 80%             40% 60% 80%
                                 Top 1 Accuracy          Top 1 Accuracy          Top 1 Accuracy         Top 1 Accuracy          Top 1 Accuracy          Top 1 Accuracy


                                              Figure 24: High level scatter plot with multiple factors per image.


                                                                                                23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Model      Metaclass         Robust                                                                        Susceptible
           bird              person blocking (0.0), style (0.0), texture (0.0), larger (0.0)               darker (2.6), smaller (2.7), object blocking (12.9), shape (12.9)
           commodity         brighter (0.0), texture (0.7), pattern (0.8), pose (0.8)                      partial view (1.7), darker (2.0), object blocking (2.3), style (3.3)
           covering          pose (0.8), larger (0.8), pattern (0.9), partial view (0.9)                   texture (1.6), smaller (1.6), style (2.5), object blocking (2.7)
           device            partial view (0.7), pattern (0.8), style (0.8), brighter (0.8)                smaller (1.5), person blocking (1.6), texture (2.3), object blocking (2.7)
           dog               pattern (0.7), pose (0.8), partial view (0.9), smaller (0.9)                  object blocking (3.0), subcategory (3.1), person blocking (4.5), multiple objects (4.5)
           equipment         darker (0.0), style (0.0), larger (0.3), pattern (0.7)                        smaller (1.8), object blocking (1.9), subcategory (2.2), person blocking (3.8)
           food              style (0.0), larger (0.0), brighter (0.0), pose (0.5)                         darker (1.5), partial view (1.6), subcategory (2.6), texture (2.6)
           furniture         object blocking (0.0), larger (0.0), style (0.0), multiple objects (0.0)      shape (1.4), subcategory (1.6), smaller (1.9), darker (3.3)
DINO       insect            texture (0.0), larger (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), brighter (0.0)           shape (3.3), style (3.3), subcategory (4.2), darker (6.6)
           natural object    brighter (0.0), pose (0.5), partial view (0.9)                                larger (2.7), darker (2.7), subcategory (3.2), object blocking (5.3)
           other             pose (0.7)                                                                    subcategory (2.0), multiple objects (2.0), style (2.6), person blocking (3.0)
           primate           partial view (0.0), larger (0.0), style (0.0), pose (0.7)                     object blocking (2.5), subcategory (5.1), shape (5.1), texture (5.1)
           snake             darker (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), pose (0.8), pattern (1.0)               subcategory (2.2), partial view (2.9), person blocking (3.3), object blocking (3.3)
           structure         object blocking (0.0), brighter (0.0), darker (0.6), color (0.7)              person blocking (1.8), subcategory (2.4), style (2.4), texture (2.6)
           vehicle           person blocking (0.0), texture (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), pattern (0.5)   smaller (2.0), style (3.0), darker (3.0), shape (3.0)
           vessel            brighter (0.0), pattern (0.8), pose (0.9), color (1.0)                        larger (1.5), style (1.7), texture (1.8), object blocking (2.6)
           wheeled vehicle   object blocking (0.0), person blocking (0.0), texture (0.0), style (0.0)      shape (1.6), smaller (1.6), darker (2.4), larger (4.9)
           bird              larger (0.0), style (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), brighter (0.0)             darker (4.8), object blocking (11.9), person blocking (11.9), shape (11.9)
           commodity         pattern (0.6), person blocking (0.8), pose (0.8)                              texture (2.2), larger (2.6), brighter (3.1), style (3.1)
           covering          pattern (0.7), larger (0.8), pose (0.8), person blocking (0.9)                smaller (1.5), texture (1.7), object blocking (2.0), style (3.3)
           device            pattern (0.6), partial view (0.7), pose (0.8), color (1.0)                    multiple objects (1.7), texture (2.3), object blocking (2.3), brighter (2.5)
           dog               pattern (0.4), texture (0.8), pose (0.8), partial view (0.8)                  object blocking (3.0), subcategory (4.2), person blocking (4.6), multiple objects (4.6)
           equipment         darker (0.0), style (0.0), larger (0.3), pattern (0.5)                        smaller (1.8), object blocking (1.9), subcategory (2.1), person blocking (3.9)
           food              larger (0.0), style (0.0), brighter (0.0), pose (0.4)                         shape (1.5), subcategory (2.9), darker (2.9), texture (2.9)
           furniture         object blocking (0.0), larger (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), style (0.8)      smaller (1.6), texture (1.7), person blocking (2.0), darker (3.1)
ResNet50   insect            brighter (0.0), pose (0.6), pattern (0.8), larger (1.0)                       shape (3.6), subcategory (4.2), multiple objects (5.8), darker (5.8)
           natural object    brighter (0.0), pattern (0.2), pose (0.5)                                     darker (2.9), larger (2.9), subcategory (4.6), object blocking (5.7)
           other             pose (0.6), pattern (0.9)                                                     subcategory (2.2), texture (2.3), multiple objects (2.3), person blocking (3.5)
           primate           partial view (0.0), larger (0.0), pose (0.8)                                  style (4.4), subcategory (4.4), shape (4.4), texture (4.4)
           snake             darker (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), pose (0.8), pattern (0.9)               texture (2.1), shape (2.1), object blocking (3.2), person blocking (3.2)
           structure         brighter (0.0), pattern (0.7), pose (0.8), color (0.8)                        texture (2.0), style (2.3), subcategory (2.8), multiple objects (2.9)
           vehicle           person blocking (0.0), texture (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), pattern (0.5)   subcategory (2.4), shape (3.0), style (3.0), darker (4.4)
           vessel            pattern (0.7), pose (0.9), subcategory (0.9), shape (1.0)                     style (1.6), larger (1.9), object blocking (2.4), brighter (2.4)
           wheeled vehicle   texture (0.0), brighter (0.0), style (0.0), pattern (0.4)                     shape (2.5), object blocking (2.5), larger (3.4), person blocking (5.0)
           bird              person blocking (0.0), texture (0.0), larger (0.0), multiple objects (0.0)    partial view (1.8), smaller (1.8), shape (5.7), object blocking (5.7)
           commodity         object blocking (0.7), pattern (0.8), shape (0.8), pose (0.9)                 smaller (1.5), texture (1.7), style (2.5), brighter (2.5)
           covering          larger (0.7), partial view (0.7), pattern (0.8), pose (0.9)                   smaller (1.8), texture (2.0), style (2.1), object blocking (2.2)
           device            larger (0.7), partial view (0.8), pattern (0.8), pose (0.9)                   person blocking (1.7), brighter (1.9), texture (2.1), object blocking (2.5)
           dog               multiple objects (0.0), partial view (0.5), pose (0.8)                        object blocking (1.9), darker (2.4), subcategory (2.7), person blocking (2.9)
           equipment         darker (0.0), style (0.0), pattern (0.6), multiple objects (0.8)              object blocking (1.5), subcategory (1.8), texture (2.7), person blocking (3.0)
           food              darker (0.0), larger (0.0), style (0.0), pose (0.6)                           smaller (1.6), object blocking (2.0), subcategory (2.1), texture (2.2)
           furniture         object blocking (0.0), larger (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), style (0.7)      smaller (1.9), texture (2.3), subcategory (2.7), darker (2.7)
SimCLR     insect            brighter (0.0), partial view (0.6), larger (0.7), pose (0.7)                  subcategory (2.8), shape (2.9), multiple objects (3.9), darker (3.9)
           natural object    brighter (0.0), pose (0.6), background (1.0)                                  larger (2.8), subcategory (3.0), darker (3.7), object blocking (3.7)
           other             pose (0.7), brighter (0.8)                                                    subcategory (1.7), shape (1.7), texture (1.9), person blocking (2.7)
           primate           larger (0.0), style (0.0), partial view (0.5), darker (0.8)                   smaller (2.2), subcategory (3.3), texture (3.3), shape (3.3)
           snake             darker (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), texture (0.8), pose (0.8)               subcategory (1.6), partial view (2.2), person blocking (2.5), object blocking (2.5)
           structure         brighter (0.0), darker (0.5), color (0.8), pattern (0.8)                      object blocking (1.5), person blocking (1.5), subcategory (2.0), texture (2.2)
           vehicle           person blocking (0.0), texture (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), pattern (0.7)   object blocking (1.9), darker (2.4), style (2.4), shape (2.4)
           vessel            brighter (0.0), darker (0.5), style (0.6), pattern (0.9)                      smaller (1.2), partial view (1.4), texture (1.5), object blocking (1.9)
           wheeled vehicle   object blocking (0.0), brighter (0.0), pattern (0.5), shape (0.6)             larger (2.5), person blocking (3.8), style (3.8), texture (3.8)
           bird              person blocking (0.0), object blocking (0.0), larger (0.0), texture (0.0)     subcategory (2.2), darker (2.7), smaller (2.7), shape (13.4)
           commodity         brighter (0.0), pattern (0.8), pose (0.9), person blocking (0.9)              texture (1.8), larger (1.8), darker (2.1), style (3.5)
           covering          person blocking (0.5), pattern (0.7), partial view (0.8), pose (0.9)          subcategory (1.7), smaller (2.0), style (2.7), object blocking (2.9)
           device            brighter (0.0), pattern (0.7), partial view (0.7), pose (0.9)                 darker (1.6), smaller (1.6), multiple objects (1.9), object blocking (2.6)
           dog               partial view (0.6), pose (0.8), pattern (0.8)                                 darker (3.3), subcategory (3.4), multiple objects (3.9), person blocking (3.9)
           equipment         darker (0.0), texture (0.0), larger (0.7), pattern (0.7)                      smaller (1.9), subcategory (1.9), object blocking (2.0), person blocking (4.1)
           food              larger (0.0), brighter (0.0), style (0.0), pose (0.5)                         darker (1.7), smaller (1.8), subcategory (2.3), texture (2.4)
           furniture         object blocking (0.0), larger (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), style (0.0)      texture (1.7), subcategory (2.0), smaller (2.1), darker (4.1)
ViT        insect            texture (0.0), brighter (0.0), multiple objects (0.0), pose (0.7)             larger (2.4), subcategory (3.2), style (7.1), darker (7.1)
           natural object    partial view (0.0), pattern (0.6), pose (0.6), color (1.0)                    brighter (2.2), subcategory (2.7), object blocking (3.4), darker (3.4)
           other             pose (0.7), brighter (0.8)                                                    shape (1.8), texture (2.3), subcategory (2.3), person blocking (3.6)
           primate           larger (0.0), partial view (0.0), pose (0.7)                                  darker (4.6), texture (4.6), style (4.6), subcategory (4.6)
           snake             multiple objects (0.0), pose (0.8)                                            shape (2.3), person blocking (3.4), object blocking (3.4), darker (3.4)
           structure         person blocking (0.0), pattern (0.7), partial view (0.8), color (0.8)         texture (2.1), subcategory (2.3), style (2.5), multiple objects (2.5)
           vehicle           multiple objects (0.0), person blocking (0.0), texture (0.0), shape (0.0)     subcategory (1.4), darker (1.8), smaller (2.3), style (3.5)
           vessel            brighter (0.0), style (0.0), darker (0.7), pattern (0.7)                      subcategory (1.3), larger (1.7), texture (1.8), object blocking (2.9)
           wheeled vehicle   shape (0.0), brighter (0.0), style (0.0), pattern (0.6)                       object blocking (2.6), larger (3.5), person blocking (5.2), texture (5.2)



Table 4: Best and worst 4 factors for DINO, ResNet50, SimCLR and ViT by Metaclass. The values
between parenthesis are the error ratios for the associated factor.


                                                                                             24
