Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I N - CONTEXT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
WITH A LGORITHM D ISTILLATION

 Michael Laskin∗† , Luyu Wang∗ , Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto, Stephen Spencer,
 Richie Steigerwald, DJ Strouse, Steven Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks,
 Maxime Gazeau, Himanshu Sahni, Satinder Singh, Volodymyr Mnih†
 DeepMind



                                                   A BSTRACT

            We propose Algorithm Distillation (AD), a method for distilling reinforcement
            learning (RL) algorithms into neural networks by modeling their training his-
            tories with a causal sequence model. Algorithm Distillation treats learning to
            reinforcement learn as an across-episode sequential prediction problem. A dataset
            of learning histories is generated by a source RL algorithm, and then a causal
            transformer is trained by autoregressively predicting actions given their preceding
            learning histories as context. Unlike sequential policy prediction architectures that
            distill post-learning or expert sequences, AD is able to improve its policy entirely
            in-context without updating its network parameters. We demonstrate that AD can
            reinforcement learn in-context in a variety of environments with sparse rewards,
            combinatorial task structure, and pixel-based observations, and find that AD learns
            a more data-efficient RL algorithm than the one that generated the source data.
                                                                                                  Private & Conﬁdential


            Data Generation

            Task 1     o0 a0 r0 o1 a1 r1 … oT-1 aT-1 rT-1 oT aT rT
                        o0 a0 r0 o1 a1 r1 … oT-1 aT-1 rT-1 oT aT rT          RL algorithm
                          o0 a0 r0 o1 a1 r1 … oT-1 aT-1 rT-1 oT aT rT        learning histories
            Task

                                         learning progress
            Model Training
                                                                             Predict actions using
                                                                             across-episodic contexts


                                Causal Transformer



Figure 1: Algorithm Distillation (AD) has two steps – (i) a dataset of learning histories is collected from
individual single-task RL algorithms solving different tasks; (ii) a causal transformer predicts actions from
these histories using across-episodic contexts. Since the RL policy improves throughout the learning histories,
by predicting actions accurately AD learns to output an improved policy relative to the one seen in its context.
AD models state-action-reward tokens, and does not condition on returns.



1       I NTRODUCTION
Transformers have emerged as powerful neural network architectures for sequence modeling (Vaswani
et al., 2017). A striking property of pre-trained transformers is their ability to adapt to downstream
tasks through prompt conditioning or in-context learning. After pre-training on large offline datasets,
large transformers have been shown to generalize to downstream tasks in text completion (Brown
et al., 2020), language understanding (Devlin et al., 2018), and image generation (Yu et al., 2022).
    *
        Equal contribution.
    †
        Corresponding authors: {mlaskin, vmnih}@deepmind.com.


                                                           1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recent work demonstrated that transformers can also learn policies from offline data by treating offline
Reinforcement Learning (RL) as a sequential prediction problem. While Chen et al. (2021) showed
that transformers can learn single-task policies from offline RL data via imitation learning, subsequent
work showed that transformers can also extract multi-task policies in both same-domain (Lee et al.,
2022) and cross-domain settings (Reed et al., 2022). These works suggest a promising paradigm
for extracting generalist multi-task policies – first collect a large and diverse dataset of environment
interactions, then extract a policy from the data via sequential modeling. We refer to the family
of approaches that learns policies from offline RL data via imitation learning as Offline Policy
Distillation, or simply Policy Distillation1 (PD).
Despite its simplicity and scalability, a substantial drawback of PD is that the resulting policy does
not improve incrementally from additional interaction with the environment. For instance, the Multi-
Game Decision Transformer (MGDT, Lee et al., 2022) learns a return-conditioned policy that plays
many Atari games while Gato (Reed et al., 2022) learns a policy that solves tasks across diverse
environments by inferring tasks through context, but neither method can improve its policy in-context
through trial and error. MGDT adapts the transformer to new tasks by finetuning the model weights
while Gato requires prompting with an expert demonstration to adapt to a new task. In short, Policy
Distillation methods learn policies but not Reinforcement Learning algorithms.
We hypothesize that the reason Policy Distillation does not improve through trial and error is that it
trains on data that does not show learning progress. Current methods either learn policies from data
that contains no learning (e.g. by distilling fixed expert policies) or data with learning (e.g. the replay
buffer of an RL agent) but with a context size that is too small to capture policy improvement.
Our key observation is that the sequential nature of learning within RL algorithm training could,
in principle, make it possible to model the process of reinforcement learning itself as a causal
sequence prediction problem. Specifically, if a transformer’s context is long enough to include policy
improvement due to learning updates it should be able to represent not only a fixed policy but a
policy improvement operator by attending to states, actions and rewards from previous episodes. This
opens the possibility that any RL algorithm can be distilled into a sufficiently powerful sequence
model such as a transformer via imitation learning, converting it into an in-context RL algorithm. By
in-context RL we mean that the transformer should improve its policy through trial and error within
the environment by attending to its context, without updating its parameters.
We present Algorithm Distillation (AD), a method that learns an in-context policy improvement
operator by optimizing a causal sequence prediction loss on the learning histories of an RL algorithm.
AD has two components. First, a large multi-task dataset is generated by saving the training histories
of an RL algorithm on many individual tasks. Next, a transformer models actions causally using the
preceding learning history as its context. Since the policy improves throughout the course of training
of the source RL algorithm, AD is forced to learn the improvement operator in order to accurately
model the actions at any given point in the training history. Crucially, the transformer context size
must be sufficiently large (i.e. across-episodic) to capture improvement in the training data. The full
method is shown in Fig. 1.
We show that by imitating gradient-based RL algorithms using a causal transformer with sufficiently
large contexts, AD can reinforcement learn new tasks entirely in-context. We evaluate AD across
a number of partially observed environments that require exploration, including the pixel-based
Watermaze (Morris, 1981) from DMLab (Beattie et al., 2016). We show that AD is capable of
in-context exploration, temporal credit assignment, and generalization. We also show that AD learns
a more data-efficient algorithm than the one that generated the source data for transformer training.
To the best of our knowledge, AD is the first method to demonstrate in-context reinforcement learning
via sequential modeling of offline data with an imitation loss.

2    BACKGROUND
Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes: A Markov Decision Process (MDP) consists of
states s ∈ S, actions a ∈ A, rewards r ∈ R, a discount factor γ, and a transition probability function
p(st+1 |st , at ), where t is an integer denoting the timestep and (S, A) are state and action spaces. In
   1
     What we refer to as Policy Distillation is similar to Rusu et al. (2016) but the policy is distilled from offline
data, not a teacher network.


                                                          2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


environments described by an MDP, at each timestep t the agent observes the state st , selects an action
at ∼ π(·|st ) from its policy, and then observes the next state st+1 ∼ p(·|st , at ) sampled from the
transition dynamics of the environment. In this work, we operate in the Partially Observable Markov
Decision Process (POMDP) setting where instead of states s ∈ S the agent receives observations
o ∈ O that only have partial information about the true state of the environment. Full state information
may be incomplete due to missing information about the goal in the environment, which the agent
must instead infer through rewards with memory, or because the observations are pixel-based, or both.
Online and Offline Reinforcement Learning: Reinforcement            PLearning algorithms aim to
maximize the return, defined as the cumulative sum of rewards t γ t rt , throughout an agent’s
lifetime or episode of training. RL algorithms broadly fall into two categories: on-policy
algorithms (Williams, 1992) where the agent directly maximizes a Monte-Carlo estimate of the
total returns or off-policy (Mnih et al., 2013; 2015) where an agent learns and maximizes a value
function that approximates the total future return. Most RL algorithms maximize returns through
trial-and-error by directly interacting with the environment. However, offline RL (Levine et al., 2020)
has recently emerged as an alternate and often complementary paradigm for RL where an agent
aims to extract return maximizing policies from offline data gathered by another agent. The offline
dataset consists of (s, a, r) tuples which are often used to train an off-policy agent, though other
algorithms for extracting return maximizing policies from offline data are also possible.
Self-Attention and Transformers The self-attention (Vaswani et al., 2017) operation begins by
projecting input data X with three separate matrices onto D-dimensional vectors called queries Q,
keys K, and values V . These vectors are then passed through the attention function:
                                                                   √
                           Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax(QK T / D)V.                               (1)
         T
The QK term computes an inner product between two projections of the input data X. The inner
product is then normalized and projected back to a D-dimensional vector with the scaling term V .
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017; Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020) utilize self-attention as
a core part of the architecture to process sequential data such as text sequences. Transformers are
usually pre-trained with a self-supervised objective that predicts tokens within the sequential data.
Common prediction tasks include predicting randomly masked out tokens (Devlin et al., 2018) or
applying a causal mask and predicting the next token (Radford et al., 2018).
Offline Policy Distillation: We refer to the family of methods that treat offline Reinforcement
Learning as a sequential prediction problem as Offline Policy Distillation, or Policy Distillation
(PD) for brevity. Rather than learning a value function from offline data, PD extracts policies by
predicting actions in the offline data (i.e. behavior cloning) with a sequence model and either return
conditioning (Chen et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022) or filtering out suboptimal data (Reed et al., 2022).
Initially proposed to learn single-task policies (Chen et al., 2021; Janner et al., 2021), PD was recently
extended to learn multi-task policies from diverse offline data (Lee et al., 2022; Reed et al., 2022).
In-Context Learning: In-context learning refers to the ability to infer tasks from context. For
example, large language models like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) or Gopher (Rae et al., 2021) can
be directed at solving tasks such as text completion, code generation, and text summarization by
specifying the task through language as a prompt. This ability to infer the task from prompt is
often called in-context learning. We use the terms ‘in-weights learning’ and ‘in-context learning’
from prior work on sequence models (Brown et al., 2020; Chan et al., 2022) to distinguish between
gradient-based learning with parameter updates and gradient-free learning from context, respectively.

3       M ETHOD
Over the course of its lifetime a capable reinforcement learning (RL) agent will exhibit complex
behaviours, such as exploration, temporal credit assignment, and planning. Our key insight is that an
agent’s actions, regardless of the environment it inhabits, its internal structure, and implementation,
can be viewed as a function of its past experience, which we refer to as its history. Formally, we write:
              H ∋ ht := (o0 , a0 , r0 , . . . , ot−1 , at−1 , rt−1 , ot , at , rt ) = (o≤t , r≤t , a≤t ) (2)
and we refer to a long2 history-conditioned policy as an algorithm:
                                        P : H ∪ O → ∆(A),                                               (3)
    2
        Long enough to span learning updates, e.g. across episodes.


                                                         3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where ∆(A) denotes the space of probability distributions over the action space A. Eqn. (3) suggests
that, similar to a policy, an algorithm can be unrolled in an environment to generate sequences of ob-
servations, rewards, and actions. For brevity, we denote the algorithm as P and environment (i.e. task)
as M, such that the history of learning for any given task M is generated by the algorithm PM .
                                   (O0 , A0 , R0 , . . . , OT , AT , RT ) ∼ PM .                                   (4)
Here, we’re denoting random variables with uppercase Latin letters, e.g. O, A, R, and their values
with lowercase Latin letters, e.g. o, a, r. By viewing algorithms as long history-conditioned policies,
we hypothesize that any algorithm that generated a set of learning histories can be distilled into
a neural network by performing behavioral cloning over actions. Next, we present a method that,
provided agents’ lifetimes, learns a sequence model with behavioral cloning to map long histories
to distributions over actions.

3.1    A LGORITHM D ISTILLATION

Suppose the agents’ lifetimes, which we also call learning histories, are generated by the source
algorithm P source for many individual tasks {Mn }N  n=1 , producing the dataset D:
                         n                                                     oN
                              (n) (n) (n)           (n) (n) (n)         source
                    D :=    o0 , a0 , r0 , . . . , oT , aT , rT    ∼ PM    n
                                                                                   .          (5)
                                                                                          n=1
Then we distill the source algorithm’s behaviour into a sequence model that maps long histories
to probabilities over actions with a negative log likelihood (NLL) loss and refer to this process as
algorithm distillation (AD). In this work, we consider neural network models Pθ with parameters
θ which we train by minimizing the following loss function:
                                           N T −1
                                                                      (n)   (n)    (n)
                                           X X
                              L(θ) := −              log Pθ (A = at |ht−1 , ot ).                                  (6)
                                           n=1 t=1
Intuitively, a sequence model with fixed parameters that is trained with AD should amortise the source
RL algorithm P source and by doing so exhibit similarly complex behaviours, such as exploration
and temporal credit assignment. Since the RL policy improves throughout the learning history of
the source algorithm, accurate action prediction requires the sequence model to not only infer the
current policy from the preceding context but also infer the improved policy, therefore distilling
the policy improvement operator.

Algorithm 1 Algorithm Distillation
Require: Train {Mtrain } and test {Mtest } tasks, observations o ∈ O, actions a ∈ A, and rewards r ∈ R.
Require: Network parameters ϕi for i = 1, . . . , N source RL algorithms.
Require: Network parameters θ for a causal transformer Pθ that predicts actions.
Require: An empty buffer to store data D.
 1: for i = 1 . . . N do                                                                   ▷ Part 1: Dataset Generation
 2:     Sample a task Mtraini  randomly from the train task distribution.
 3:     Train the source RL algorithm ϕi until it converges to the optimal policy.
                                    (i)                                                                   (i)
 4:     Save the learning history hT = (o0 , a0 , r0 , . . . , oT , aT , rT )i to the dataset D ← D ∪ hT .
 5: end for
 6: while Pθ not converged do                                                          ▷ Part 2: Algorithm Distillation
                                                                (i)
 7:     Randomly sample a multi-episodic subsequence h̄j = (oj , aj , rj , . . . , oj+c , aj+c , rj+c )i of length c.
 8:     Autoregressively predict the actions with Pθ and compute the NLL loss in Eq. 6.
 9:     Backpropagate to update the transformer parameters.
10: end while
11: for k = 1 . . . Mseeds do                                                      ▷ Part 3: Autoregressive Evaluation
12:     Sample a task Mtest k randomly from the test task distribution. Initialize empty context queue C.
13:     Unroll the transformer Pθ (·|C) in the environment storing sequential transitions (i.e. histories) in C.
14:     Measure the return accumulated by the agent for each episode of evaluation.
15: end for


3.2    P RACTICAL I MPLEMENTATION

In practice, we implement AD as a two-step procedure. First, a dataset of learning histories is
collected by running an individual gradient-based RL algorithm on many different tasks. Next, a


                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


sequence model with multi-episodic context is trained to predict actions from the histories. We
describe these two steps below and detail the full practical implementation in Algorithm 1.
Dataset Generation: A dataset of learning histories is collected by training N individual single-task
gradient-based RL algorithms. To prevent overfitting to any specific task during sequence model
training, a task M is sampled randomly from a task distribution for each RL run. The data generation
step is RL algorithm agnostic - any RL algorithm can be distilled. We show results distilling UCB
exploration (Lai & Robbins, 1985), an on-policy actor-critic (Mnih et al., 2016), and an off-policy
DQN (Mnih et al., 2013), in both distributed and single-stream settings. We denote the dataset of
learning histories as D in Eq. 5.
Training the Sequence Model: Once a dataset of learning histories D is collected, a sequen-
tial prediction model is trained to predict actions given the preceding histories. We utilize the
GPT (Radford et al., 2018) causal transformer model for sequential action prediction, but AD is
compatible with any sequence model including RNNs (Williams & Zipser, 1989). For instance,
we show in Appendix L that AD can also be achieved with an LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber,
1997), though less effectively than AD with causal transformers. Since causal transformer train-
ing and inference are quadratic in the sequence length, we sample across-episodic subsequences
h̄j = (oj , rj , aj . . . , oj+c , rj+c , aj+c ) of length c < T from D rather than training full histories.


4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

4.1   E NVIRONMENTS

To investigate the in-context RL capabilities of AD and the base-
lines (see next section), we focus on environments that cannot be
solved through zero-shot generalization after pre-training. Specif-
ically, we require that each environment supports many tasks,
that the tasks cannot be inferred easily from the observation, and
that episodes are short enough to feasibly train across-episodic
causal transformers - for more details regarding environments see
Appendix B. We list the evaluation environments below:
Adversarial Bandit: a multi-armed bandit with 10 arms and 100
trials similar to the environment considered in RL2 (Duan et al.,       Figure 2: Agent view from the DM-
2016). However, during evaluation the reward is out of distribu-        Lab Watermaze environment. The
tion. Reward is more likely distributed under odd arms 95% of           task is to find a hidden platform that
the time during training. At evaluation, the opposite happens -         elevates once found.
reward appears more often under even arms 95% of the time.
Dark Room: a 2D discrete POMDP where an agent spawns in a room and must find a goal location.
The agent only knows its own (x, y) coordinates but does not know the goal location and must infer
it from the reward. The room size is 9 × 9, the possible actions are one step left, right, up, down, and
no-op, the episode length is 20, and the agent resets at the center of the map. We test two environment
variants – Dark Room where the agent receives r = 1 every time the goal is reached and Dark Room
Hard, a hard exploration variant with a 17 × 17 size and sparse reward (r = 1 exactly once for
reaching the goal). When not r = 1, then r = 0.
Dark Key-to-Door: similar to Dark Room but this environment requires an agent to first find an
invisible key upon which it receives a reward of r = 1 once and then open an invisible door upon
which it receives a reward of r = 1 once again. Otherwise, the reward is r = 0. The room size is 9 × 9
making the task space combinatorial with 812 = 6561 possible tasks. This environment is similar to
the one considered in Chen et al. (2021) except the key and door are invisible and the reward is semi-
sparse (r = 1 for both key and the door). The agent is randomly reset. The episode length is 50 steps.
DMLab Watermaze: a partially observable 3D visual DMLab environment based on the classic
Morris Watermaze (Morris, 1981). The task is to navigate the water maze to find a randomly spawned
trap-door. The maze walls have color patterns that can be used to remember the goal location.
Observations are pixel images of size 72 × 96 × 3. There are 8 possible actions in total, including
going forward, backward, left, or right, rotating left or right, and rotating left or right while going
forward. The episode length is 50, and the agent resets at the center of the map. Similar to Dark


                                                     5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Adversarial Bandit (Section 5): AD, RL2 , and ED evaluated on a 10-arm bandit with 100 trials. The
source data for AD comes from learning histories from UCB (Lai & Robbins, 1985). During training, the reward
is distributed under odd arms 95% of the time and under even arms 95% of the time during evaluation. Both AD
and RL2 can in-context learn in-distribution tasks, but AD generalizes better out of distribution. Running RL2
with a transformer generally doesn’t offer an advantage over the original LSTM variant. ED performs poorly
both in and out of distribution relative to AD and RL2 . Scores are normalized relative to UCB.


Room, the agent cannot see the location of the goal from the observations and must infer it through
the reward of r = 1 if reached and r = 0 otherwise; however, the goal space is continuous and
therefore there are an infinite number of goals.

4.2   BASELINES

The main aim of this work is to investigate to what extent AD reinforcement learns in-context relative
to prior related work. AD is mostly closely related to Policy Distillation, where a policy is learned
with a sequential model from offline interaction data. In-context online meta-RL is also related
though not directly comparable to AD, since AD is an in-context offline meta-RL method. Still, we
consider both types of baselines to better contextualize our work. For a more detailed discussion of
these baseline choices we refer the reader to Appendix C. Our baselines include:
Expert Distillation (ED): this baseline is exactly the same as AD but the source data consists of expert
trajectories only, rather than learning histories. ED is most similar to Gato (Reed et al., 2022) except
ED models state-action-reward sequences like AD, while Gato models state-action sequences.
Source Algorithm: we compare AD to the gradient-based source RL algorithm that generates the
training data for distillation. We include running the source algorithm from scratch as a baseline to
compare the data-efficiency of in-context RL to the in-weights source algorithm.
RL2 (Duan et al., 2016): an online meta-RL algorithm where exploration and fast in-context adapta-
tion are learned jointly by maximizing a multi-episodic value function. RL2 is not directly comparable
to AD for similar reasons to why online and offline RL algorithms are not directly comparable – RL2
gets to interact with the environment during training while AD does not. We use RL2 asymptotic
performance as an approximate upper bound for AD.

4.3   E VALUATION

After pre-training, the AD transformer Pθ can reinforcement learn in-context. Evaluation is exactly
the same as with an in-weights RL algorithm except the learning happens entirely in-context without
updating the transformer network parameters. Given an MDP (or POMDP), the transformer interacts
with the environment and populates its own context (i.e. without demonstrations), where the context
is a queue containing the last c transitions. The transformer’s performance is then evaluated in terms
of its ability to maximize return. For all evaluation runs, we average results across 5 training seeds
with 20 evaluation seeds each for a total of 100 seeds. A task M is sampled uniformly from the test
task distribution and fixed for each evaluation seed. The aggregate statistics reported reflect multi-task
performance. We evaluate for 1000 and 160 episodes for the Dark and Watermaze environments
respectively and plot performance as a function of total environment steps at test-time.

5     E XPERIMENTS
The main research question of this work is whether an in-weights RL algorithm can be amortized into
an in-context one via Algorithm Distillation. The in-context RL algorithm should behave in a similar


                                                      6
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 Dark Room                            Dark Room (Hard)                       Dark Key-to-Door                      Dark Key-to-Door
                                                                                                                                     Watermaze
         15                                                                                                              1.0
                                               0.6                                     1.5                                1.5
                                                                                                                         0.8                              AD
         10                                                                                                              0.6                              ED


                                                                                                                     Return
                                                                                                                     Return
                                      Return


                                                                              Return
Return                                         0.4                                     1.0                                1.0
                                                                                                                         0.4                              Source
         5                                     0.2                                                                                                        RL2 (1 billion)
                                                                                       0.5                                0.5
                                                                                                                         0.2
         00    4     8 12 16 20                0.00    4 8 12 16 20                      0    10 20 30 40 50             0.00 0    102 20 4 30 640 508
              Env Steps (Thousands)                   Env Steps (Thousands)                  Env Steps (Thousands)                EnvSteps
                                                                                                                                  Env Steps(Thousands)
                                                                                                                                            (Thousands)

 Figure 4: Main results: we evaluate AD, RL2 , ED, and the source algorithm on environments that require
 memory and exploration. In these environments, an agent must reach a goal location that can only be inferred
 through a binary reward. AD is consistently able to in-context reinforcement learn across all environments and is
 more data-efficient than the A3C (“Dark” environments) (Mnih et al., 2016) or DQN (Watermaze) (Mnih et al.,
 2013) source algorithm it distilled. We report the mean return ± 1 standard deviation over 5 training seeds with
 20 test seeds each.

way as the in-weights one and exhibit exploration, credit assignment, and generalization capabilities.
We begin our analysis in a clean and simple experimental setting where all three properties are
required to solve the task - the Adversarial Bandit described in Sec. 4.
To generate the source data, we sample a set of training tasks {Mj }N j=1 , run the Upper Confidence
Bound algorithm (Lai & Robbins, 1985), and save its learning histories. We then train a transformer
to predict actions as described in Alg. 1. We evaluate AD, ED, and RL2 and normalize their scores
relative to UCB and a random policy (r − rrand. )/(rU CB − rrand. ). The results are shown in
Fig. 3. We find that both AD and RL2 can reliably in-context learn tasks sampled from the training
distribution while ED cannot, though ED does do better than random guessing when evaluated
in-distribution. However, AD can also in-context learn to solve out of distribution tasks whereas
the other methods cannot. This experiment shows that AD can explore the bandit arms, can assign
credit by exploiting an arm once reached, and can generalize well out of distribution nearly as well as
UCB. We now move beyond the bandit setting and investigate similar research questions in more
challenging RL environments and present our results as answers to a series of research questions.
Does Algorithm Distillation exhibit in-context reinforcement learning? To answer this question,
we first generate source data for Algorithm Distillation. In the Dark Room and Dark Key-to-Door
environments we collect 2000 learning histories with an Asynchronous Advantage Actor-Critic
(A3C) (Mnih et al., 2016) with 100 actors, while in DMLab Watermaze we collect 4000 learning
histories with a distributed DQN with 16 parallel actors (see Appendix F for asymptotic learning
curves of the source algorithm and Appendix O for hyperparameters). Shown in Fig. 4, AD in-context
reinforcement learns in all of the environments. In contrast, ED fails to explore and learn in-context
in most settings. We use RL2 trained for 1 billion environment steps as a proxy for the upper
bound of performance for a meta-RL method. RL2 achieves a near-optimal asymptotic score in all
the environments except for Dark Room (Hard). Despite learning from offline data, AD matches
asymptotic RL2 on the Dark environments and approaches it (within 13%) on Watermaze.
Credit-assignment: In Dark Room, the agent receives r = 1 each time it visits the goal location. Even
though AD is trained to condition only on single timestep reward and not episodic return tokens, it is
still able to maximize the reward, which suggests that AD has learned to do credit assignment.
Exploration: Dark Room (Hard) tests the agents exploration capability. Since the reward is sparse
(r = 1 exactly once), most of the learning history has reward values of r = 0. Nevertheless, AD
infers the goal from previous episodes in its context which means it has learned to explore and exploit.
Generalization: Dark Key-to-Door tests in-distribution generalization with a combinatorial task space.
While the environment has a total of ∼ 6.5k tasks, less than 2k were seen during training. During
evaluation, AD both generalizes and achieves near-optimal performance on mostly unseen tasks.
Can Algorithm Distillation learn from pixel-based observations? DMLab Watermaze is a pixel-
based environment that is larger than the Dark environments with tasks sampled from a continuous
uniform distribution. The environment is partially observable in two ways - the goal is invisible until
the agent has reached it and the first-person view limits the agent’s field of vision. Shown in Fig. 4,
AD maximizes the episodic return with in-context RL while ED does not learn.
Can AD learn a more data-efficient RL algorithm than the one that produced the source
data? In Fig. 4, AD is significantly more data-efficient than the source algorithm. This gain is a
byproduct of distilling a multi-stream algorithm into a single-stream one. The source algorithms


                                                                                               7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    Algorithm Distillation                                    Expert Distillation
               15                                                       15
                                             5% optimal                                                              5% optimal
               10                            25% optimal                10                                           25% optimal

      Return


                                                               Return
                                             50% optimal                                                             50% optimal
               5                             75% optimal                5                                            75% optimal
                                             95% optimal                                                             95% optimal
               00                                                       0
                      5 10 15 20 25                                      0    5 10 15 20 25
                     Env Steps (Thousands)                                   Env Steps (Thousands)

Figure 5: AD and ED conditioned on partial demonstrations: We compare the performance of AD and ED
when prompted with a demonstration from the source algorithm’s training history on Dark Room (semi-dense).
While ED slightly improves and then maintains performance from the input policy, AD is able to improve it
in-context until the policy is optimal or nearly optimal.

(A3C and DQN) are distributed, which means they run many actors in parallel to achieve good
performance.3 A distributed RL algorithm may not be very data-efficient in aggregate but each
individual actor can be data-efficient. Since the learning history for each actor is saved separately,
AD achieves similar performance to the multi-stream dis-
tributed RL algorithm, but is more data-efficient as a              2.0    Single-stream AD
single-stream method.
                                                                                                 1.5
These data-efficiency gains are also evident for distilling


                                                                                        Return
single-stream algorithms. In Fig 6 we show that by sub-                                          1.0
sampling every k-th episode (where k = 10) from a single                                         0.5                      Source
stream A3C learning history, AD can still learn a more                                                                    AD
data-efficient in-context RL algorithm (for more detail, see                                     0.00   10 20 30 40 50
Appendix J). Therefore, AD can be more data-efficient                                                   Env Steps (Thousands)
than both a multi and single-stream source RL algorithm.
While AD is more data-efficient, the source algorithm                        Figure 6: Single-stream Algorithm Distil-
                                                                             lation: AD trained on the learning history
achieves slightly higher asymptotic performance (see Ap-
                                                                             from an A3C agent with only one actor (i.e.
pendix F). However, the source algorithm produces many                       single-stream). By training on subsampled
single-task agents with a unique set of weights ϕn per task                  learning histories (see Sec. 5), AD learns are
Mn , while AD produces a single generalist agent with                        more data-efficient in-context RL algorithm.
weights θ that are fixed across all tasks.
Is it possible to accelerate AD by prompting it with                                              Dark Key-to-Door
demonstrations? Although AD can reinforcement learn
                                                                                                                              20 (.4 ep)
without relying on demonstrations, it has the added benefit                           1.5                                     30 (.6 ep)
that, unlike the source algorithm, it can be conditioned on                                                                   40 (.8 ep)
                                                                             Return


or prompted with external data. To answer the research                                1.0                                     50 (1 ep)
                                                                                                                              100 (2 eps)
question, we sample policies from the hold-out test-set                               0.5                                     200 (4 eps)
data along different points of the source algorithm history
                                                                                        0         10 20 30 40 50
- from a near-random policy to a near-expert policy. We                                          Env Steps (Thousands)
then pre-fill the context for both AD and ED with this
policy data, and run both methods in the environment in                      Figure 7: Context size: AD in Dark Key-to-
Dark Room (Fig. 5). While ED maintains the performance                       Door with different context sizes. In-context
of the input policy, AD improves every policy in-context                     RL only emerges once the context size is
until it is near-optimal. Importantly, the more optimal the                  large enough and across-episodic.
input policy the faster AD improves it until it is optimal.
What context size is required for in-context RL to emerge? We’ve hypothesized that AD
requires sufficiently long (i.e. across-episodic) contexts to in-context reinforcement learn. We test this
hypothesis by training several AD variants with different context sizes on the Dark Room environment.
We plot the learning curves of these different variants in Fig. 7 and find that multi-episodic contexts
of 2-4 episodes are necessary to learn a near-optimal in-context RL algorithm. Initial signs of
in-context RL begin to emerge when the context size is roughly the length of an episode. The reason
for this is likely that the context is large enough to retrain across-episodic information – e.g., at the
start of a new episode, the context will be filled with transitions from most of the previous episode.
    3
      Indeed, current state-of-the-art RL algorithms such as MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2019) and Muesli (Hessel
et al., 2021) rely on distributed actors.


                                                           8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


6       R ELATED W ORK
Offline Policy Distillation: Most closely related to our work are the recent advances in learning
policies from offline environment interaction data with transformers, which we have been referring to
as Policy Distillation (PD). Initial PD architectures such as Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al.,
2021) and Trajectory Transformer (Janner et al., 2021) showed that transformers can learn single-task
policies from offline data. Subsequently the Multi-Game Decision Transformer (MGDT) (Lee et al.,
2022) and Gato (Reed et al., 2022) showed that PD architectures can also learn multi-task same
domain and cross-domain policies, respectively. Importantly, these prior methods use contexts
substantially smaller than an episode length, which is likely the reason in-context RL was not
observed in these works. Instead, they rely on alternate ways to adapt to new tasks - MGDT
finetunes the model parameters while Gato gets prompted with expert demonstrations to adapt to
downstream tasks. AD adapts in-context without finetuning and does not rely on demonstrations.
A number of recent works have explored more generalized PD architectures (Furuta et al., 2021),
prompt conditioning (Xu et al., 2022), and online gradient-based RL (Zheng et al., 2022). Some PD
architectures such as DT and MGDT are instantiations of Upside Down RL (UDRL) Schmidhuber
(2019); Srivastava et al. (2019) where rather than learning a value function, a policy is conditioned
directly on the desired return. However, AD is not explicitly doing UDRL since it is not conditioned
on returns. In fact, return maximization is not specified anywhere in the AD objective but rather
emerges implicitly by modeling the learning histories of an RL algorithm.
Meta Reinforcement Learning: AD falls into the category of methods that learn to reinforcement
learn, also known as meta-RL. Specifically, AD is an in-context offline meta-RL method. This general
idea of learning the policy improvement process has a long history in reinforcement learning, but has
been limited to meta-learning hyper-parameters4 until recently (Ishii et al., 2002). In-context deep
meta-RL methods introduced by Wang et al. (2016) and Duan et al. (2016) are usually trained in
the online setting by maximizing multi-episodic value functions with memory-based architectures
through environment interactions (Ni et al., 2022). Meta-RL through multi-episodic value functions
has been done in both on-policy (Duan et al., 2016) and off-policy (Rakelly et al., 2019; Fakoor
et al., 2020) settings. Another common approach to online meta-RL includes optimization-based
methods that find good network parameter initializations for meta-RL (Hochreiter et al., 2001;
Finn et al., 2017; Nichol et al., 2018) and adapt by taking additional gradient steps. Like other
in-context meta-RL approaches, AD is gradient-free - it adapts to downstream tasks without updating
its network parameters. Recent works have proposed learning to reinforcement learn from offline
datasets, or offline meta-RL, using Bayesian RL (Dorfman et al., 2021) and optimization-based
meta-RL (Mitchell et al., 2021). Given the difficulty of offline meta-RL, Pong et al. (2022) proposed
a hybrid offline-online strategy for meta-RL.
In-Context Learning with Transformers: In this work, we make the distinction between in-context
learning and incremental or in-context learning. In-context learning involves learning from a provided
prompt or demonstration while incremental in-context learning involves learning from one’s own
behavior through trial and error. While many recent works have demonstrated the former, it is much
less common to see methods that exhibit the latter. Arguably, the most impressive demonstrations of
in-context learning to date have been shown in the text completion setting (Radford et al., 2018; Chen
et al., 2020; Brown et al., 2020) through prompt conditioning. Similar methodology was recently
extended to show powerful composability properties in text-conditioned image generation (Yu et al.,
2022). Recent work showed that transformers can also learn simple algorithm classes, such as linear
regression, in-context in a small-scale setting (Garg et al., 2022). Like prior in-context learning
methods, Garg et al. (2022) required initializing the transformer prompt with expert examples. While
the aforementioned approaches were examples of in-context learning, a recent work (Chen et al.,
2022) demonstrated incremental in-context learning for hyperparameter optimization by treating
hyperparameter optimization as a sequential prediction problem with a score function.

7       C ONCLUSION
We have demonstrated that can distill RL algorithms by modeling their learning histories causally
with imitation learning and that AD can learn more data-efficient algorithms than those that generated
the source data. We hope that AD inspires further investigation into in-context reinforcement learning
from the research community.
    4
        For a recent example of meta-optimization in RL see Flennerhag et al. (2022).


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Charles Beattie, Joel Z. Leibo, Denis Teplyashin, Tom Ward, Marcus Wainwright, Heinrich Küttler,
  Andrew Lefrancq, Simon Green, Vı́ctor Valdés, Amir Sadik, Julian Schrittwieser, Keith Anderson,
  Sarah York, Max Cant, Adam Cain, Adrian Bolton, Stephen Gaffney, Helen King, Demis Hassabis,
  Shane Legg, and Stig Petersen. DeepMind Lab. CoRR, abs/1612.03801, 2016.

Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14165, 2020.

Stephanie CY Chan, Adam Santoro, Andrew K Lampinen, Jane X Wang, Aaditya Singh, Pierre H
  Richemond, Jay McClelland, and Felix Hill. Data Distributional Properties Drive Emergent
  In-Context Learning in Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.05055, 2022.

Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel,
  Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
  modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:15084–15097, 2021.

Mark Chen, Alec Radford, Rewon Child, Jeffrey Wu, Heewoo Jun, David Luan, and Ilya Sutskever.
 Generative pretraining from pixels. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1691–
 1703. PMLR, 2020.

Yutian Chen, Xingyou Song, Chansoo Lee, Zi Wang, Qiuyi Zhang, David Dohan, Kazuya Kawakami,
  Greg Kochanski, Arnaud Doucet, Marc’aurelio Ranzato, Sagi Perel, and Nando de Freitas. Towards
  Learning Universal Hyperparameter Optimizers with Transformers, 2022.

Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

Ron Dorfman, Idan Shenfeld, and Aviv Tamar. Offline Meta Reinforcement Learning–Identifiability
  Challenges and Effective Data Collection Strategies. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 34:4607–4618, 2021.

Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L. Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. RL2 : Fast
  Reinforcement Learning via Slow Reinforcement Learning, 2016.

Rasool Fakoor, Pratik Chaudhari, Stefano Soatto, and Alexander J. Smola. Meta-q-learning. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. URL https://openreview.
  net/forum?id=SJeD3CEFPH.

Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.

Sebastian Flennerhag, Yannick Schroecker, Tom Zahavy, Hado van Hasselt, David Silver, and Satinder
  Singh. Bootstrapped meta-learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=b-ny3x071E5.

Hiroki Furuta, Yutaka Matsuo, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Generalized decision transformer for offline
  hindsight information matching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.10364, 2021.

Shivam Garg, Dimitris Tsipras, Percy Liang, and Gregory Valiant. What Can Transformers Learn
  In-Context? A Case Study of Simple Function Classes, 2022.

Matteo Hessel, Ivo Danihelka, Fabio Viola, Arthur Guez, Simon Schmitt, Laurent Sifre, Theophane
 Weber, David Silver, and Hado van Hasselt. Muesli: Combining Improvements in Policy Optimiza-
 tion. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
 Machine Learning, ICML 2021, 18-24 July 2021, Virtual Event, volume 139 of Proceedings of
 Machine Learning Research, pp. 4214–4226. PMLR, 2021.

Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long Short-Term Memory. Neural Computation, 9(8):
  1735–1780, 1997.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Sepp Hochreiter, A Steven Younger, and Peter R Conwell. Learning to learn using gradient descent.
  In International conference on artificial neural networks, pp. 87–94. Springer, 2001.
Shin Ishii, Wako Yoshida, and Junichiro Yoshimoto. Control of exploitation–exploration meta-
  parameter in reinforcement learning. Neural networks, 15(4-6):665–687, 2002.
Michael Janner, Qiyang Li, and Sergey Levine. Reinforcement Learning as One Big Sequence
 Modeling Problem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.02039, 2021.
T.L Lai and Herbert Robbins. Asymptotically Efficient Adaptive Allocation Rules. Adv. Appl. Math.,
  6(1):4–22, mar 1985. ISSN 0196-8858. doi: 10.1016/0196-8858(85)90002-8.
Kuang-Huei Lee, Ofir Nachum, Mengjiao Yang, Lisa Lee, Daniel Freeman, Winnie Xu, Sergio
  Guadarrama, Ian Fischer, Eric Jang, Henryk Michalewski, and Igor Mordatch. Multi-Game
  Decision Transformers, 2022.
Sergey Levine, Aviral Kumar, George Tucker, and Justin Fu. Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial,
  review, and perspectives on open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Eric Mitchell, Rafael Rafailov, Xue Bin Peng, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Offline meta-
  reinforcement learning with advantage weighting. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 7780–7791. PMLR, 2021.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Alex Graves, Ioannis Antonoglou, Daan
  Wierstra, and Martin Riedmiller. Playing atari with deep reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous Methods for Deep Reinforcement
  Learning. In Maria-Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger (eds.), Proceedings of the 33nd
  International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2016, New York City, NY, USA, June 19-24,
  2016, volume 48 of JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, pp. 1928–1937. JMLR.org,
  2016.
Richard G.M. Morris. Spatial localization does not require the presence of local cues. Learning and
  Motivation, 12(2):239–260, 1981. doi: 10.1016/0023-9690(81)90020-5.
Rafael Müller, Simon Kornblith, and Geoffrey E Hinton.       When does label smoothing
  help? In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Gar-
  nett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32. Curran Asso-
  ciates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/
  f1748d6b0fd9d439f71450117eba2725-Paper.pdf.
Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. Recurrent model-free RL can be a
  strong baseline for many pomdps. In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba
  Szepesvári, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato (eds.), International Conference on Machine Learning,
  ICML 2022, 17-23 July 2022, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine
  Learning Research, pp. 16691–16723. PMLR, 2022. URL https://proceedings.mlr.
  press/v162/ni22a.html.
Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On First-Order Meta-Learning Algorithms, 2018.
Vitchyr H Pong, Ashvin V Nair, Laura M Smith, Catherine Huang, and Sergey Levine. Offline
  meta-reinforcement learning with online self-supervision. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 17811–17829. PMLR, 2022.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Improving language
  understanding by generative pre-training, 2018.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
  Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, Eliza Rutherford, Tom Hennigan,
  Jacob Menick, Albin Cassirer, Richard Powell, George van den Driessche, Lisa Anne Hendricks,
  Maribeth Rauh, Po-Sen Huang, Amelia Glaese, Johannes Welbl, Sumanth Dathathri, Saffron
  Huang, Jonathan Uesato, John Mellor, Irina Higgins, Antonia Creswell, Nat McAleese, Amy Wu,
  Erich Elsen, Siddhant Jayakumar, Elena Buchatskaya, David Budden, Esme Sutherland, Karen
  Simonyan, Michela Paganini, Laurent Sifre, Lena Martens, Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro,
  Aida Nematzadeh, Elena Gribovskaya, Domenic Donato, Angeliki Lazaridou, Arthur Mensch,
  Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Nikolai Grigorev, Doug Fritz, Thibault Sottiaux,
  Mantas Pajarskas, Toby Pohlen, Zhitao Gong, Daniel Toyama, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume,
  Yujia Li, Tayfun Terzi, Vladimir Mikulik, Igor Babuschkin, Aidan Clark, Diego de Las Casas,
  Aurelia Guy, Chris Jones, James Bradbury, Matthew Johnson, Blake Hechtman, Laura Weidinger,
  Iason Gabriel, William Isaac, Ed Lockhart, Simon Osindero, Laura Rimell, Chris Dyer, Oriol
  Vinyals, Kareem Ayoub, Jeff Stanway, Lorrayne Bennett, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu,
  and Geoffrey Irving. Scaling Language Models: Methods, Analysis & Insights from Training
  Gopher, 2021.
Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Deirdre Quillen. Efficient off-policy
  meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and
  Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA, volume 97 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 5331–5340. PMLR, 2019. URL http://proceedings.
  mlr.press/v97/rakelly19a.html.
Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel
  Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake
  Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals,
  Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A Generalist Agent, 2022.
Andrei A. Rusu, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Çaglar Gülçehre, Guillaume Desjardins, James Kirk-
  patrick, Razvan Pascanu, Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Raia Hadsell. Policy
  distillation. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (eds.), 4th International Conference on Learning
 Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings,
  2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06295.
Jürgen Schmidhuber. Reinforcement learning upside down: Don’t predict rewards - just map them to
   actions. CoRR, abs/1912.02875, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02875.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  and David Silver. Mastering Atari, Go, Chess and Shogi by Planning with a Learned Model. CoRR,
  abs/1911.08265, 2019.
Rupesh Kumar Srivastava, Pranav Shyam, Filipe Mutz, Wojciech Jaśkowski, and Jürgen Schmidhuber.
  Training agents using upside-down reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.02877,
  2019.
Christian Szegedy, Vincent Vanhoucke, Sergey Ioffe, Jon Shlens, and Zbigniew Wojna. Rethinking
  the inception architecture for computer vision. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2818–2826, 2016. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.308.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Lukasz
  Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 2017.
Jane X Wang, Zeb Kurth-Nelson, Dhruva Tirumala, Hubert Soyer, Joel Z Leibo, Remi Munos,
  Charles Blundell, Dharshan Kumaran, and Matt Botvinick. Learning to reinforcement learn, 2016.
Ronald J. Williams. Simple Statistical Gradient-Following Algorithms for Connectionist Reinforce-
  ment Learning. Mach. Learn., 8:229–256, 1992. doi: 10.1007/BF00992696.
Ronald J Williams and David Zipser. A learning algorithm for continually running fully recurrent
  neural networks. Neural computation, 1(2):270–280, 1989.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Mengdi Xu, Yikang Shen, Shun Zhang, Yuchen Lu, Ding Zhao, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Chuang Gan.
 Prompting decision transformer for few-shot policy generalization. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning, pp. 24631–24645. PMLR, 2022.
Jiahui Yu, Yuanzhong Xu, Jing Yu Koh, Thang Luong, Gunjan Baid, Zirui Wang, Vijay Vasudevan,
   Alexander Ku, Yinfei Yang, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Ben Hutchinson, Wei Han, Zarana Parekh,
   Xin Li, Han Zhang, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Scaling Autoregressive Models for
   Content-Rich Text-to-Image Generation, 2022.
Qinqing Zheng, Amy Zhang, and Aditya Grover. Online decision transformer. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2202.05607, 2022.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    D ISCUSSION AND L IMITATIONS

Discussion: While AD is more data-efficient than the source algorithm, we found that the source
algorithm achieves a slightly higher asymptotic score in harder environments. This presents a trade-
off between data-efficiency and asymptotic optimality when using AD that should be taken into
consideration when applying AD to a specific problem. In terms of long-term consequences, AD
presents a path for converting narrow single-task RL agents into multi-task generalist ones. To date,
deep RL research has mostly focused on powerful single-task agents Mnih et al. (2015); Schrittwieser
et al. (2019); Hessel et al. (2021). These algorithms have produced powerful but data-inefficient
agents, which has limited their applicability beyond narrow domains. AD offers a path toward training
substantially more data-efficient, though perhaps less optimal, generalist agents by distilling narrow
RL algorithms into sequence models like transformers.
Limitations: While AD is a general method, in this work we’ve shown that AD generalizes to
new tasks within the same domain. Showing the ability to distill cross-domain RL algorithms and
generalize to new domains would be an interesting line if inquiry for future work. AD also requires
storing many learning histories which could take up significant memory, though this may not be too
much of an issue since the learning histories can be stored on disk rather than RAM. Perhaps the main
limitation of AD is that most RL environments of interest have long episodes and modeling multi-
episodic context requires more powerful long-horizon sequential models than the ones considered in
this work. We believe this is a promising direction for future research.


B    E NVIRONMENT C ONSIDERATIONS

In this work, we consider environments where zero-shot generalization is difficult, so the agent
must learn through trial and error. We also want environments where overfitting to any particular
task is difficult to ensure our method is general. A final practical consideration is that we consider
environments wher across-episodic histories can be feasibly modeled with a causal transformer.
Given these considerations, our evaluation environments need to satisfy three criteria:

      1. Supports many tasks: The environments must be multi-task to ensure that our agent and the
         baselines do not overfit to any single task and instead is able to in-context reinforcement
         learn across many tasks within a given domain.
      2. Task must be hard to infer: To ensure that the downstream tasks are hard to generalize to in
         zero-shot, we use environments that require exploration. Namely, we require environments
         where either the task can only be inferred from the reward and not the observation, or tasks
         that are partially observable.
      3. Supports multi-episodic contexts: Lastly, we impose a practical constraint - the environment
         episodes must be short enough such that a normal GPT-like transformer can fit multiple
         episodes in its context. Since this work introduces AD as a method, we wish to investigate it
         in the cleanest possible setting using a canonical architecture. We leave investigating AD
         with more complex architectures that scale to longer sequences for future work.

Prior related works (Chen et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022; Janner et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022)
evaluated on Atari, OpenAI gym, and as well as other environments. However, Atari and OpenAI
gym don’t satisfy at least one of the above criteria. Atari and OpenAI gym episodes are often long
and can contain thousands or more transitions per episode, so it’s technically challenging to populate
a causal transformer’s context with across-episode histories. Indeed, the prior related works only
considered within-episode context lengths. Additionally, it is often easy to infer the task from either
the observation or the dense reward alone in both Atari and OpenAI gym, which reduces the need for
exploration. For these reasons, we evaluate in environments that satisfy all three criteria instead.


C    C LOSELY R ELATED P RIOR M ETHODS

In our main results we use Expert Distillation (ED) as a baseline. Here, we discuss how the most
closely related methods differ from AD and why ED is sufficient to support the paper’s claims.


                                                  14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Expert Distillation (ED): ED is most similar to Gato (Reed et al., 2022), which models expert
sequences from a converged RL policy using a causal transformer. ED also trains a causal transformer
to predict actions using expert policy data. There are two key differences between ED and Gato. First,
unlike Gato which utilizes small (relative to an episode length) within-episode contexts, ED is trained
on the same across-episode contexts as AD, so the architectures used by ED and AD are the same.
The benefits of AD cannot therefore be attributed to across-episode contexts alone but also learning
progress in the offline data used to train AD. Second, ED models state-action-reward sequences while
Gato models only state-action sequences. The main difference between ED and AD is that AD is
trained on full multi-task learning histories rather than expert policy data.
Decision Transformer (DT) (Chen et al., 2021) and Multi-Game Decision Transformer (Lee et al.,
2022): DTs learn return-conditioned policies from single-task offline data collected by an RL agent.
While the training data itself (an RL agent’s replay buffer) contains learning, the context sizes
used in DT are too small to capture any learning progress or identify the task using across-episode
information. For instance, the Atari experiments use a context of length 30 − 50 tokens, or 10 − 17
transitions. Atari games can have hundreds or thousands of transitions in a single episode, which
means these contexts capture mostly within-episode information. Additionally, very little learning
progress happens in the underlying replay buffer data within that many transitions.
Another difference between DT and AD / ED is that DT learns a return-conditioned model whereas
AD / ED are both reward-conditioned. In our setting return-conditioning alone cannot yield an
optimal policy since the agent does not know the task until after it explores the environment and can
identify it using across-episode contexts. Since (i) DT uses small within-episodic contexts and (ii)
return-conditioning would not help in the environments considered, this baseline is similar to ED
with a small within-episode context which is strictly weaker than the long across-episode context
variant of ED we consider.
Trajectory Transformer (TTO) (Janner et al., 2021): Like AD, TTO also models state-action-reward
tokens but in addition to predicting actions it also learns a world model by predicting states and
rewards. To maximize return, TTO then uses beam search to select high-reward actions. However,
in our setting, TTO will run into the same problem as DT. To model rewards accurately it will
need longer across-episodic contexts since one environment supports many tasks. Similar to DT,
MGDT, and Gato, TTO uses smaller within-episode contexts. For this reason, TTO will fare no better
than DT, MGDT, or ED in the settings we consider. We also note that in contrast to TTO, AD is
model-free. In AD, actions are sampled from the transformer history-conditioned predictions and
return maximization emerges from modeling the learning histories of an RL algorithm.
To summarize, AD differs from prior methods mainly because its context is across-episodic and hence
large enough to capture learning progress and task information. AD could further be augmented by
learning world models like TTO or conditioning on returns like DT, but these investigations would be
well suited for future work since they are tangential to the main research question addressed in this
work – whether in-context RL can emerge by imitating the learning histories of an RL algorithm with
long across-episodic contexts.
AD is also closely related to prior work in in-context meta-RL. While both AD and in-context
meta-RL model across-episodic histories with memory-based architectures, prior in-context meta-RL
algorithms, such as RL2 (Duan et al., 2016) are trained online and rely on learning multi-episodic
value functions with TD learning while AD is trained offline and uses a supervised imitation learning
objective.


                                                 15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    E XPERT D ISTILLATION M AIN R ESULTS
We elaborate further on the main results in Fig. 4 and provide intuition regarding the behaviors of
the ED baseline. In Dark Room, Dark Room (Hard), and Watermaze, ED performance is either
flat or it degrades. The reason for this is that ED only saw expert trajectories during training, but
during evaluation it needs to first explore (i.e. perform non-expert behavior) to identify the task.
This required behavior is out-of-distribution for ED and for this reason it does not reinforcement
learning in-context. In Dark Key-to-Door the agent is reset randomly at the beginning of each episode,
whereas in all of the environments the agent’s starting position is fixed. Due to random resets, the
ED agent is sometimes reset by the first goal in Dark Key-to-Door which allows it to occasionally
identify the first goal of the task, which is why it shows slight improvement.

E    M ODEL S IZE
We investigate how transformer capacity affects performance in Fig. 8. While in-context RL emerges
across all model sizes investigated, we find that increasing the model depth, the model width in terms
of embedding dimension, and (to a lesser extent) the number of attention heads improves performance
on Dark Key-to-Door.

                              2.0

                              1.5
                     Return


                              1.0

                              0.5

                              0.0
                                    16    32   64 128 256   2     4    6    8      10   1      2     4        8
                                         embedding size         number of layers            number of heads


Figure 8: Model size investigations: We investigate how increasing model capacity affects AD. While
in-context RL with AD emerges regardless of the model capacity, increasing the model depth and width helps
improve AD until it achieves near-optimal performance.


                                                                  16
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 F                S OURCE A LGORITHM T RAINING RUNS

                        Dark Room                            Dark Room (Hard)                        Dark Key-to-Door                          Watermaze
                                                      1.00                                     2.0                                   1.00
         15
                                                      0.75                                     1.5                                   0.75
         10
Return


                                                                                                                            Return
                                                                                      Return
                                             Return
                                                      0.50                                     1.0                                   0.50
         5                                            0.25                                                                           0.25
                                                                                               0.5
         0                                            0.00
              0     2        4     6    8                 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00               0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00               0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                         Env Steps     1e5                         Env Steps  1e6                         Env Steps  1e7                         Env Steps  1e5

 Figure 9: Asymptotic performance of the A3C (Mnih et al., 2016) and a Q-λ variant of the DQN (Mnih et al.,
 2013) RL algorithms used to produce learning histories for the Dark and Watermaze environments. These curves
 show the learning histories AD is trained on. The source algorithms plotted in Fig. 4 are the same as in these plots.



 G                L ABEL S MOOTHING A BLATION
 For the harder exploration task of Dark Room (Hard), we found that adding label smoothing regular-
 ization (Szegedy et al., 2016; Müller et al., 2019) improved the in-context learning ability of AD .
 In Figure 10 we ablate the benefit of using label smoothing for 3 different α values as well as with
 it turned off. Each curve in the figure denotes average performance over 5 training seeds. We can
 see that adding label smoothing up to a point improves the in-context learning ability of Algorithm
 Distillation, with performance continually increasing with the number of evaluation episodes.

                                                         Label Smoothing Ablation
                                                            Dark Room (Hard)
                                                 0.6
                                                                                                                alpha=0.0
                                                                                                                alpha=0.1
                                        Return


                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                alpha=0.2
                                                 0.2                                                            alpha=0.3

                                                 0.00        200 400 600 800 1000
                                                                  Episodes
                  Figure 10: AD trained with different amounts of label smoothing on Dark Room (Hard).


 H                RL2 NETWORK ARCHITECTURE : T RANSFORMER VS LSTM
We compared using a transformer as the architecture for RL2 instead of an LSTM. In Figure 11, we
ran both transformer and LSTM RL2 agents over the Dark Room environment. The curves shown
are the best from a sweep over learning rate and unroll length hyperparameters. The transformer
architecture is 4-layers with a model size of 256 and pre-norm layer normalization placement. While
both agents reached a similar level of final performance, all RL2 transformer models trained tended
to be more unstable with the average return not as consistent as with an LSTM architecture. Given
the poor performance of the transformer-based RL2 on the simpler Dark Room setting, our other
experimental settings used the LSTM.


                                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                  LSTM v.s. Transformer
                                                                                        LSTM


                   Final Episodic Reward
                                           0.8                                          Transformer
                                           0.6
                                           0.4
                                           0.2
                                              0     250 500 750 1000
                                                    Training Step (1e6)
Figure 11: Comparison of LSTM and Transformer architecture for RL2 agent on Dark Room. Each
curve is averaged over 5 training seeds with the shaded area representing the standard error.


I   N UMBER OF T RAINING TASKS IN S OURCE DATA

                                       2.0         # of tasks during training             1 tasks
                                                                                          9 tasks
                                       1.5                                                18 tasks
                                                                                          37 tasks
                                                                                          75 tasks
                    Return


                                       1.0                                                151 tasks
                                                                                          303 tasks
                                                                                          606 tasks
                                       0.5                                                1212 tasks
                                                                                          2424 tasks
                                             0       3         6       9      12   15
                                                         Env Steps (Thousands)
Figure 12: Algorithm distillation trained on different numbers of training tasks on Dark Key-to-Door
evaluated on a fixed set of test tasks for 300 episodes of evaluation.

One interesting question is how many tasks AD needs to be trained on to learn an algorithm that
generalizes to held out tasks. We trained AD on different numbers of Dark Key-to-Door training
tasks and evaluated the resulting models on the same set of test tasks. Figure 12 shows the in-
context learning plots for the resulting AD models on the set of test tasks. As a reminder, there are
812 = 6561 unique Dark Key-to-Door tasks. Models trained on 1, 9 or 18 training tasks did not show
any in-context learning on test tasks. While models trained on 37, 75 and 151 tasks did not achieve
good performance overall, they did exhibit some in-context learning over the course of 300 episodes.
The best models were trained on 1212 and 2424 tasks which corresponds to roughly 18% and 37% of
the total number of tasks in the Dark Key-to-Door domain.

J   S INGLE -S TREAM A LGORITHM D ISTILLATION
We provide more details around the experimental setup for the single-stream result shown in Fig. 6.
We showed in Fig. 4 that when AD is trained on data from a subset of the actors of a distributed
source RL algorithm, the resulting model is more data efficient than the source algorithm. Here we
confirm that AD can produce a faster algorithm than the one it was trained on in the single-stream
setting. For this experiment we trained A3C on 2048 Dark Key-to-Door tasks for 2000 episodes each.
We then trained AD on the resulting data while subsampling the learning histories by a factor of 10.
More concretely, we took every 10th episode from each of the learning history, which resulted in
a 200 episode compressed learning trajectory for each task. Figure 6 compares the resulting AD
model evaluated on a set of test tasks to the performance of the source algorithm on these tasks.
The model learned by AD learns much faster than the source algorithm confirming that Algorithm
Distillation can turn a slow gradient-based algorithm into a much more data efficient in-context
learning algorithm.


                                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


K    R ANDOM MASK


                                           Dark Key-to-Door              0.1
                                                                         0.3
                                    1.5                                  0.5
                                                                         0.7
                                                                         0.9


                           Return
                                    1.0
                                    0.5
                                      0         5       10      15
                                          Env Steps (Thousands)

Figure 13: Downstream performance of Algorithm Distillation with different values of random
masking during training in 9x9 1 goal gridworld.

During training, input tokens were randomly masked to avoid overfitting to training data. This
plot shows the downstreams results on a 9x9 Dark Key-to-Door domain with different values of
this random masking. Values of 0.3 − 0.5 perform the best with the value of 0.3 chosen for all
experiments.

L    AD NETWORK ARCHITECTURE : T RANSFORMER VS LSTM
Here we consider the importance of the Transformer architecture to the success of algorithm dis-
tillation (AD) by comparing to AD based off of an LSTM (Hochreiter & Schmidhuber, 1997).
Specifically, the LSTM receives the concatenated embeddings of (oi , ai , ri ) triplets up to the most
recent time step t − 1. The output of the LSTM is then concatenated with the current observation ot
embedding and both are then fed through a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) policy torso to produce a
distribution over the present action at . The LSTM hidden size (512), MLP depth (2), and MLP width
(256) were swept and tuned by grid search based on downstream reward attainment.
Comparing Transformer AD and LSTM AD on the Dark Key-to-Door task (Figure 14), we find
that both agents are capable of in-context learning, demonstrating that the success of AD is not
tied to the underlying network architecture. However, we also find that the Transformer variant
consistently outperforms the LSTM variant, which is why all other experiments in this paper employ
the Transformer variant. This finding is consistent with the recent wider success of Transformer-based
architectures over recurrent neural network (RNN)-based architectures in sequence prediction tasks.

M     D ISTILLING ACTIONS VS PROBABILITIES
In the rest of the paper, we use (one-hot) actions taken by the source policy as the prediction target
for AD. Here, we compare that choice to predicting the source policy probabilities from which that
action was sampled. In other words, is it better to distill actions or probabilities?
Figure 15 compares all combinations of: 1) distilling actions vs probabilities, and 2) conditioning
those predictions on past actions, probabilities, or both. The plot labels represent various input/output
combinations, e.g. sar->a indicates observing states, actions, and rewards while predicting actions
(i.e. the main variant of AD in the rest of the paper), sar->p represents using the same observations
but instead predicting probabilities, and sapr->a represents observing states, actions, probabilities,
and rewards while predicting actions, etc.
Two conclusions stand out from this plot. First, the original action distillation variant of AD
(sar->a) performs best, followed closely by probability distillation (sar->p). In the paragraphs
and experiments below, we explore why action distillation outperforms probability distillation.
Second, all variants that condition on past probabilities catastrophically fail. We speculate on


                                                   19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     2.00         Dark Key-to-Door
                                     1.75
                                     1.50
                                     1.25


                            Return
                                     1.00
                                     0.75
                                     0.50
                                                                     Transformer
                                     0.25                            LSTM
                                     0.000   50     100     150   200 250 300
                                                          Episodes
Figure 14: Comparison between algorithm distillation with a Transformer and LSTM architecture on
Dark Key-to-Door. Mean ± 1 standard deviation over 5 training seeds and 20 evaluation seeds. 300
episodes corresponds to 15k environment steps.



                                     2.00 One-Hot Actions vs Probabilities
                                     1.75
                                     1.50                          sar->a
                                     1.25                          sar->p
                            Return


                                                                   spr->a
                                     1.00                          sapr->p
                                     0.75                          sapr->a
                                     0.50                          spr->p
                                     0.25
                                     0.000.0 0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8      1.0
                                                          Episodes          1e3


Figure 15: Comparison between algorithm distillation with various input/output combinations on
Dark Key-to-Door. Mean ± 1 standard deviation over 5 training seeds and 20 evaluation seeds. 1000
episodes corresponds to 50k environment steps.


two somewhat contradictory reasons why this might occur: 1) The AD prediction task involves a
combination of inferring the current policy, as well as predicting when policy updates will occur. Since
observing policy probabilities provides more information about the current policy than actions do, it is
possible that this leads to AD fully focusing on inferring the current policy and ignoring the prediction
of policy updates. In other words, observing only actions taken may act as a useful information
bottleneck. 2) On the other hand, observing probabilities may inadvertently leak information about
when policy updates occur. If the transformer context includes multiple visits to the same state, AD
could learn to compare the policy probabilities to infer whether a policy update occurred in between
the two visits. If AD learned during training to rely on this information, then during autoregressive
evaluation, it may be “waiting“ for a policy update than never occurs. If this is the source of the issue,
then a potential solution would be retraining with explicit policy update tokens and including them
between evaluation episodes, however we leave this investigation to future work.
Now we return to the question of why action distillation (sar->a) outperforms probability distillation
(sar->p). Intuitively, distilling one-hot actions will result in a more deterministic policy than
distilling probabilities when training on finite data. Indeed, the red curves in the top two plots
of Figure 16 show that probability distillation (top left) converges to a higher entropy (∼1.2 bits)
policy than does action distillation (top right, ∼1 bit). Noting this discrepancy, we speculated that
encouraging probability distillation towards a more deterministic policy might lead to increased
performance. To do so, we experimented with an entropy penalty regularizer added to the AD loss


                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


from equation 6, leading to the modified objective:
                                       N T −1                                      h                  i
                                                                (n) (n)    (n)             (n)    (n)
                                       X X
                        L̃(θ, α) :=              − log Pθ (A = at |ht−1 , ot ) + αH Pθ (A|ht−1 , ot ) ,                                       (7)
                                       n=1 t=1

where H[·] is the Shannon entropy in bits, and α is a regularization weight. The top two panels
of Figure 16 show the effect of increasing α on decreasing policy entropy for action distillation
(top right) and probability distillation (top left), throughout training. The bottom two panels show
the corresponding changes in evaluation returns. Notably, entropy penalization indeed improves
performance for probability distillation (bottom left), with the best performing regularization value
(α = 0.1) achieving a similar return to the original unregularized action distillation (bottom right,
red). Interestingly, this is the amount of regularization that leads probability distillation to have the
most similar entropy to the unregularized action distillation variant (∼1 bit) as well. Further entropy
penalization for action distillation, on the other hand, does not lead to increased performance (bottom
right). Together, these results suggest that action distillation naturally leads to the “optimal“ amount
of entropy regularization on its own, at least in the environments we study.

                     2.0           sar->p policy entropy                                  2.0           sar->a policy entropy
                                                                                                                      entropy penalty
                     1.8                                                                  1.8                                  0.0
                     1.6                                                                  1.6                                  0.05
    Entropy (bits)


                                                                         Entropy (bits)
                                                                                                                               0.1
                     1.4                                                                  1.4                                  0.2
                                                                                                                               0.3
                     1.2                                                                  1.2
                     1.0                                                                  1.0
                     0.8                                                                  0.8
                     0.6      0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75                          0.6      0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75
                                          Episodes                 1e5                                         Episodes                 1e5

                     2.0               sar->p reward                                      2.0               sar->a reward

                     1.8                                                                  1.8

                     1.6                                                                  1.6
    Return


                                                                         Return


                     1.4                                                                  1.4

                     1.2                                                                  1.2

                     1.00.0      0.2     0.4     0.6    0.8        1.0                    1.00.0      0.2     0.4    0.6     0.8        1.0
                                         Episodes              1e3                                            Episodes              1e3


Figure 16: Policy entropy during training and reward during evaluation for the action distillation
(sar->a) and probability distillation (sar->p) variants of AD on Dark Key-to-Door. Colors
indicate the strength of the weight on the entropy penalty regularizer from equation 7. Mean ± 1
standard deviation over 5 training seeds and 20 evaluation seeds. 1000 episodes corresponds to 50k
environment steps.

In addition to closing gap between probability and action distillation with an entropy penalty, we
also explored retuning various hyperparameters for sar->p rather than reusing those tuned for
sar->a. We found that many hyperparameters, such as the dropout rate, attention dropout rate,
and sequence mask probability, had similar optimal values in the two cases, and so retuning them
did not help. However, one hyperparameter that did have an effect was the size of the transformer
context window (Figure 17). While action distillation performance increased only up to a context
window size of 200 steps (4 episodes) and then plateaued (Figure 17, right), probability distillation
performance continued to increase up to a context window size of 300 steps (6 episodes) before
plateauing (Figure 17, left). Thus, while a comparison at our default context window size of 200


                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


steps favored action distillation, for larger context window sizes, action and probability distillation
performed similarly. We leave any further explanation of why probability distillation requires larger
context windows than action distillation to future work.

             2.00             sar->p                          2.00             sar->a
             1.75                                             1.75
             1.50                                             1.50
             1.25                                             1.25
    Return


                                                     Return
             1.00                                             1.00
                                                                                  context window size
             0.75                                             0.75                    100 steps (2 ep)
             0.50                                             0.50                    200 steps (4 ep)
                                                                                      300 steps (6 ep)
             0.25                                             0.25                    400 steps (8 ep)
             0.000.0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0            0.000.0   0.2   0.4    0.6     0.8      1.0
                             Episodes          1e3                            Episodes               1e3


Figure 17: Context window size dependence for the action distillation (sar->a) and probability
distillation (sar->p) variants of AD on Dark Key-to-Door. Mean ± 1 standard deviation over 5
training seeds and 20 evaluation seeds. 1000 episodes corresponds to 50k environment steps.


                                                     22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N    A LGORITHM D ISTILLATION H YPERPARAMETERS

      Hyperparameter             Dark Room      Dark Room (Hard)      Dark Key-to-Door   Watermaze
      Embedding Dim.                                             64
      Number of Layers                                            4
      Number of Heads                                             4
      Feedforward Dim.                                         2048
      Position Encodings                                      Absolute
      Layer Norm Placement                                   Post Norm
      Dropout Rate                                               0.1
      Context Window                                 600 tokens (200 timesteps)
      Attention Dropout Rate           0.5             0                   0.5              0.5
      Sequence Mask Prob               0.3            0.5                  0.3              0.3
      Label Smoothing α                 0             0.2                   0                0

                 Table 1: Algorithm Distillation Architecture Hyperparameters.


                               Hyperparameter                        Value
                               Batch Size                             128
                               Optimizer                             Adam
                               β1                                     0.9
                               β2                                    0.99
                               Gradient Clip Norm Threshold            1
                               Learning Rate Schedule             Cosine Decay
                               Initial Value                          2e-6
                               Peak Value                             3e-4

                 Table 2: Algorithm Distillation Optimization Hyperparameters.


                               Layer                Hyperparameter      Value
                               Conv Block
                                                         Channel         128
                               Conv                       Kernel          5
                                                          Stride          2
                                                        Decay Rate      0.999
                               BatchNorm
                                                           eps          1e-5
                               Activation                    -          ReLU
                                                          Kernel          2
                               Max Pooling
                                                          Stride          2
                               Dropout                     Rate          0.2
                               Network
                               Conv Blocks                 -              3
                               Final Linear Layer         Units          256

                       Table 3: Watermaze Image Encoder Hyperparameters.


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O     S OURCE RL A LGORITHM H YPERPARAMETERS
O.1   DARK E NVIRONMENTS

                                Hyperparameter             Value
                                Batch Size (Num. Actors)    100
                                λ                           0.95
                                Agent Discount              0.99
                                Entropy Bonus Weight        0.01
                                MLP Layers                    3
                                MLP Hidden Dim              128
                                Optimizer                  Adam
                                β1                          0.9
                                β2                         0.999
                                ϵ                          1e-6
                                Learning Rate              1e-4

           Table 4: Source A3C Algorithm Hyperparameters for Dark Environments.


O.2    DML AB WATERMAZE

                           Hyperparameter                     Value
                           Batch Size                           8
                           Rollout Length                      40
                           Rollout Overlap                     31
                           Number of Actors                    16
                           Reply Buffer Capacity              1e5
                           Offline Data Fraction               0.7
                           λ                                  0.75
                           ϵ                                  0.01
                           Agent Discount                      0.9
                           Target Update Period                50
                           ResNet Channels                 [32, 64, 64]
                           ResNet Kernels                    [3, 3, 3]
                           ResNet Strides                    [1, 1, 1]
                           Pool Kernels                      [3, 3, 3]
                           Pool Strides                      [2, 2, 2]
                           Optimizer                         Adam
                           β1                                 0.9
                           β2                                0.999
                           ϵ                                 1e-6
                           Gradient Clip Norm Threshold        10
                           Learning Rate                     1e-4

            Table 5: Source DQN(Q-λ) Algorithm Hyperparameters for Watermaze.


                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P   RL2 H YPERPARAMETERS

                              Hyperparameter            Value
                              RL Algorithm              A3C
                              Learning Rate             3e-4
                              Batch Size                256
                              Unroll Length              20
                              LSTM Hidden Dim.          256
                              LSTM Number of Layers       2
                              Episodes Per Trial         10

                 Table 6: RL2 Hyperparameters used in “Dark” Environments.


                            Hyperparameter              Value
                            RL Algorithm              DQN(Q-λ)
                            Learning Rate               1e-4
                            Batch Size                   96
                            Unroll Length                40
                            LSTM Hidden Dim.            256
                            LSTM Number of Layers         1
                            Episodes Per Trial           30

              Table 7: RL2 Hyperparameters used in the Watermaze Environment.


                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Q       ATTENTION M APS

    0                                                1700


100                                                  1800


2000                   100                  200      1900
                                                        1700                 1800                1900
    0                                                1700


100                                                  1800


2000                   100                  200      1900
                                                        1700                 1800                1900
   0 18: Attention maps for AD from five separate1700
Figure                                                 seeds. White and gray colors correspond to low
and high attention. Red and blue colors indicate that those transitions correspond to an episode restart
and a positive reward token, respectively. The left column plots attention for an AD transformer after
200 time-steps of evaluation (when the context is initially filled). The right column plots attention
after 1900 steps (38 episodes) of evaluation. Each episode has a length of 50 steps. From these
patterns, it is evident that AD attends to tokens across several episodes to predict its next action.

100                                                  1800


2000                   100                  200      1900
                                                        1700                 1800                1900
    0                                                1700


100                                               26
                                                     1800
