Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P RUNING D EEP N EURAL N ETWORKS FROM A S PARSITY
P ERSPECTIVE
 Enmao Diao⇤                          Ganghua Wang⇤                       Jiawei Zhang
 Department of Electrical             School of Statistics                School of Statistics
 and Computer Engineering             University of Minnesota             University of Minnesota
 Duke University                      Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA          Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
 Durham, NC 27705, USA                wang9019@umn.edu                    zhan4362@umn.edu
 enmao.diao@duke.edu

 Yuhong Yang                         Jie Ding                         Vahid Tarokh
 School of Statistics                School of Statistics             Department of Electrical
 University of Minnesota             University of Minnesota          and Computer Engineering
 Minneapolis,                        Minneapolis,                     Duke University
 MN 55455, USA                       MN 55455, USA                    Durham, NC 27705, USA
 yangx374@umn.edu                    dingj@umn.edu                    vahid.tarokh@duke.edu



                                                A BSTRACT
             In recent years, deep network pruning has attracted significant attention in order to
             enable the rapid deployment of AI into small devices with computation and memory
             constraints. Pruning is often achieved by dropping redundant weights, neurons, or
             layers of a deep network while attempting to retain a comparable test performance.
             Many deep pruning algorithms have been proposed with impressive empirical
             success. However, existing approaches lack a quantifiable measure to estimate the
             compressibility of a sub-network during each pruning iteration and thus may under-
             prune or over-prune the model. In this work, we propose PQ Index (PQI) to measure
             the potential compressibility of deep neural networks and use this to develop a
             Sparsity-informed Adaptive Pruning (SAP) algorithm. Our extensive experiments
             corroborate the hypothesis that for a generic pruning procedure, PQI decreases
             first when a large model is being effectively regularized and then increases when
             its compressibility reaches a limit that appears to correspond to the beginning
             of underfitting. Subsequently, PQI decreases again when the model collapse and
             significant deterioration in the performance of the model start to occur. Additionally,
             our experiments demonstrate that the proposed adaptive pruning algorithm with
             proper choice of hyper-parameters is superior to the iterative pruning algorithms
             such as the lottery ticket-based pruning methods, in terms of both compression
             efficiency and robustness. Our code is available here.

1       I NTRODUCTION
Over-parameterized deep neural networks have been applied with enormous success in a variety of
fields, including computer vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016b; Redmon et al., 2016),
natural language processing (Devlin et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2018), audio signal processing (Oord
et al., 2016; Schneider et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020), and distributed learning (Konečnỳ et al., 2016;
Ding et al., 2022; Diao et al., 2022). These deep neural networks have significantly expanded in size.
For example, LeNet-5 (LeCun et al., 1998) (1998; image classification) has 60 thousand parameters
whereas GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) (2020; language modeling) has 175 billion parameters. This
rapid growth in size has necessitated the deployment of a vast amount of computation, storage, and
energy resources. Due to hardware constraints, these enormous model sizes may be a barrier to
deployment in some edge devices such as mobile phones and virtual assistants. This has greatly
increased interest in deep neural network compression/pruning. To this end, various researchers have
developed empirical methods of building much simpler networks with similar performance based
    ⇤
        Equally contributed


                                                       1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Performance                    Performance                     Performance

                      Sparsity                        Sparsity                       Sparsity


                   Regularization                   Compression                       Collapse

Figure 1: An illustration of our hypothesis on the relationship between sparsity and compressibility
of neural networks. The width of connections denotes the magnitude of model parameters.


on pre-trained networks (Han et al., 2015; Frankle & Carbin, 2018). For example, Han et al. (2015)
demonstrated that AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2017) could be compressed to retain only 3% of the
original parameters on the ImageNet dataset without impacting classification accuracy.
An important topic of interest is the determination of limits of network pruning. An overly pruned
model may not have enough expressivity for the underlying task, which may lead to significant
performance deterioration (Ding et al., 2018). Existing methods generally monitor the prediction
performance on a validation dataset and terminate pruning when the performance falls below a
pre-specified threshold. Nevertheless, a quantifiable measure for estimating the compressibility of a
sub-network during each pruning iteration is desired. Such quantification of compressibility can lead
to the discovery of the most parsimonious sub-networks without performance degradation.
In this work, we connect the compressibility and performance of a neural network to its sparsity. In a
highly over-parameterized network, one popular assumption is that the relatively small weights are
considered redundant or non-influential and may be pruned without impacting the performance. Let
us consider the sparsity of a non-negative vector w = [w1 , . . . , wd ], since sparsity is related only to
the magnitudes of entries. Suppose S(w) is a sparsity measure, and a larger value indicates higher
sparsity. Hurley & Rickard (2009) summarize six properties that an ideal sparsity measure should
have, originally proposed in economics (Dalton, 1920; Rickard & Fallon, 2004). They are

   (D1) Robin Hood. For any wi > wj and ↵ 2 (0, (wi wj )/2), we have S([w1 , . . . , wi
        ↵, . . . , wj + ↵, . . . , wd ]) < S(w).
   (D2) Scaling. S(↵w) = S(w) for any ↵ > 0.
   (D3) Rising Tide. S(w + ↵) < S(w) for any ↵ > 0 and wi not all the same.
   (D4) Cloning. S(w) = S([w, w]).
   (P1) Bill Gates. For any i = 1, . . . , d, there exists i > 0 such that for any ↵ > 0 we have
                     S([w1 , . . . , wi +   i + ↵, . . . , wd ]) > S([w1 , . . . , wi +   i , . . . , wd ]).

   (P2) Babies. S([w1 , . . . , wd , 0]) > S(w) for any non-zero w.

Hurley & Rickard (2009) point out that only Gini index satisfies all six criteria among a comprehensive
list of sparsity measures. In this work, we propose a measure of sparsity named PQ Index (PQI). To
the best of our knowledge, PQI is the first measure related to the norm of a vector that satisfies all the
six properties above. Therefore, PQI is an ideal indicator of vector sparsity and is of its own interest.
We suggest using PQI to infer the compressibility of neural networks. Furthermore, we discover
the relationship between the performance and sparsity of iteratively pruned models as illustrated in
Figure 1. Our hypothesis is that for a generic pruning procedure, the sparsity will first decrease when
a large model is being effectively regularized, then increase when its compressibility reaches a limit
that corresponds to the start of underfitting, and finally decrease when the model collapse occurs, i.e.,
the model performance significantly deteriorates.
Our intuition is that the pruning will first remove redundant parameters. As a result, the sparsity
of model parameters will decrease and the performance may be improved due to regularization.
When the model is further compressed, part of the model parameters will become smaller when the


                                                        2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


model converges. Thus, the sparsity will increase and the performance will moderately decrease.
Finally, when the model collapse starts to occur, all attenuated parameters are removed and the
remaining parameters become crucial to maintain the performance. Therefore, the sparsity will
decrease and performance will significantly deteriorate. Our extensive experiments on pruning
algorithms corroborate the hypothesis. Consequently, PQI can infer whether a model is inherently
compressible. Motivated by this discovery, we also propose the Sparsity-informed Adaptive Pruning
(SAP) algorithm, which can compress more efficiently and robustly compared with iterative pruning
algorithms such as the lottery ticket-based pruning methods. Overall, our work presents a new
understanding of the inherent structures of deep neural networks for model compression. Our main
contributions are summarized below.

      1. We propose a new notion of sparsity for vectors named PQ Index (PQI), with a larger value
         indicating higher sparsity. We prove that PQI meets all six properties proposed by (Dalton,
         1920; Rickard & Fallon, 2004), which capture the principles a sparsity measure should
         obey. Among 15 commonly used sparsity measures, the only other measure satisfying
         all properties is Gini Index (Hurley & Rickard, 2009). Thus, norm-based PQI is an ideal
         sparsity/equity measure and may be of independent interest to many areas, e.g., signal
         processing and economics.
      2. We develop a new perspective on the compressibility of neural networks. In particular, we
         measure the sparsity of pruned models by PQI and postulate the above hypothesis on the
         relationship between sparsity and compressibility of neural networks.
      3. Motivated by our proposed PQI and hypothesis, we further develop a Sparsity-informed
         Adaptive Pruning (SAP) algorithm that uses PQI to choose the pruning ratio adaptively. In
         particular, the pruning ratio at each iteration is decided based on a PQI-related inequality. In
         contrast, Gini Index does not have such implications for the pruning ratio.
      4. We conduct extensive experiments to measure the sparsity of pruned models and corroborate
         our hypothesis. Our experimental results also demonstrate that SAP with proper choice
         of hyper-parameters can compress more efficiently and robustly compared with iterative
         pruning algorithms such as the lottery ticket-based pruning methods.

2    R ELATED W ORK
Model compression The goal of model compression is to find a smaller model that has comparable
performance to the original model. A smaller model saves storage and computation resources, boosts
training, and facilitates the deployment of the model to devices with limited capacities, such as
mobile phones and virtual assistants. Therefore, model compression is vital for deploying deep
neural networks with millions or even billions of parameters. Various model compression methods
have been proposed for neural networks. Among them, pruning is one of the most popular and
effective approach (LeCun et al., 1989; Hagiwara, 1993; Han et al., 2015; Hu et al., 2016; Luo et al.,
2017; Frankle & Carbin, 2018; Lee et al., 2018; He et al., 2017). The idea of pruning is the sparsity
assumption that many redundant or non-influential neuron connections exist in an over-parameterized
model. Thus, we can remove those connections (e.g., weights, neurons, or neuron-like structures such
as layers) without sacrificing much test accuracy. Two critical components of pruning algorithms are
a pruning criterion that decides which connection to be pruned and a stop criterion that determines
when to stop pruning and thus prevent underfitting and model collapse. There are many pruning
criteria motivated by different interpretations of redundancy. A widely-used criterion removes the
parameters with the smallest magnitudes, assuming that they are less important (Hagiwara, 1993;
Han et al., 2015). Besides magnitude-based pruning, one may prune the parameters based on their
sensitivity or contribution to the network output (LeCun et al., 1989; Lee et al., 2018; Hu et al., 2016;
Soltani et al., 2021) or restrict different model components to share a large proportion of neural
weights (Diao et al., 2019; 2021). As for the stop criterion, the common choice is validation: to stop
pruning once the test accuracy on a validation dataset falls below a given threshold.
While pruning is a post-processing method that requires a pre-trained model, there are also pre-
processing and in-processing methods based on the sparsity assumption. For example, one can add
explicit sparse constraints on the network, such as forcing the parameters to have a low-rank structure
and sharing weights. Alternatively, one can implicitly force the trained model to be sparse, such
as adding a sparsity penalty (e.g., `1 -norm) to the parameters. In contrast to those sparsity-based
compression methods, which find a sub-network of the original one, researchers have also proposed


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


compressing the model by finding a smaller model with a different architecture. The efforts include
knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) and architecture search (Mushtaq et al., 2021). We refer
the reader to (Hoefler et al., 2021) for a comprehensive survey of model compression.
Theory of model compression In practice, the compressibility of a model depends on the network
architecture and learning task. The pruning usually involves a lot of ad hoc hyper-parameter fine-
tuning. Thus, an understanding of model compressibility is urgently needed. There have been some
recent works to show the existence of or find a sub-network with guaranteed performance. Arora et al.
(2018) show that a model is more compressible if it is more stable to the noisy inputs and provides
a generalization error bound of the pruned model. Yang et al. (2022) propose a backward pruning
algorithm inspired by approximating functions using `q -norm (Wang et al., 2014), and quantify its
generalization error. Baykal et al. (2018); Mussay et al. (2019) utilize the concept of coreset to
prove the existence of a pruned network with similar performance. The main idea is to sample the
parameters based on their importance, and thus selected parameters could preserve the output of the
original network. Ye et al. (2020) propose a greedy selection algorithm to reconstruct a network and
bound the generalization error for two-layer neural networks. Our work develops a new perspective
on the compressibility of neural networks by directly measuring the sparsity of pruned models to
reveal the relationship between the sparsity and compressibility of neural networks.
Sparsity measure Sparsity is a crucial concept in many fundamental fields such as statistics and
signal processing (Tibshirani, 1996; Donoho, 2006; Akçakaya & Tarokh, 2008). Intuitively, sparsity
means that the most energy is concentrated in a few elements. For example, a widely-used assumption
in high-dimensional machine learning is that the model has an underlying sparse representation.
Various sparsity measures have been proposed in the literature from different angles. One kind
of sparsity measure originates from sociology and economics. For example, the well-known Gini
Index (Gini, 1912) can measure the inequality in a population’s wealth or welfare distribution. A
highly wealth-concentrated population forms a sparse vector if the vector consists of the wealth of
each person. In addition, to measure the diversity in a group, entropy-based measures like Shannon
entropy and Gaussian entropy are often used (Jost, 2006). Another kind of sparsity measure has
been studied in mathematics and engineering for a long time. A classic measure is the hard sparsity,
also known as `0 -norm, which is the number of non-zero elements in w. A small hard sparsity
implies that only a few vector elements are active or effective. However, a slight change in the
zero-valued element may cause a significant increase in the hard sparsity, which can be undesirable.
Thus, its relaxations such as `p -norm (0 < p  1) are also widely used. For example, `1 -norm-based
constraints or penalties are used for function approximation (Barron, 1993), model regularization
and variable selection (Tibshirani, 1996; Chen et al., 2001). Our work proposes the first measure of
sparsity related to vector norms that satisfies all the properties shared by the Gini Index (Hurley &
Rickard, 2009) and an adaptive pruning algorithm based on our proposed measure of sparsity.

3     P RUNING WITH PQ I NDEX
3.1   PQ I NDEX
We will prove all the six properties (D1)-(D4) and (P1), (P2), which are mentioned in the introduction,
hold for our proposed PQ Index (PQI).
Definition 1 (PQ Index). For any 0 < p < q, the PQ Index of a non-zero vector w 2 Rd is
                                                         1   1   kwkp
                                     Ip,q (w) = 1       dq   p        ,                            (1)
                                                                 kwkq
                Pd
where kwkp = ( i=1 |wi |p )1/p is the `p -norm of w for any p > 0. For simplicity, we will use I(w)
and drop the dependency on p and q when the context is clear.
                                              1     1
Theorem 1. We have 0  Ip,q (w)  1 d q p , and a larger Ip,q (w) indicates a sparser vector.
Furthermore, Ip,q (w) satisfies all the six properties (D1)-(D4) and (P1), (P2).
Remark 1 (Sanity check). For the densest or most equal situation, we have wi = c for i = 1, . . . , d,
where c is a non-zero constant. It can be verified that Ip,q (w) = 0. In contrast, the sparsest or most
                                                                                                   1 1
unequal case is that wi ’s are all zeros except one of them, and corresponding Ip,q (w) = 1 d q p .
Note that I(w) for an all-zero vector is not defined. From the perspective of the number of important
elements, an all-zero vector is sparse; however, it is dense from the aspect of energy distribution.


                                                    4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Remark 2 (Insights). The form of Ip,q is not a random thought but inherently driven by properties
(D1)-(D4). Why do we need the ratio of two norms? It is essentially decided by the requirement of
(D2) Scaling. If S(w) involves only a single norm, then S(w) is not scale-invariant. However, since
`r -norm is homogeneous for all r > 0, the ratio of two norms is inherently scale-invariant. Why is
                                        1  1
there an additional scaling constant d q p ? This is necessary to satisfy (D4) Cloning. Inspired by
the well-known Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), we found out that the additional scaling constant
is the correct term to help Ip,q be independent of the vector length. It is essentially appealing for
comparing the sparsity of neural networks with different model parameters. Why do we require
p < q? We find it plays a central role in meeting (D1) and (D3). The insight is that kwkp decreases
faster than kwkq when a vector becomes sparser, thus guaranteeing a larger PQ Index.
Theorem 2 (PQI-bound on pruning). Let Mr denote     P the setp of r indices
                                                                         P     of w with the largest
magnitudes, and ⌘r be the smallest value such that i2M / r  |w i |  ⌘ r   i2Mr |wi | . Then, we have
                                                                                     p

                                                                       qp
                                r    d(1 + ⌘r ) q/(q p) [1   I(w)] q p .                             (2)
Remark 3. The PQI-bound is inspired by Yang et al. (2022) that proposed to use kwk1 /kwkq , q 2
(0, 1) as a measure of sparsity. We use similar techniques to derive the bound based on our proposed
PQ Index. It is worth mentioning that kwk1 /kwkq does not satisfy properties (D2), (D4), (P1), and
(P4), which an ideal sparsity measure should have Hurley & Rickard (2009). Consequently, we
cannot use it to compare the sparsity of models of different sizes. The merit of the PQI-bound is that
it applies to iterative pruning of models that involve different numbers of model parameters.

Recall that the pruning is based on the assumption that parameters with small magnitudes are
removable. Therefore, suppose we know I(w) and ⌘r , then we immediately have a lower bound for
the retaining ratio of the pruning from Theorem 2. Thus, we can adaptively choose the pruning ratio
based on I(w) and ⌘r , which inspires our Sparsity-informed Adaptive Pruning (SAP) algorithm in
the following subsection. In practice, ⌘r is unavailable before we decide the pruning ratio. Therefore,
we treat it as a hyper-parameter in our experiments. Since ⌘r is non-increasing with respect to r, a
larger ⌘r means that we assume the model is more compressible and leads to a higher pruning ratio.
Experiments show that it is safe to choose ⌘r = 0.
3.2 S PARSITY- INFORMED A DAPTIVE P RUNING
In this section, we introduce the Sparsity-informed Adaptive Pruning (SAP) algorithm as illustrated
in Algorithm 1. Our algorithm is based on the well-known lottery ticket pruning method (Frankle
& Carbin, 2018). The lottery ticket pruning algorithm proposes to prune and retrain the model
iteratively. Compared with one shot pruning algorithm, which does not retrain the model at each
pruning iteration, the lottery ticket pruning algorithm produces pruned models of better performance
with the same percent of remaining model parameters. However, both methods use a fixed pruning
ratio P at each pruning iteration. As a result, they may under-prune or over-prune the model at
earlier or later pruning iterations, respectively. The under-pruned models with spare compressibility
require more pruning iterations and computation resources to obtain the smallest neural networks
with satisfactory performance. The over-pruned model suffers from underfitting due to insufficient
compressibility to maintain the desired performance. Therefore, we propose SAP to adaptively
determine the number of pruned parameters at each iteration based on the PQI-bound derived in
Formula 2. Furthermore, we introduce two additional hyper-parameters, the scaling factor and the
maximum pruning ratio , to make our algorithm further flexible and applicable.
Next, we walk through our SAP algorithm. Before the pruning starts, we randomly generate model
parameters winit . We will use winit to initialize retained model parameters at each pruning iterations.
The lottery ticket pruning algorithm shows that the performance of retraining the subnetworks from
winit is better than from scratch. Then, we initialize the mask m0 with all ones. Suppose we have
T number of pruning iterations. For each pruning iteration t = 0, 1, 2, . . . T , we first initialize the
model parameters w̃t and compute the number of model parameters dt as follows
                                    w̃t = winit   mt ,   dt = |mt |,                                 (3)
where is the Hadamard product. After training the model parameters w̃t with mt by freezing the
gradient for E epoch, we arrive at trained model parameters wt . Upon this point, our algorithm has
no difference from the classical lottery ticket pruning algorithm. The lottery ticket pruning algorithm
will then prune d · P parameters from mt according to the magnitude of wt and finally create new
mask mt+1 .


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Sparsity-informed Adaptive Pruning (SAP)
Input: model parameters w, mask m, norm 0 < p < q, compression hyper-parameter ⌘r , scaling
         factor , maximum pruning ratio , number of epochs E, and number of pruning iterations T .
Randomly generate model parameters winit
 Initialize mask m0 with all ones
 for each pruning iteration t = 0, 1, 2, . . . T do
    Initialize model parameters w̃t = winit mt
      Compute the number of model parameters dt = |mt |
     Train the model parameters w̃t with mt for E epochs and arrive at wt
                                            1   1
                                                    kw k
      Compute PQ Index I(wt ) = 1 dtq p kwtt kpq
      Compute the lower bound of the number of retained model parameters
                                            qp
      rt = dt (1 + ⌘r ) q/(q p) [1 I(wt )] q p
      Compute the number of pruned model parameters
      ct = bdt · min( (1 drtt ), )c
      Prune ct model parameters with the smallest magnitude based on wt and mt
      Create new mask mt+1
end
Output: The pruned model parameters wT and mask mT .


After arriving at wt , our proposed SAP will compute the PQ Index, denoted by I(wt ), and the lower
bound of the number of retrained model parameters, denoted by rt , as follows
                             1   1
                                     kwt kp                                                qp
              I(wt ) = 1   dtq   p
                                            ,       rt = dt (1 + ⌘r ) q/(q p) [1   I(wt )] q p .    (4)
                                     kwt kq
Then, we compute the number of pruned model parameters ct = bdt · min( (1 drtt ), )c. Here, we
introduce to accelerate or decelerate the pruning at initial pruning iterations. Specifically, > 1
or < 1 encourages the pruning ratio to be larger or smaller than the pruning ratio derived from the
PQI-bound, respectively. As the retraining of pruned models is time-consuming, it is appealing to
efficiently obtain the smallest pruned model with satisfactory performance for a small number of
pruning iterations. In addition, we introduce the maximum pruning ratio to avoid excessive pruning
because we will compress more than the PQI-bound if > 1 and may completely prune all model
parameters. If we set = 1, can be safely omitted. In our experiments, we set = 0.9 only to
provide minimum protection from excessive pruning at each pruning iteration. Finally, we prune
ct model parameters with the smallest magnitude based on wt and mt , and finally create new mask
mt+1 for the next pruning iteration.

4     E XPERIMENTAL S TUDIES
4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP
We conduct experiments with FashionMNIST (Xiao et al., 2017), CIFAR10, CIFAR100 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009), and TinyImageNet (Le & Yang, 2015) datasets. Our backbone models are Linear,
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), ResNet18, ResNet50 (He
et al., 2016a), and Wide ResNet28x8 (WResNet28x8) (Zagoruyko & Komodakis, 2016). We run
experiments for T = 30 pruning iterations with Linear, MLP, and CNN, and T = 15 pruning
iterations with ResNet18. We compare the proposed SAP with two baselines, including ‘One Shot’
and ‘Lottery Ticket’ (Frankle & Carbin, 2018) pruning algorithms. The difference between ‘One
Shot’ and ‘Lottery Ticket’ pruning algorithms is that ‘One Shot’ prunes d · P model parameters at
each pruning iteration from w0 instead of wt . We have P = 0.2 throughout our experiments. We
compare the proposed PQ Index (p = 0.5, q = 1.0) with the well-known Gini Index (Gini, 1912) to
validate its effectiveness in evaluating sparsity. Furthermore, we perform pruning on various pruning
scopes, including ‘Neuron-wise Pruning,’ ‘Layer-wise Pruning,’ and ‘Global Pruning.’ In particular,
‘Global Pruning’ gather all model parameters as a vector for pruning, while ‘Neuron-wise Pruning’
and ‘Layer-wise Pruning’ prune each neuron and layer of model parameters separately. The number
of neurons at each layer is equal to the output size of that layer. For example, ‘One Shot’ and ‘Lottery
Ticket methods with ‘Neuron-wise Pruning’ prune di · P model parameters of each neuron, where di
refers to the size of each neuron. Similarly, SAP computes the PQ Index and the number of pruned


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              (a) Retrained models


                                               (b) Pruned models
Figure 2: Results of (a) retrained and (b) pruned models at each pruning iteration for ‘Global Pruning’
with FashionMNIST and MLP, where (a) is obtained from the models after retraining and (b) is
directly from those after pruning.


                                              (a) Retrained models


                                               (b) Pruned models
Figure 3: Results of (a) retrained and (b) pruned models at each pruning iteration for ‘Global Pruning’
with CIFAR10 and ResNet18.


model parameters for neuron i. Details of the model architecture and learning hyper-parameters are
included in the Appendix. We conducted four random experiments with different seeds, and the
standard deviation is shown in the error bar of all figures. Further experimental results can be found
in the Appendix.

4.2   E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS
Retrained models We demonstrate the results of retrained models (wt mt ) at each pruning iteration
in Figure 2(a) and 3(a). In particular, we illustrate the performance, percent of remaining weights,
PQ Index, and Gini Index at each pruning iteration. In these experiments, ⌘r and are set to 0 and
1 to prevent interference. The ‘Lottery Ticket’ method outperforms ‘One Shot’ as expected. SAP
(p = 1.0, q = 2.0) compresses more aggressively than SAP (p = 0.5, q = 1.0). Recall that SAP
adaptively adjusts the pruning ratio based on the sparsity of models, while ‘One Shot’ and ‘Lottery
Ticket’ have a fixed pruning ratio at each pruning iteration. In Figure 2(a), SAP (p = 1.0, q = 2.0) at
around T = 10 achieves similar performance as ‘Lottery Ticket’ at around T = 25. Furthermore,
SAP (p = 0.5, q = 1.0) and ‘Lottery Ticket’ have similar pruning ratio before T = 10, but SAP
(p = 0.5, q = 1.0) adaptively lowers the pruning ratio and thus prevents the performance from
deteriorating like ‘Lottery Ticket’ does after T = 25. In Figure 3(a), we observe similar fast pruning
phenomenon of SAP (p = 1.0, q = 2.0). Meanwhile, SAP (p = 0.5, q = 1.0) performs similar to
‘Lottery Ticket’ but prunes more than ‘Lottery Ticket’ does. Consequently, by carefully choosing p
and q, SAP can provide more efficient and robust pruning. As for the sparsity of retrained models,
the result of the PQ Index is aligned with the Gini Index, which experimentally demonstrates that
the PQ Index can effectively measure the sparsity of model parameters. Furthermore, the dynamics
of the sparsity also corroborates our hypothesis, as shown by ‘One Shot’ in Figure 2(a) and SAP


                                                    7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           (a) Compression Trade-off


                                     (b) Layer-wise Percent of Remaining Weights


                                             (c) Layer-wise PQ Index
Figure 4: Results of various pruning scopes regarding (a) compression trade-off, (b) layer-wise percent
of remaining weights, and (c) layer-wise PQ Index for CIFAR10 and CNN. (b, c) are performed with
SAP (p = 0.5, q = 1.0).


(p = 1.0, q = 2.0) in Figure 3(a). The results show that an ideal pruning procedure should avoid a
rapid increase in sparsity.
Pruned models We demonstrate the results of pruned models at each pruning iteration in Figure 2(b)
and 3(b). In particular, we illustrate the performance, performance difference, PQ Index, and PQ
Index difference at each pruning iteration. The performance and PQ Index are computed directly
from the pruned models without retraining. The performance and PQ Index difference is between the
retrained (w0 mt for ‘One Shot’ and wt mt for ‘Lottery Ticket’ and SAP) and pruned models
(w0 mt+1 for ‘One Shot’ and wt mt+1 for ‘Lottery Ticket’ and SAP). The results of performance
difference show that the performance of pruned models without retraining from SAP can perform
close to that of retrained models. Furthermore, the sparsity of pruned models shows that iterative
pruning generally decreases the sparsity of pruned models. Meanwhile, the sparsity difference of
pruned models provides a sanity check by showing that pruning at each pruning iteration decreases
the sparsity of retrained models.
Pruning scopes We demonstrate various pruning scopes regarding compression trade-off, layer-wise
percent of remaining weights, and layer-wise PQ Index in Figure 4. The results of the compression
trade-off show that SAP with ‘Global Pruning’ may perform worse than ‘One Shot’ and ‘Lottery
Ticket’ when the percent of remaining weights is small. As illustrated in the ‘Global Pruning’ of
Figure 4(b), the first layer has not been pruned enough. It is because SAP with ‘Global Pruning’
measures the sparsity of all model parameters in a vector, and the magnitude of the parameters of
the first layer and other layers may not be at the same scale. As a result, the parameters of the first
layer will not be pruned until late pruning iterations. However, SAP with ‘Neuron-wise Pruning’
and ‘Layer-wise Pruning’ perform better than ‘One Shot’ and ‘Lottery Ticket.’ SAP can adaptively
adjust the pruning ratio of each neuron and layer, but ‘One Shot’ and ‘Lottery Ticket’ may over-prune
specific neurons and layers because they adopt a fixed pruning ratio. Interestingly, the parameters of
the first layer are pruned more aggressively by ‘Neuron-wise Pruning’ than ‘Global Pruning’ in the


                                                    8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 (a) 𝒒 = 𝟏. 𝟎


                                                 (b) 𝒑 = 𝟏. 𝟎
         Figure 5: Ablation studies of p and q for global pruning with CIFAR10 and CNN.


                                                 (a) 𝜸 = 𝟏. 𝟎


                                                  (b) 𝜼𝒓 = 𝟎. 𝟎
        Figure 6: Ablation studies of ⌘r and    for global pruning with CIFAR10 and CNN.


early pruning iterations. However, they are not pruned by ‘Neuron-wise Pruning’ in the late pruning
iterations, while ‘Global Pruning’ still prunes them aggressively. It aligns with the intuition that
the initial layers of CNN are more important to maintain the performance, e.g., Gale et al. (2019)
observed that the first layer was often more important to model quality and pruned less than other
layers. Furthermore, the PQ Index of ‘Neuron-wise Pruning’ is also more stable than the other two
pruning scopes, which indicates that ‘Neuron-wise Pruning’ is more appropriate for SAP, as the PQ
Index is computed more precisely.
Ablation studies We demonstrate ablation studies of p and q in Figure 5. In Figure 5(a), we fix
q = 1.0 and study the effect of p. The results show that SAP prunes more aggressively when q = 1.0
and p is close to q. In Figure 5(b), we fix p = 1.0 and study the effect of q. The results show that SAP
prunes more aggressively when p = 1.0 and q is distant from p. We demonstrate ablation studies
of ⌘r and in Figure 6. In Figure 6(a), we fix = 1.0 and study the effect of ⌘r . The results show
that SAP prunes more aggressively when ⌘r > 0. In Figure 6(b), we fix ⌘r = 0.0 and study the
effect of . The results show that SAP prunes more aggressively when > 1. Interestingly, the
performance of our results roughly follows a logistic decay model due to the adaptive pruning ratio,
and the inflection point corresponds to the peak of the sparsity measure. Moreover, the dynamics of
the sparsity measure of SAP with various ablation studies also corroborate our hypothesis.
5    C ONCLUSION
We proposed a new notion of sparsity for vectors named PQ Index (PQI), which follows the principles
a sparsity measure should obey. We develop a new perspective on the compressibility of neural
networks by measuring the sparsity of pruned models. We postulate a hypothesis on the relationship
between the sparsity and compressibility of neural networks. Motivated by our proposed PQI and
hypothesis, we further develop a Sparsity-informed Adaptive Pruning (SAP) algorithm that uses PQI
to choose the pruning ratio adaptively. Our experimental results demonstrate that SAP can compress
more efficiently and robustly than state-of-the-art algorithms.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under grant number
N00014-21-1-2590.

R EFERENCES
Mehmet Akçakaya and Vahid Tarokh. A frame construction and a universal distortion bound for
 sparse representations. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 56(6):2443–2450, 2008.
Sanjeev Arora, Rong Ge, Behnam Neyshabur, and Yi Zhang. Stronger generalization bounds for
  deep nets via a compression approach. In Proc. ICML, pp. 254–263, 2018.
Andrew R Barron. Universal approximation bounds for superpositions of a sigmoidal function. IEEE
 Transactions on Information Theory, 39(3):930–945, 1993.
Cenk Baykal, Lucas Liebenwein, Igor Gilitschenski, Dan Feldman, and Daniela Rus. Data-dependent
  coresets for compressing neural networks with applications to generalization bounds. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1804.05345, 2018.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
  Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
  few-shot learners. Proc. NeurIPS, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
Scott Shaobing Chen, David L Donoho, and Michael A Saunders. Atomic decomposition by basis
  pursuit. SIAM review, 43(1):129–159, 2001.
Hugh Dalton. The measurement of the inequality of incomes. The Economic Journal, 30(119):
  348–361, 1920.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.
Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. Restricted recurrent neural networks. In IEEE International
  Conference on Big Data, pp. 56–63. IEEE, 2019.
Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. HeteroFL: Computation and communication efficient
  federated learning for heterogeneous clients. International Conference on Learning Representations
  (ICLR), 2021.
Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. GAL: Gradient assisted learning for decentralized multi-
  organization collaborations. Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
  2022.
Jie Ding, Vahid Tarokh, and Yuhong Yang. Model selection techniques: An overview. IEEE Signal
   Processing Magazine, 35(6):16–34, 2018.
Jie Ding, Eric Tramel, Anit Kumar Sahu, Shuang Wu, Salman Avestimehr, and Tao Zhang. Federated
   learning challenges and opportunities: An outlook. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
   Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 8752–8756. IEEE, 2022.
David L Donoho. Compressed sensing. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 52(4):1289–1306,
  2006.
Utku Evci, Trevor Gale, Jacob Menick, Pablo Samuel Castro, and Erich Elsen. Rigging the lottery:
  Making all tickets winners. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2943–2952.
  PMLR, 2020.
Jonathan Frankle and Michael Carbin. The lottery ticket hypothesis: Finding sparse, trainable neural
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.03635, 2018.
Trevor Gale, Erich Elsen, and Sara Hooker. The state of sparsity in deep neural networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1902.09574, 2019.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Corrado Gini. Variabilità e mutabilità: contributo allo studio delle distribuzioni e delle relazioni
  statistiche.[Fasc. I.]. Tipogr. di P. Cuppini, 1912.
Masafumi Hagiwara. Removal of hidden units and weights for back propagation networks. In Proc.
 IJCNN, volume 1, pp. 351–354, 1993.
Song Han, Huizi Mao, and William Dally. Deep compression: Compressing deep neural networks
  with pruning, trained quantization and huffman coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.00149, 2015.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016a.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Identity mappings in deep residual
  networks. In Proc. ECCV, pp. 630–645. Springer, 2016b.
Yihui He, Xiangyu Zhang, and Jian Sun. Channel pruning for accelerating very deep neural networks.
  In Proc. ICCV, pp. 1389–1397, 2017.
Geoffrey Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeff Dean. Distilling the knowledge in a neural network. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1503.02531, 2015.
Torsten Hoefler, Dan Alistarh, Tal Ben-Nun, Nikoli Dryden, and Alexandra Peste. Sparsity in deep
  learning: Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training in neural networks. J. Mach.
  Learn. Res., 22(241):1–124, 2021.
Hengyuan Hu, Rui Peng, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang. Network trimming: A data-driven
  neuron pruning approach towards efficient deep architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.03250,
  2016.
Niall Hurley and Scott Rickard. Comparing measures of sparsity. IEEE Transactions on Information
  Theory, 55(10):4723–4741, 2009.
Lou Jost. Entropy and diversity. Oikos, 113(2):363–375, 2006.
Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMahan, Felix X Yu, Peter Richtárik, Ananda Theertha Suresh, and
  Dave Bacon. Federated learning: Strategies for improving communication efficiency. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1610.05492, 2016.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. Proc. NeurIPS, 25, 2012.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep convolu-
  tional neural networks. Communications of the ACM, 60(6):84–90, 2017.
Ya Le and Xuan Yang. Tiny imagenet visual recognition challenge. CS 231N, 7(7):3, 2015.
Yann LeCun, John Denker, and Sara Solla. Optimal brain damage. Proc. NeurIPS, 2, 1989.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. Proc. IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Namhoon Lee, Thalaiyasingam Ajanthan, and Philip HS Torr. Snip: Single-shot network pruning
  based on connection sensitivity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.02340, 2018.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1608.03983, 2016.
Jian-Hao Luo, Jianxin Wu, and Weiyao Lin. Thinet: A filter level pruning method for deep neural
   network compression. In Proc. ICCV, pp. 5058–5066, 2017.
Erum Mushtaq, Chaoyang He, Jie Ding, and Salman Avestimehr. Spider: Searching personalized
  neural architecture for federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.13939, 2021.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ben Mussay, Margarita Osadchy, Vladimir Braverman, Samson Zhou, and Dan Feldman. Data-
  independent neural pruning via coresets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.04018, 2019.
Aaron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves,
  Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw
  audio. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.03499, 2016.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. You only look once: Unified,
  real-time object detection. In Proc. CVPR, pp. 779–788, 2016.
Alex Renda, Jonathan Frankle, and Michael Carbin. Comparing rewinding and fine-tuning in neural
  network pruning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02389, 2020.
Scott Rickard and Maurice Fallon. The gini index of speech. In Proceedings of the 38th Conference
  on Information Science and Systems (CISS’04), 2004.
Steffen Schneider, Alexei Baevski, Ronan Collobert, and Michael Auli. wav2vec: Unsupervised
  pre-training for speech recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05862, 2019.
Mohammadreza Soltani, Suya Wu, Jie Ding, Robert Ravier, and Vahid Tarokh. On the information of
 feature maps and pruning of deep neural networks. In Proc. ICPR, pp. 6988–6995, 2021.
Robert Tibshirani. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J. Royal Stat. Soc. B, 58(1):
  267–288, 1996.
Jianyou Wang, Michael Xue, Ryan Culhane, Enmao Diao, Jie Ding, and Vahid Tarokh. Speech
   emotion recognition with dual-sequence lstm architecture. In IEEE International Conference on
   Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. 6474–6478. IEEE, 2020.
Zhan Wang, Sandra Paterlini, Fuchang Gao, and Yuhong Yang. Adaptive minimax regression
  estimation over sparse lq -hulls. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 15(1):1675–1711, 2014.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmarking
  machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Wenjing Yang, Ganghua Wang, Jie Ding, and Yuhong Yang. A theoretical understanding of neural
 network compression from sparse linear approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05604, 2022.
Mao Ye, Chengyue Gong, Lizhen Nie, Denny Zhou, Adam Klivans, and Qiang Liu. Good subnetworks
 provably exist: Pruning via greedy forward selection. In Proc. ICML, pp. 10820–10830, 2020.
Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1605.07146,
  2016.


                                               12
