Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


P RE - TRAIN G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS FOR
B RAIN N ETWORK A NALYSIS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Human brains, controlling behaviors and cognition, are at the center of complex
         neurobiological systems. Recent studies in neuroscience and neuroimaging anal-
         ysis have reached a consensus that interactions among brain regions of interest
         (ROIs) are driving factors for neural development and disorders. Graph neural
         networks (GNNs) as a powerful tool for analyzing graph-structured data are nat-
         urally applied to the analysis of brain networks. However, training of deep learn-
         ing models including GNNs often requires a significant amount of labeled data.
         Due to the complicated data acquisition process and restrictions on data sharing,
         brain network datasets are still small compared to other types of graphs (e.g., so-
         cial networks, molecules, proteins). Moreover, real clinical tasks (e.g., mental
         disorder analysis) are often conducted on local datasets with even smaller scales
         and larger noises. To this end, we propose to leverage pre-training to capture
         the intrinsic brain network structures regardless of specific clinical outcomes, for
         obtaining GNN models that are easily adaptable to downstream tasks. Specifi-
         cally, (1) we design brain-network-oriented unsupervised pre-training techniques
         to utilize large-scale brain imaging studies without highly relevant task labels; (2)
         we develop a data-driven parcellation atlas mapping pipeline to facilitate effec-
         tive knowledge transfer across studies with different ROI systems. The proposed
         framework is validated with various GNN models, with extensive empirical results
         demonstrating consistent improvement in performance as well as robustness.


1   I NTRODUCTION
In recent years, the analysis of brain networks has attracted considerable interest in neuroscience
studies. Brain networks are essentially graphs, where anatomical regions of interest (ROIs) given a
parcellation atlas are formed into nodes, and the connectivities among ROIs are formed into edges.
Based on brain networks constructed from different modalities such as Diffusion Tensor Imaging
(DTI) and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), effective graph analysis plays a piv-
otal role in understanding the biological structures and functions of complex neural systems, which
can be helpful in the early diagnosis of neurological disorders and facilitate neuroscience research
Martensson et al. (2018); Yahata et al. (2016); Lindquist (2008); Smith (2012).
Deep learning has replenished the fields of computer science and beyond. Among various modern
deep learning models, the emerging graph neural networks (GNNs) have demonstrated superior per-
formance and even plausible interpretability on a variety of network datasets, including social net-
works, recommender systems, knowledge graphs, protein and gene networks, molecules and so forth
Kipf & Welling (2017); Hamilton et al. (2017); Schlichtkrull et al. (2018); Vashishth et al. (2020);
Xu et al. (2019); Ying et al. (2018); He et al. (2020b); Zhang et al. (2020); Liu et al. (2022); Xiong
et al. (2020), due to its powerful representations and efficient computations of complex graph struc-
tures towards specific downstream tasks. Such achievements on other types of networked data pro-
pel studies on GNNs for brain networks, especially models for graph-level classification/regression
Ying et al. (2018); Xu et al. (2019); Errica et al. (2020) and important vertex/edge identification Ying
et al. (2019); Luo et al. (2020); Vu & Thai (2020), towards tasks such as connectome-based disease
prediction and multi-level neural pattern discovery. However, the training of powerful deep learning
models including GNNs often requires significant amounts of labeled data Hu et al. (2020a); You
et al. (2020); Zhu et al. (2021a). For brain network analysis, there are limited big imaging datasets
from a few large-scale national neuroimaging studies such as the ABCD Casey et al. (2018), ADNI


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hinrichs et al. (2009), and PPMI Aleksovski et al. (2018), but such datasets are still rather small
compared with graph datasets in other domains (e.g., datasets with 41K to 452K graphs on OGB
Hu et al. (2020b) and datasets with thousands to millions of graphs on NetRepo Rossi & Ahmed
(2016)).
One solution toward data scarcity is transfer learning which transfers models trained on the large-
scale brain network datasets onto small-scale local studies while retaining favorable performance.
However, one limitation of transfer learning is its reliance on the availability of similar tasks as
supervision during training in the source dataset. In reality, similar tasks in the smaller local studies
may not always be available in the large-scale public studies. Pre-training has shown its effectiveness
in the fields of computer vision He et al. (2020a); Chen et al. (2020b), natural language processing
Devlin et al. (2019b); Radford et al. (2018), as well as graph mining Sun et al. (2022). We explore
GNN pre-training on brain networks without supervision and study its effectiveness in the prediction
of specific clinical outcomes. However, unique challenges impede the direct application of existing
GNN pre-training paradigms to brain networks. For example, brain networks within one study
usually share the same node system, which is not properly exploited, whereas different studies often
use different node systems, which hinders the transferability of pre-trained models.
To fully unleash the power of GNNs for brain network data by collaborating across datasets, we
propose to develop an unsupervised multi-dataset GNN pre-training framework for brain networks.
Specifically, we adapt the popular data-efficient framework of MAML with carefully designed two-
level contrastive learning that works in concert with the functional neural system modules in brain
networks. In addition, to address the problem of dataset misalignment, we propose a novel data-
driven atlas mapping technique based on an auto-encoder that transforms the original features in
multiple datasets into low-dimensional representations in a uniform embedding space. The trans-
formed features are aligned via variance-based projection with locality-preserving, module-aware,
and sparsity-oriented regularizations.
In summary, our contributions are three-folded:
• We identify the intrinsic data-scarcity issue in brain network learning and formulate our problem
  into an unsupervised pre-training objective.
• We propose a novel brain-network-oriented two-level contrastive sampling strategy for multi-
  dataset GNN pre-training (Section 3.2). In addition, we implement a data-driven brain atlas map-
  ping strategy with customized regularizations and variance-based sorting to facilitate cross-dataset
  model sharing (Section 3.3).
• Extensive experiments are conducted to compare our proposed framework with various baselines
  (Section 4.1), and we further the analysis through in-depth studies on the contributions of each
  constituent component of our framework (Sections 4.2, 4.3, 4.4).

2   R ELATED W ORK

Unsupervised Graph Representation Learning. Most graph representation learning framework
often leverages specific label knowledge as ground truth references in the objective function. Unfor-
tunately, brain connectome data often lacks sufficient expert annotation making most supervised op-
timizations underperform. Therefore, we adopt unsupervised learning techniques for GNN training
on brain networks. Motivated by context-based token embedding techniques such as Skip-Gram and
Continuous Bag-of-Words (CBOW) Mikolov et al. (2013), Node2vec Grover & Leskovec (2016)
and DeepWalk Perozzi et al. (2014) propose to learn node representation by leveraging similarity
w.r.t its random-walk induced neighbors. However, this framework is transductive and thus cannot
be properly pre-trained and adapted to a new dataset. VGAE Kipf & Welling (2016) proposes to
learn representations capable of reconstructing the graph connectivity. However, this design may
still adapt poorly to tasks other than link prediction. Recently, the advancement in visual represen-
tation learning Chen et al. (2020a); He et al. (2020a) has inspired contrastive learning on graphs.
For instance, GBT Bielak et al. (2022) designs a Barlow Twins Zbontar et al. (2021) loss function
based on empirical cross-correlation of node embeddings learned from a pair of augmented graph
views Zhao et al. (2021). Similarly, GraphCL You et al. (2020) contrasts among graph represen-
tations learned from different graphs. Generally, graph contrastive learning captures robust latent
representations on well-attributed graphs with a sufficient number of graph samples. However, its
accountability may be undermined in sample-scarce and attribute-lacking brain networks.


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Graph Neural Networks Pre-training. Pre-training of deep neural networks has proven immense
success in computer vision Cao et al. (2020); Grill et al. (2020), natural language processing Devlin
et al. (2019a); Radford et al. (2018), and multi-modality (e.g. text-image pair) learning Radford
et al. (2021); Li et al. (2022); Yao et al. (2022); Wang et al. (2022). Specifically, the pre-training
pipeline is formulated by defining pretext tasks such as masked token prediction in NLP or image
recovery from Gaussian blurring in CV. Following a similar intuition, GPT-GNN Hu et al. (2020c)
proposes graph-oriented pretext tasks, for instance, masked attribute and edge prediction. L2P-
GNN Lu et al. (2021) introduces dual-adaptation by simultaneously optimizing the encoder on a
node-level link prediction objective and a graph-level self-supervision task similar to DGI Velickovic
et al. (2019). Interestingly, PHD Li et al. (2021a) leverages half-graph representations and optimizes
on a connected component prediction objective. Others, such as GMPT Hou et al. (2022) devises
inter-graph message passing to obtain contextual node embedding and optimizes concurrently under
supervision and self-supervision. Overall, most GNN pre-training strategies emphasize the effective
formulation of pretext tasks and data augmentation. However, existing techniques cannot be directly
localized to brain networks because they do not consider the special properties of brain connectome
data.

3     U NSUPERVISED B RAIN N ETWORK P RE - TRAINING

Problem Definition. Formally, given a collection of brain network datasets S = {D1 , D2 , · · · Ds },
each Di = {Gi,j }N
                 j=1 is composed of Ni subjects of weighted graphs Gi,j . Specifically, each graph
                   i

                                                M i,j
Gi,j is described by a node set Vi,j = {vm }m=1       , an edge set Ei,j = Vi,j × Vi,j , and a weighted
adjacency Ai,j ∈ RMi,j ×Mi,j . We define a θ parameterized GNN f (·) that learns a mapping relation
fθ (Gi,j ) = zi,j where zi,j denotes the learned representation(s). The goal of our framework focuses
on pre-training f (·) on a subset Ssource of S via self-supervision, to obtain an initialization θ0 that
can efficiently converge toward a target optimal θ∗ on a dataset Dtarget ∈ S.

3.1   M ULTI - DATASET GNN P RE - TRAINING

Model pre-training aims at finding proper initialization that can be efficiently adapted toward down-
stream evaluations. Specifically, in our framework, the model is first jointly pre-trained on multiple
brain network datasets under self-supervision, and later applied to a target dataset with a supervised
objective. Importantly, our pipeline differs from traditional transfer learning since it requires mea-
surable similarity between the source and target data as well as their learning objectives, whereas
transferable task formulations are often missing for brain network analysis.
To enable faster convergence, our multi-dataset pre-training adapts the popular data-efficient train-
ing techniques presented in MAML Finn et al. (2017). Specifically, at each training iteration, we
partition each input dataset into an inner-loop support set and an outer-loop query set. The model is
first trained on the support set without explicitly updating the parameters. Instead, we temporarily
store the updates as fast weights Ba et al. (2016), which we later evaluate on the query set to compute
the actual gradients. In other words, the training makes use of approximating higher-order deriva-
tives Tan & Lim (2019) at each step to achieve a quicker descent along the optimization trajectory.
In our scenario, the joint optimization sums over the loss on each brain network dataset, that is, for
n number of datasets along with their respective temporary fast weights θ′ and   Pquery   partition, the
                                                                                    n
step-wise update of the model parameter at time t states as θt+1 = θt − α∇θ i=1 Lqueryi fθ′ t (·).
                                                                                                  i



3.2   B RAIN N ETWORK O RIENTED T WO -L EVEL C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING

Considering the high cost of acquiring informative task labels for brain networks, our pre-training
pipeline resorts to a label-free learning strategy, in particular, contrastive learning (CL). Generically,
given an anchor point of investigation X from a data distribution H, CL seeks to maximize the
mutual information (MI) I(· ; ·) against its positive samples X + and minimize MI against its negative
samples X − . Formally, we express the cost function as below:
                                                                                    
                                   1       X
                                                      −I(X; X + ) + I(X; X − )  .

                     Jcon = E                                                                        (1)
                                  |H|      −   −
                                     X,X ,X ∼H



                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: Overview of our proposed framework. We first project the source data features into a
fixed dimensional representation through atlas transformation followed by variance-based feature
alignment. We then pre-train a GNN encoder on multiple datasets under self-supervision via novel
two-level contrastive learning. Finally, learned parameters are fine-tuned on a target task.

Applying this concept toward graph-level CL, given an anchor node representation zα and an arbi-
trary set S containing a collection of node representations sampled from the training batch. Based
on the Jensen-Shannon divergence, the MI between zα and the representations in S is elaborated as:
                                                                   T
                                                                                zsT zα

                     X                     1 X                      zα zs
        I (zα ; S) =      JSD(zα ; zs ) =           log 1 + exp             +              ,   (2)
                                          2|S|                     ∥zαT zs ∥ ∥zsT zα ∥
                    zs ∈ S                    zs ∈ S

 The end goal of our framework focuses on localizing effective GNN CL learning Zhu et al. (2020;
2021b) for brain networks. To this end, suppose a dataset D and an anchor node i from graph
Gp ∈ D with the learned representation zi,p , we propose to categorize the possible sample selections
into three fundamental types (a gentle visualization is shown in Figure 2):
• S1 : {zj,p : j ∈ Nk (i, p)}, which refers to the set of node representations within the anchor’s
  k-hop neighborhood in graph Gp .
• S2 : {zj,p : j ∈/ Nk (i, p)}, which refers to the set of remaining node representations in graph Gp
  that are not in the anchor’s k-hop neighborhood.
• S3 : {zj,q : Gq ∈ D, j ∈ Gq , q ̸= p}, which refers to the set of node representations in all other
  graphs in the dataset D.
Notice that our framework leverages the k-hop substructure of the anchor node to further differ-
entiate S1 and S2 for contrastive optimization. This design is motivated by two perspectives: (1)
Regarding GNN learning. Since the node representation is learned from information aggregation
of its k-hop neighborhood, maximizing the MI of an anchor to its k-hop neighbors naturally en-
courages lossless message passing of GNN convolutions. (2) Regarding the uniqueness of brain
networks. Brain networks can be anatomically segmented into smaller-scaled neural system mod-
ules Cui et al. (2022b), thus capturing subgraph-level knowledge can provide useful signals for
brain-related analysis.
On top of these three fundamental types of samples, we further introduce an additional type by
leveraging the property of brain networks that ROI identities and orders are fixed across samples.
Taking this advantage, we can further promote GNN to extract shared substructure knowledge by
evaluating the MI of an anchor against its presence in other graphs. Given an anchor representation
zi,p of node i from graph Gp ∈ D, the novel inter-graph sample type is defined as:
• S4 : {zj,q : j ∈ Nk (i, q) ∩ Nk (i, p), Gq ∈ D, q ̸= p}, which refers to the set of node represen-
  tations within the k-hop neighborhood of node i in all other graphs in D. Conceptually, S4 is a
  special subset of S3 .
Notice that for an anchor node i, its k-hop neighborhood structures might not be identical among
different graphs. Thus, we only consider shared neighborhoods for multi-graph MI evaluation.
To encourage the learning of unique neighborhood knowledge in a single brain network instance,
and shared substructure knowledge across the entire dataset, we configure S1 and S4 as positive
samples while S2 and the set S3 − S4 as negative samples, as illustrated in Figure 3.


                                                 4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Visual example of the sample types where Xi,p is               Figure 3: Sampling configu-
the anchor and S1 /S4 are sampled as 1-hop neighbors.                    rations of our framework.
In addition, our sampling categorization can also help un- Table 1: Sampling configurations
derstand the objective formulations in various state-of-the- of existing graph CL methods.
art graph CL frameworks Velickovic et al. (2019); Qiu et al.
(2020); Xia et al. (2022); Sun et al. (2019); Zhu et al. (2021a).        S1 S2 S3 S4
We hereby summarize our findings in Table 1. Specifically,        DGI    +     +   /     /
“+” denotes positive sampling; “-” denotes negative sampling;
and “/” means that the sample type is not considered. Observe     InfoG +      +   –     /
that since DGI and InfoGraph leverage graph representation        GCC    +     –   –     /
pooled from node representations as a special sample, it is       EGI    +     –   –     /
essentially equivalent to jointly considering S1 and S2 with-
out explicit differentiation. On the other hand, GCC and EGI,     Ours   +     –   –     +
which are more intuitively connected to our framework, lever-
age neighborhood MI maximization on a single graph, but fail to extend this consideration to a
multi-graph setting like ours.

3.3     DATA - DRIVEN B RAIN ATLAS M APPING

Motivation. When a pre-trained model is fine-tuned on a new data domain, misalignment between
source and target signals may negatively affect downstream adaptation. This problem is especially
concerning in brain networks where datasets are built from various brain atlas templates each map-
ping to a unique system of ROIs. For example, the HIV dataset is parcellated from the AAL90
template, resulting in 90 defined ROIs; whereas the PPMI dataset adopts the Desikan-Killiany84
template, resulting in 84 defined ROIs. Thus, brain networks in the two datasets will have differ-
ent numbers and semantics of nodes. Although GNNs can naturally handle graphs without fixed
numbers and orders of nodes, when we construct the most informative ROI features as the brain
connection profiles Cui et al. (2022a), the feature dimensions and their meanings will be different.
Although manual conversion can be done to translate among various templates, an accurate one-
to-one mapping is impossible, and even obtaining a coarse mapping still needs tremendous expert
effort. To this end, to facilitate an effective target adaptation, we propose a data-driven atlas mapping
solution that transforms the original node features into lower-dimensional embedding spaces that not
only preserves original connectivity information but also achieves cross-dataset feature alignment.

3.3.1    AUTOENCODER WITH B RAIN N ETWORK O RIENTED R EGULARIZERS
To address information preservation, we adopt a one-layer linear autoencoder (AE) as our base
structure. Specifically, AE features a linear projection encoder W and a transposed decoder WT .
The general objective is to learn a low-dimensional projection that can easily reconstruct to its
original presentation. Formally, the loss function is defined as minimizing the reconstruction Lrec =
(1/n)∥X − XWWT ∥22 for an input X ∈ Rn×d and a projection W ∈ Rd×m Hinton & Zemel
(1993). To achieve a more informative feature compression besides dimension reduction and to
guide the overall AE optimization, we propose to implement several regularizers that take special
consideration of brain network characteristics:

Locality-Preserving Regularizer. Following section 3.2, a significant portion of brain network
analysis focuses on learning neighborhood structure. Naturally, the compressed feature should pre-
serve the neighborhood information from its original profile. Considering that each ROI atlas con-
tains a unique set of 3D coordinates specifying the scaled actual locations of ROIs in the human


                                                   5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


brain, one important type of neighborhood is its physical adjacencies based on the 3D projection.
Hence, we regularize our AE objective as neighborhood preserving He et al. (2005), which can be
written as Lloc = (1/n)∥Y − TY∥2 , where Y ∈ Rn×m denotes the AE projected features and
T ∈ Rn×n is the transition matrix built from the k-NN graph of the 3D coordinates.

Module-Aware Regularizer. Brain networks can be segmented into various neural system mod-
ules each characterizing a subset of ROIs. In graph terminology, they are community structures.
Given this, the projected feature could also incorporate information regarding neural system belong-
ings. Unfortunately, knowing such ground-truth segmentations requires significant prior knowledge.
Hence, we resort to community detection methods on graphs, and in particular, our design follows
the modularity maximization paradigm in which the regularizer Salha-Galvan et al. (2022) can be
formally written as minimizing
                                        n
                                    1 X             ki kj
                        Lcom = −              Aij −         exp(−∥yi − yj ∥22 ),                 (3)
                                   2m i,j=1          2m
where A ∈ Rn×n denotes graph adjacency, ki denotes degree of node i, and yi denotes the projected
features. Essentially, the optimization minimizes the L2 distance of representations among nodes
within the same communities measured by the modularity and maximizes the distance otherwise.

Sparsity-Oriented Regularizer. Sparse networks have demonstrated robustness in learning repre-
sentations from noise Jeong et al. (2017); Shi et al. (2019); Makhzani & Frey (2014) and it has been
shown that, in brain connectome analysis, sparsity leads to a better interpretation of task-specific
ROI connections in generation and classification tasks Kan et al. (2022). To this end, we adopt the
popular KL-divergence smoothing to enforce parameter sparsity, which is given as:
                             n X  d
                            X                  ρ                      1−ρ
                    LKL =             ρ log          + (1 − ρ) log               ,               (4)
                            i=1 j=1
                                              ρ̂ij                   1 − ρ̂ij
where ρ is the target sparsity value usually set to a small positive float, and ρ̂ij is the element-wise
activation of the n × d encoder projection matrix.

3.3.2   VARIANCE - BASED D IMENSION S ORTING
In addition to dataset-specific feature transformation, cross-dataset alignment of feature signals also
greatly facilitates model adaptation. Taking a closer look at the one-layer AE transformed feature
vectors, essentially, each dimension in the projected space is formed by a weighted (nonlinear) com-
bination of multiple dimensions in the original space. Localizing this concept to brain networks, the
process is ultimately grouping the ROIs and their signals to derive new feature dimensions, which
can be regarded as virtual ROIs. Although different datasets devise unique atlas templates, the base
brain anatomy construction process follows fundamental theorems and practices in the neuroscience
literature Brodmann (1909); Zhou et al. (2020). The final variations in ROI parcellations are results
of post-processing due to different analytical and clinical conventions. Therefore, it is reasonable
to assume a shared virtual ROI system underlying different parcellation systems. Incorporating the
objectives of community learning and neighborhood preserving regularizers introduced in section
3.3, we are essentially training the AE to capture such shared virtual ROIs from a data-driven per-
spective. Our final step is to align the discovered virtual ROIs across datasets such that, regardless
of origins, each virtual ROI characterizes the same functional unit in the human brain.
Observe that a one-layer linear AE shares a similar objective with PCA (more details in Appendix
A.1)but with greater customizability (i.e., adding regularizers). In particular, PCA automatically
orders the dimensions based on decreasing levels of sample variance Hotelling (1933). Taking this
inspiration, we can leverage the learned parameters of the AE projection to approximate a variance
estimate for each virtual ROI (i.e., projected feature dimension). Intuitively, each virtual ROI is
computed with the sample variance indicating its representativeness of the original data variations.
Based on the previous discussion on shared patterns across different parcellation systems, we assume
similar virtual ROIs in different datasets with different atlas templates would give similar variance
scores, at least regarding the order of the scores. Thus, by separately sorting the same number of
virtual ROIs according to the sample variance in each dataset, we expect to achieve a cross-dataset
virtual ROI alignment, regarding the actual functional unit in the human brain. We summarize this
procedure in detail in Appendix A.2 Algorithm 1.


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4     E XPERIMENTS

We analyze our framework by conducting extensive experiments on real brain network datasets, with
a focus on these research questions: RQ1: How does our method perform compared to other popular
unsupervised GNN pre-training frameworks adapted to our setting? RQ2: How does each major
component in our framework contribute to the overall performance? RQ3: How do the difference in
sampling consideration influence model convergence and adaptation performance? RQ4: How does
our variance-based sorting align virtual ROIs among different parcellation systems?

Datasets, configurations, and metrics. Our experiments use brain network datasets of diverse
modalities from three IRB approved sources, including Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative
(PPMI), Bipolar Disorders (BP), and Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection (HIV). Specifically,
the PPMI is a public dataset that includes brain networks constructed from three tractography algo-
rithms namely the Probabilistic Index of Connectivity (PICo), Hough voting (Hough), and FSL for
718 subjects, where 569 subjects are Parkinson’s Disease (PD) patients and the rest 149 are Healthy
Control (HC) ones; while BP is a private dataset composed of the resting-state fMRI and DTI image
data of 52 Bipolar I subjects who are in euthymia and 45 HCs, and HIV involves 70 subjects, with 35
early HIV patients and 35 HCs. More details about the dataset origin and preprocessing are provided
in Appendix B. We pre-train the model on the PPMI data where brain networks constructed from
each tractography algorithm are treated as a separate pre-training dataset and then evaluate the target
performance on BP and HIV. For backbone selection, we employ GCN as our base GNN encoder.
Detailed hyper-parameter settings regarding the entire pipeline and GCN setup are described in Ap-
pendix C. In addition, we also benchmark our framework on GAT and GIN, and the performance
is reported in Appendix D.1. Our target evaluation of disease prediction is formulated as a binary
graph classification problem. To this end, we adopt the two widely used metrics in the medical
discipline Li et al. (2021b); Cui et al. (2022a), namely, accuracy score (ACC) and the area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) to assess the downstream performance.

4.1    OVERALL PERFORMANCE COMPARED WITH BASELINES (RQ1)

We present a comprehensive comparison of the target performance between our framework and
existing unsupervised baselines in Table 2. The baselines are grouped based on their optimiza-
tion strategies: Group 0: No pre-training (NPT), where model parameters are randomly initial-
ized before fine-tuning on the target. Group 1: Non-CL-based frameworks, including Node2Vec,
DeepWalk, and VGAE, whose cost functions focus on co-occurrence agreement or link reconstruc-
tion. Group 2: Single-scale CL, including GBT, ProGCL, and GraphCL, whose CL optimizations
leverage either node- or graph-level representations. Group 3: Multi-scale CL, including DGI and
InfoGraph (InfoG), whose CL optimizations depend on examining both nodes- and graph-level rep-
resentations. Group 4: Ego-graph sampling, including GCC and EGI, whose contrastive samplings
consider k-hop ego-networks as discriminative instances, which are the most similar to our method.

Table 2: Disease prediction performance comparison. All results are averaged from 5-fold cross-
validation along with standard deviations and have passed the significance test with p = 0.05.

                        BP-fMRI                      BP-DTI                    HIV-fMRI                     HIV-DTI
      Method
                   ACC           AUC           ACC           AUC           ACC           AUC           ACC           AUC
      NPT        50.07±13.70   50.11±15.48   49.51±14.68   51.83±13.98   56.27±15.84   57.16±15.14   51.30±16.42   53.82±14.94
      Node2Vec   48.51±10.39   49.68±7.23    50.83±8.14    46.70±10.33   52.61±10.38   50.75±10.94   49.65±10.30   51.22±10.79
      DeepWalk   50.28±9.33    51.59±9.06    52.17±9.74    48.36±9.37    54.81±11.26   55.55±11.93   52.67±11.42   50.88±10.53
      VGAE       56.71±9.68    55.24±11.48   54.63±12.09   54.21±11.94   62.76±9.47    61.25±11.61   56.90±9.72    55.35±9.04
      GBT        57.21±10.68   57.32±10.48   56.29±9.35    55.27±10.54   65.73±10.93   66.08±10.43   59.80±9.76    57.37±9.49
      GraphCL    59.79±9.36    59.10±10.78   57.57±10.63   57.35±9.67    67.08±9.70    69.17±10.68   60.43±8.39    60.03±10.48
      ProGCL     61.36±8.90    61.61±9.34    60.26±8.37    61.67±8.46    70.52±9.19    71.16±9.85    61.48±10.38   60.94±10.57
      DGI        62.44±10.12   60.75±10.97   58.15±9.63    58.95±9.60    70.22±11.43   70.12±12.46   60.83±10.84   62.06±10.16
      InfoG      62.87±9.52    62.37±9.67    60.88±9.97    60.44±9.61    72.46±8.71    72.94±8.68    61.75±9.76    61.37±9.85
      GCC        63.45±9.82    62.39±9.08    60.44±9.54    60.29±10.33   70.97±10.31   72.48±11.36   61.27±9.66    61.38±10.72
      EGI        63.38±8.93    63.58±8.02    61.82±8.53    61.57±8.27    73.46±8.49    73.28±8.68    60.89±9.87    62.41±8.50
      Ours       68.84±8.26    68.45±8.96    66.57±7.67    68.31±9.39    77.80±9.76    77.62±8.74    67.51±8.67    67.74±8.59



                                                              7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Overall, we highlight the following observations:
• Our framework demonstrates consistent improvements over the baselines. In particular, our
  method achieves 7.34%-13.30% relative gain over the best performing baselines and 31.80%-
  38.26% relative gain over the NPT setting across all metrics.
• Compared with the transductive methods of Node2Vec and DeepWalk, the GNN pre-trained by
  VGAE learns structure-preserving representations and achieves the most promising results in
  group 1, but the performance is still visibly inferior to Ours.
• Maximizing MI between augmentations from a singular instance may prevent GNN from learning
  shared knowledge about the entire dataset. For baselines in groups 2-4, non-augmentation-based
  CL pre-training generally reports 4.36% relative gain across both metrics and a 7.63% relative
  decrease in performance variance compared to augmentation-based counterparts. For this reason,
  Ours does not deploy data augmentation.
• Multi-scale MI encourages capturing of effective local (i.e., node-level) representations capable
  of summarizing global (i.e., graph-level) information of the entire network. Hence, on average,
  group 3 outperforms group 2 by a relative gain of 2.68% in ACC and 3.27% in AUC.
• Group 4 presents the strongest baseline which benefits from its considerations of k-hop neigh-
  borhood, indicating the importance of local neighborhoods in brain network analysis. Ours is the
  only method that captures nodes’ local neighborhoods through both nodes- and graph-level CL.

4.2   A BLATION STUDIES (RQ2)


Figure 4: Ablation comparisons on contrastive sampling considerations (left two) and atlas mapping
regularizers (right two). The y-axis refers to the numeric values of evaluated metrics (in %).
Figure 4 shows the contribution of each constituent part of Table 3: Sampling variants overview
our framework to the overall performance in the fMRI view
(the DTI version is in Appendix D.2). Specifically, the two                    S1 S2 S3 S4
sub-figures on the left investigate the different sampling con-      Var. 1 –        –     /     /
siderations of S1 − S4 . In particular, we list four possible
variants detailed in Table 3. To this end, we deliver three in-      Var.  2   +     –     /     /
sights regarding the comparison: (1) leveraging k-hop neigh-         Var. 3 +        –     –     /
borhood (i.e., positive S2 ) MI maximization brings visible          Var. 4 +        +     –     /
performance gain, confirming its benefit in brain structure
learning; (2) extending to multi-graph CL (i.e., consideration of S3 ) encourages extraction of unique
ROI knowledge, thus leading to improved results in Var. 3/4; (3) Var. 4 performs better than Var. 3
likely due to its summarization of global (i.e., graph-level) information in local node representations.
Meanwhile, the two sub-figures on the right focus on atlas mapping regularizers by comparing the
downstream results without the sparsity regularizer (-SR), the locality regularizer (-LR), and the
community regularizer (-CR) respectively against our full framework. We hereby remark two key
observations: (1) removing SR leads to the greatest performance drop, indicating its importance in
learning noise robust projections; (2) LR and CR are both crucial to atlas mapping optimization,
validating our intuition in learning neighborhood-aware and blockwise feature information.

4.3   I N - DEPTH ANALYSIS OF TWO - LEVEL CONTRASTIVE SAMPLING (RQ3)

Figure 5 shows the further investigation of the four sampling variants and the full framework in terms
of pre-training convergence, target adaptation progression, and pre-training runtime consumption.
Overall, we highlight three important observations: (1) From Figure 5(a), we can observe that the
pre-training convergence is generally efficient across all variants with the MAML-inspired multi-
dataset joint optimization technique. In addition, the full model presents the most optimal conver-
gence confirming the benefit of learning shared neighborhood information in brain network data


                                                   8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      (a) Pre-train loss on PPMI      (b) Test ACC on HIV-fMRI        (c) Pre-train time (secs) on PPMI
Figure 5: In-depth comparison among the four variants and our full model. The x-axis is epochs.
via two-level node contrastive sampling. (2) From Figure 5(b), the effectiveness of learning shared
substructure knowledge within a fixed ROI system is directly reflected in a superior downstream
adaptation compared to other variants. (3) From Figure 5(c), the more sophisticated the sampling
considerations, the greater the computational complexity for MI evaluation, resulting in larger run-
time for each pre-training epoch. However, the total time consumptions are all on the same scale.

4.4    I N - DEPTH ANALYSIS OF VIRTUAL ROI ALIGNMENT (RQ4)


          (a) PPMI mapping                 (b) BP mapping                    (c) HIV mapping
                Figure 6: Virtual ROI Mapping across the three investigated datasets.

To further validate our designs of variance-based virtual ROI sorting, for each atlas template (i.e.,
dataset), we select the top 2 virtual ROIs that have the highest sample variances and backtrack to
locate their projected ROIs. We then illustrate in Figure 6 a visualization highlighting the original
ROIs on a 3D brain surface. Specifically, we remark on two key takeaways: (1) The three atlases
share similar ROI projection regions in the medial (i.e., bottom left and right) views of the brain
surface, reflecting the working effectiveness of our ROI alignment design. (2) There exist certain
variations among ROI projections from the lateral (i.e., top left and right) view, which shows a
limitation of unsupervised atlas mapping but is still better than no alignment at all.


5     C ONCLUSION

Brain network analysis for task-specific disease prediction is challenging for conventional GNN
frameworks. Firstly, effective knowledge extraction for deep neural models requires a significant
amount of training data and task labels which are often lacking in neuroimaging studies, especially
for local downstream tasks. Moreover, the absence of a unifying brain atlas definition prevents
efficient knowledge transfer across different domains. Through extensive benchmarking on real-
world brain connectome datasets, our framework reports superior and robust performance in disease
prediction and clearly outperforms various state-of-the-art baselines. Specifically, our framework
implements unsupervised multi-dataset GNN pre-training via two-level node contrastive sampling
to address the data-scarcity concern. Concurrently, our framework also features atlas mapping via
brain-network-oriented regularizers and variance-based sorting which presents a data-driven solu-
tion to the incompatible ROI parcellation systems for cross-dataset model adaptation. Due to the
difficulties in obtaining many brain network datasets, our experiments are focused on three widely
used brain imaging studies, and it is natural to further validate the generalizability of our framework
with more brain network datasets when they become available.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Darko Aleksovski, Dragana Miljkovic, Daniele Bravi, and Angelo Antonini. Disease progression in
  parkinson subtypes: the ppmi dataset. Neurol. Sci., 39:1971–1976, 2018.
Jimmy Ba, Geoffrey E Hinton, Volodymyr Mnih, Joel Z Leibo, and Catalin Ionescu. Using fast
  weights to attend to the recent past. NeurIPS, 2016.
Piotr Bielak, Tomasz Kajdanowicz, and Nitesh V Chawla. Graph barlow twins: A self-supervised
  representation learning framework for graphs. Knowl Based Syst, 2022.
Korbinian Brodmann. Vergleichende Lokalisationslehre der Grosshirnrinde in ihren Prinzipien
  dargestellt auf Grund des Zellenbaues. 1909.
Bokai Cao, Liang Zhan, Xiangnan Kong, Philip S Yu, Nathalie Vizueta, Lori L Altshuler, and Alex D
  Leow. Identification of discriminative subgraph patterns in fmri brain networks in bipolar affective
  disorder. In International Conference on Brain Informatics and Health, 2015.
Yue Cao, Zhenda Xie, Bin Liu, Yutong Lin, Zheng Zhang, and Han Hu. Parametric instance classi-
  fication for unsupervised visual feature learning. NeurIPS, 2020.
BJ Casey, Tariq Cannonier, May I Conley, Alexandra O Cohen, Deanna M Barch, Mary M Heitzeg,
  Mary E Soules, Theresa Teslovich, Danielle V Dellarco, Hugh Garavan, et al. The adolescent
  brain cognitive development (abcd) study: imaging acquisition across 21 sites. Dev. Cogn. Neu-
  rosci., 32:43–54, 2018.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020a.
Ting Chen, Simon Kornblith, Mohammad Norouzi, and Geoffrey Hinton. A simple framework for
  contrastive learning of visual representations. In ICML, 2020b.
Hejie Cui, Wei Dai, Yanqiao Zhu, Xuan Kan, Antonio Aodong Chen Gu, Joshua Lukemire, Liang
  Zhan, Lifang He, Ying Guo, and Carl Yang. Braingb: A benchmark for brain network analysis
  with graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07054, 2022a.
Hejie Cui, Wei Dai, Yanqiao Zhu, Xiaoxiao Li, Lifang He, and Carl Yang. Interpretable graph neural
  networks for connectome-based brain disorder analysis. 2022b.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, 2019a.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep
  bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In NAACL, 2019b.
Federico Errica, Marco Podda, Davide Bacciu, and Alessio Micheli. A fair comparison of graph
  neural networks for graph classification. In ICLR, 2020.
Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In ICML, 2017.
Jean-Bastien Grill, Florian Strub, Florent Altché, Corentin Tallec, Pierre Richemond, Elena
  Buchatskaya, Carl Doersch, Bernardo Avila Pires, Zhaohan Guo, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar,
  et al. Bootstrap your own latent-a new approach to self-supervised learning. NeurIPS, 2020.
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In SIGKDD,
  2016.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs.
 In NeurIPS, 2017.
Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for
  unsupervised visual representation learning. In CVPR, 2020a.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xiangnan He, Kuan Deng, Xiang Wang, Yan Li, Yongdong Zhang, and Meng Wang. Lightgcn:
  Simplifying and powering graph convolution network for recommendation. In SIGIR, 2020b.
Xiaofei He, Deng Cai, Shuicheng Yan, and Hong-Jiang Zhang. Neighborhood preserving embed-
  ding. In ICCV, 2005.
Chris Hinrichs, Vikas Singh, Lopamudra Mukherjee, Guofan Xu, Moo K Chung, Sterling C John-
  son, Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, et al. Spatially augmented lpboosting for ad
  classification with evaluations on the adni dataset. NeuroImage, 48:138–149, 2009.
Geoffrey E Hinton and Richard Zemel. Autoencoders, minimum description length and helmholtz
  free energy. NeurIPS, 1993.
Harold Hotelling. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components. J Educ
  Psychol, 1933.
Yupeng Hou, Binbin Hu, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhiqiang Zhang, Jun Zhou, and Ji-Rong Wen. Neural
  graph matching for pre-training graph neural networks. In SDM, 2022.
W Hu, B Liu, J Gomes, M Zitnik, P Liang, V Pande, and J Leskovec. Strategies for pre-training
 graph neural networks. In ICLR, 2020a.
Weihua Hu, Matthias Fey, Marinka Zitnik, Yuxiao Dong, Hongyu Ren, Bowen Liu, Michele Catasta,
 and Jure Leskovec. Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. 2020b.
Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yizhou Sun. Gpt-gnn: Generative
  pre-training of graph neural networks. In SIGKDD, 2020c.
Seongah Jeong, Xiang Li, Jiarui Yang, Quanzheng Li, and Vahid Tarokh. Dictionary learning and
  sparse coding-based denoising for high-resolution task functional connectivity mri analysis. In
  International Workshop on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging, 2017.
Xuan Kan, Hejie Cui, Joshua Lukemire, Ying Guo, and Carl Yang. Fbnetgen: Task-aware gnn-based
  fmri analysis via functional brain network generation. MIDL, 2022.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Variational graph auto-encoders. NIPS Workshop on Bayesian
  Deep Learning, 2016.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional net-
  works. In ICLR, 2017.
Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
  training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In ICML, 2022.
Pengyong Li, Jun Wang, Ziliang Li, Yixuan Qiao, Xianggen Liu, Fei Ma, Peng Gao, Sen Song, and
  Guotong Xie. Pairwise half-graph discrimination: A simple graph-level self-supervised strategy
  for pre-training graph neural networks. In IJCAI, 2021a.
Xiaoxiao Li, Yuan Zhou, Nicha Dvornek, Muhan Zhang, Siyuan Gao, Juntang Zhuang, Dustin
  Scheinost, Lawrence H Staib, Pamela Ventola, and James S Duncan. Braingnn: Interpretable
  brain graph neural network for fmri analysis. Med Image Anal, 2021b.
Martin A Lindquist. The statistical analysis of fmri data. Stat Sci, 23:439–464, 2008.
Shengchao Liu, Hanchen Wang, Weiyang Liu, Joan Lasenby, Hongyu Guo, and Jian Tang. Pre-
  training molecular graph representation with 3d geometry. ICLR, 2022.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In ICLR,
   2017.
Yuanfu Lu, Xunqiang Jiang, Yuan Fang, and Chuan Shi. Learning to pre-train graph neural networks.
  In AAAI, 2021.


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Dongsheng Luo, Wei Cheng, Dongkuan Xu, Wenchao Yu, Bo Zong, Haifeng Chen, and Xiang
  Zhang. Parameterized explainer for graph neural network. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Guixiang Ma, Chun-Ta Lu, Lifang He, S Yu Philip, and Ann B Ragin. Multi-view graph embedding
  with hub detection for brain network analysis. In ICDM, 2017.
Alireza Makhzani and Brendan Frey. K-sparse autoencoders. ICLR, 2014.
Gustav Martensson, Joana B Pereira, Patrizia Mecocci, Bruno Vellas, Magda Tsolaki, Iwona
  Kłoszewska, Hilkka Soininen, Simon Lovestone, Andrew Simmons, Giovanni Volpe, et al. Sta-
  bility of graph theoretical measures in structural brain networks in alzheimer’s disease. Scientific
  reports, 8:1–15, 2018.
Tomás Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word represen-
  tations in vector space. In ICLR, 2013.
Bryan Perozzi, Rami Al-Rfou, and Steven Skiena. Deepwalk: Online learning of social representa-
  tions. In SIGKDD, 2014.
Jiezhong Qiu, Qibin Chen, Yuxiao Dong, Jing Zhang, Hongxia Yang, Ming Ding, Kuansan Wang,
   and Jie Tang. Gcc: Graph contrastive coding for graph neural network pre-training. In SIGKDD,
   2020.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language under-
  standing by generative pre-training. 2018.
Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
  Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
  models from natural language supervision. In ICML, 2021.
Ryan A Rossi and Nesreen K Ahmed. An interactive data repository with visual analytics. SIGKDD,
  2016.
Guillaume Salha-Galvan, Johannes F. Lutzeyer, George Dasoulas, Romain Hennequin, and Michalis
  Vazirgiannis. Modularity-aware graph autoencoders for joint community detection and link pre-
  diction. Neural Netw, 2022.
Michael Schlichtkrull, Thomas N Kipf, Peter Bloem, Rianne Van Den Berg, Ivan Titov, and Max
 Welling. Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks. In ESWC, 2018.
Rui Shi, Jian Ji, Chunhui Zhang, and Qiguang Miao. Boosting sparsity-induced autoencoder: A
  novel sparse feature ensemble learning for image classification. Int. J. Adv. Robot. Syst., 2019.
Stephen M Smith. The future of fmri connectivity. NeuroImage, 62:1257–1266, 2012.
Fan-Yun Sun, Jordan Hoffman, Vikas Verma, and Jian Tang. Infograph: Unsupervised and semi-
  supervised graph-level representation learning via mutual information maximization. In ICLR,
  2019.
Mingchen Sun, Kaixiong Zhou, Xin He, Ying Wang, and Xin Wang. Gppt: Graph pre-training and
 prompt tuning to generalize graph neural networks. In SIGKDD, 2022.
Hong Hui Tan and King Hann Lim. Review of second-order optimization techniques in artificial
  neural networks backpropagation. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering,
  2019.
Nathalie Tzourio-Mazoyer, Brigitte Landeau, Dimitri Papathanassiou, Fabrice Crivello, Olivier
  Etard, Nicolas Delcroix, Bernard Mazoyer, and Marc Joliot. Automated anatomical labeling
  of activations in spm using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the mni mri single-subject
  brain. NeuroImage, 2002.
Shikhar Vashishth, Soumya Sanyal, Vikram Nitin, and Partha Talukdar. Composition-based multi-
  relational graph convolutional networks. In ICLR, 2020.


                                                 12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Petar Velickovic, William Fedus, William L Hamilton, Pietro Liò, Yoshua Bengio, and R Devon
  Hjelm. Deep graph infomax. ICLR, 2019.
M Vu and MT Thai. Pgm-explainer: Probabilistic graphical model explanations for graph neural
 networks. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Zirui Wang, Jiahui Yu, Adams Wei Yu, Zihang Dai, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Yuan Cao. Simvlm: Simple
  visual language model pretraining with weak supervision. ICLR, 2022.
Jun Xia, Lirong Wu, Ge Wang, Jintao Chen, and Stan Z Li. Progcl: Rethinking hard negative mining
  in graph contrastive learning. In ICML, 2022.
Wenhan Xiong, Jingfei Du, William Yang Wang, and Veselin Stoyanov. Pretrained encyclopedia:
 Weakly supervised knowledge-pretrained language model. ICLR, 2020.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
  networks? In ICLR, 2019.
Noriaki Yahata, Jun Morimoto, Ryuichiro Hashimoto, Giuseppe Lisi, Kazuhisa Shibata, Yuki
  Kawakubo, Hitoshi Kuwabara, Miho Kuroda, Takashi Yamada, Fukuda Megumi, et al. A small
  number of abnormal brain connections predicts adult autism spectrum disorder. Nat. Commun.,
  7:1–12, 2016.
Lewei Yao, Runhui Huang, Lu Hou, Guansong Lu, Minzhe Niu, Hang Xu, Xiaodan Liang, Zhenguo
  Li, Xin Jiang, and Chunjing Xu. Filip: Fine-grained interactive language-image pre-training.
  ICLR, 2022.
Rex Ying, Dylan Bourgeois, Jiaxuan You, Marinka Zitnik, and Jure Leskovec. Gnnexplainer: Gen-
  erating explanations for graph neural networks. In NeurIPS, 2019.
Zhitao Ying, Jiaxuan You, Christopher Morris, Xiang Ren, Will Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. Hi-
  erarchical graph representation learning with differentiable pooling. In NeurIPS, 2018.
Yuning You, Tianlong Chen, Yongduo Sui, Ting Chen, Zhangyang Wang, and Yang Shen. Graph
  contrastive learning with augmentations. In NeurIPS, 2020.
Jure Zbontar, Li Jing, Ishan Misra, Yann LeCun, and Stéphane Deny. Barlow twins: Self-supervised
  learning via redundancy reduction. In ICML, 2021.
Shijie Zhang, Hongzhi Yin, Tong Chen, Quoc Viet Nguyen Hung, Zi Huang, and Lizhen Cui. Gcn-
  based user representation learning for unifying robust recommendation and fraudster detection.
  In SIGIR, 2020.
Tong Zhao, Yozen Liu, Leonardo Neves, Oliver Woodford, Meng Jiang, and Neil Shah. Data aug-
  mentation for graph neural networks. In AAAI, 2021.
Zhen Zhou, Xiaobo Chen, Yu Zhang, Dan Hu, Lishan Qiao, Renping Yu, Pew-Thian Yap, Gang
  Pan, Han Zhang, and Dinggang Shen. A toolbox for brain network construction and classification
  (brainnetclass). Hum Brain Mapp, 2020.
Qi Zhu, Carl Yang, Yidan Xu, Haonan Wang, Chao Zhang, and Jiawei Han. Transfer learning of
  graph neural networks with ego-graph information maximization. In NeurIPS, 2021a.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Deep Graph Contrastive
  Representation Learning. In ICML Workshop on Graph Representation Learning and Beyond,
  2020.
Yanqiao Zhu, Yichen Xu, Feng Yu, Qiang Liu, Shu Wu, and Liang Wang. Graph Contrastive Learn-
  ing with Adaptive Augmentation. In WWW, 2021b.


                                               13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     A NALYSIS OF THE AUTOENCODER S TRUCTURE

A.1    B RIDGING R ECONSTRUCTION M INIMIZATION AND VARIANCE M AXIMIZATION

In this subsection, we briefly discuss how the reconstruction minimizing objective in one-layer AE
can be cast to a variance maximizing objective in PCA. Assume given a data matrix X ∈ Rn×d , its
covariance matrix Σ = XT X ∈ Rn×n , and a single-layer AE projection matrix W ∈ Rd×m with
parameters randomly initialized from the continuous uniform distribution U(0, 1), the reconstruction
objective is:
             1                       1
               ∥X − XWWT ∥2 = tr (X − XWWT )(X − XWWT )T

             n                       n
                                     1
                                  = tr (X − XWWT )(XT − WWT XT )

                                     n
                                     1
                                  = [tr(XXT ) − tr(XWWT XT ) − tr(XWWT XT )
                                     n
                                  + tr(XWWT WWT XT )]
                                     1
                                  = [c1 − 2 · tr(XWWT XT ) + tr(X̂X̂T )]
                                     n
                                     1
                                  = [c1 − 2 · tr(XWWT XT ) + c2 ]
                                     n
                                  = c3 − c4 · tr(WT XT XW)
                                      = c3 − c4 · tr(WT ΣW)
Notice that c1 , c2 , c3 , c4 are non-negative scalar constants that do not influence the overall optimiza-
tion schedule. Hence, alternatively, the optimal AE projection also maximizes the sample variance
tr(WT ΣW), achieving an identical end goal of PCA transform. Specifically, according to PCA,
variance maximization is realized by constructing the projection W to contain the set of orthonormal
eigenvectors of Σ that gives the largest eigenvalues Hotelling (1933). That is, there is an orthogo-
nality constraint on W. Minimizing the MSE reconstruction also results in an orthogonal W:
                        1
                           ∥X − XWWT ∥2 = 0 ⇒ XWWT = X ⇒ WWT = I
                        n
Therefore, the optimal AE projection W is also capturing a set of variance-maximizing orthogonal
vectors. Note that the AE optimized W is theoretically equivalent to the eigendecomposition of Σ
if and only if the reconstruction loss is 0. Therefore, in practice, the AE is, at best, an approximate
solution to variance maximization.

A.2    VARIANCE - BASED S ORTING P ROCEDURE

Following the discussion in A.1, assuming a perfect optimization, the linear one-layer AE behaves
similarly to PCA, and there is an equivalence relation between their respective objective functions.
Notice that in PCA, the eigenvalue of the covariance matrix Σ signifies the intensity of data
variation along the direction of its corresponding eigenvector, which is essentially a column entry of
the transformation matrix. Then intuitively, given an optimized AE projection W, we can examine,
for each column of W, its representativeness (i.e., data variance) of the data covariance with a
scalar estimate (i.e., an eigenvalue-like scoring). Inspired by the properties of eigendecomposition,
we can approximate these estimates by measuring the distance of W w.r.t to the product of linearly
transforming W through Σ by a scaling factor of λ. More specifically, we want to solve for λ
such that Σw = λw for every column vector w ∈ W. Under the PCA perspective, λ contains
the variance estimate for each column-wise individual projection of W. To this end, we detail the
sorting procedure in Algorithm 1.



B     DATASET D ETAILS

All datasets used, which are introduced below, are processed anonymously with no personally iden-
tifiable information. In addition, all related studies are conducted according to the Good Clinical


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Overview procedure for variance-based sorting
Input: Original feature matrix X ∈ Rn×d ; AE optimized projection matrix W ∈ Rd×m
Initialize: Scalar vector λ ∈ Rm ; Small positive float ϵ
Output: Sorted AE projection matrix W̃
 1: Normalize the feature matrix: Xn ← X/∥X∥
 2: Compute data covariance matrix: Σ ← Xn T Xn
 3: Solve for λ such that |ΣW − λ ⊙ W| ⩽ ϵ
 4: Sort column vectors w ∈ W according to sorted indexation of λ to obtain W̃

Practice guidelines and U.S. 21 CFR Part 50 (Protection of Human Subjects) and under the approval
of Institutional Review Boards.
• Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI): We pre-train the model on large-scale
  real-life Parkinsons Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI) data which is publicly available at 1
  consists of 718 subjects, where 569 subjects are Parkinson’s Disease (PD) patients and the rest
  149 are Healthy Control (HC) ones. Eddy-current and head motion correction are performed using
  FSL2 and the brain networks are extracted using the same tool. The EPI induced susceptibility
  artifacts correction is handled using Advanced Normalization Tools (ANT)3 . In the meantime,
  84 ROIs are parcellated from T1-weighted structural MRI using Freesurfer4 . The brain networks
  are constructed using three whole brain tractography algorithms namely the Probabilistic Index
  of Connectivity (PICo), Hough voting (Hough), and FSL. Each resulted network for each subject
  is 84 × 84. Each brain network is normalized by the maximum value to avoid computation bias
  for the later feature extraction and evaluation, since matrices derived from different tractography
  algorithms differ in scales and ranges.
• Bipolar Disorders (BP): This local and private dataset is composed of the resting-state fMRI and
  DTI image data of 52 Bipolar I subjects who are in euthymia and 45 Healthy Controls (HCs) with
  matched age and gender Cao et al. (2015); Ma et al. (2017). The fMRI data was acquired on a
  3T Siemens Trio scanner using a T2∗ echo planar imaging (EPI) gradient-echo pulse sequence
  with integrated parallel acquisition technique (IPAT) and DTI data were acquired on a Siemens
  3T Trio scanner. The brain networks are constructed using the CONN toolbox5 . We performed the
  normalization and smoothing after first realigning and co-registering the raw EPI pictures. After
  that, the signal was regressed to remove the confounding effects of the motion artifact, white
  matter, and CSF. The 82 cortical and subcortical gray matter regions produced by Freesurfer were
  identified, and pairwise signal correlations were used to build the brain networks.
• Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection (HIV): Collected from the Early HIV Infection
  Study at Northwestern University, this private dataset involves fMRI and DTI brain networks for
  70 subjects, with 35 of them early HIV patients and the other 35 Healthy Controls (HCs). These
  two groups of subjects do not differ in demographic distributions such as age and biological sex.
  The preprocessings for fMRI including brain extraction, slice timing correction and realignment
  are managed with the DPARSF6 toolbox, while the preprocessings for DTI such as distortion
  correction are finished with the help of FSL2 toolbox. Finally, brain networks with 90 regions
  of interest are constructed based on the automated anatomical labeling (AAL) Tzourio-Mazoyer
  et al. (2002).


C       H YPERPARAMETER S ETTINGS

GNN Setup. The GCN encoder is composed of 4 graph convolution layers with hidden dimensions
of 32, 16, 16, and 8. Similarly, the GAT encoder is built from 4 graph attention layers with hidden
dimensions of 32, 16, 16, and 8. Regarding GIN, which is slightly different, the encoder consists of
4 MLP layers with each MLP containing 2 linear layers with a unifying hidden dimension of 8.

    1
      https://www.ppmi-info.org/
    2
      https://fsl.fmrib.ox.ac.uk/fsl/fslwiki/
    3
      http://stnava.github.io/ANTs/
    4
      https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/
    5
      http://www.nitrc.org/projects/conn/
    6
      http://rfmri.org/DPARSF/


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Pre-training Pipeline Setup. For two-level node contrastive sampling, we set k = 2 as the radius
regarding k-hop neighborhood sampling for S1 and S4 . To enable efficient computation on multi-
graph MI evaluation, we resort to mini-batching and we set a default batch size of 32. In addition,
we leverage the popular Adam Kingma & Ba (2015) optimizer with the learning rate set to 0.002
as well as the cosine annealing scheduler Loshchilov & Hutter (2017) to facilitate GNN training. In
general, a complete pre-training cycle takes 400 epochs with an active deployment of early stopping.


Atlas Mapping Regularizers Setup. Following the discussion in section 3.3, the total running loss
of the AE projection is given as:
                                  L = Lrec + αLloc + βLcom + γLKL ,                                (5)
in particular, we set α, β = 0.8 and γ = 0.01. The one-layer AE encoder transforms the feature
signals from all given datasets into a universally projected dimension of 32. Regarding the details
of locality-preserving regularizer (i.e., Lloc ), the transition matrix T is built from the 5-nearest-
neighbor graph from the 3D coordinates of each atlas templates. For the sparsity-oriented regularizer
(i.e., LKL ), the target sparsity value ρ is set to 1e−5 . The overall optimization process, which is
similar to model pre-training, takes a total of 100 epochs with a learning rate of 0.02.

Downstream Evaluation Setup. For each target evaluation, the fine-tuning process features a 5-
fold cross-validation, which approximately splits the dataset into 70% training, 10% validation, and
20% testing. To prevent model over-fitting, we implement a L2 penalty with a coefficient of 1e−4 .
Overall, the model fine-tuning process, which is nearly identical to the other two training procedures,
takes a total of 200 epochs with a learning rate of 0.001 and a cosine annealing scheduler.

D      A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENT
D.1     D OWNSTREAM PERFORMANCE ON GAT AND GIN
          Table 4: Disease prediction performance of our framework using GAT and GIN.
                          BP-fMRI                     BP-DTI                    HIV-fMRI                     HIV-DTI
      Method
                      ACC          AUC          ACC           AUC           ACC           AUC           ACC          AUC
      Ours w/ GCN   68.84±8.26   68.45±8.96   66.57±7.67    68.31±9.39    77.80±9.76    77.22±8.74    67.51±8.67   67.74±8.59
      Ours w/ GAT   66.96±9.71   69.68±9.61   64.23±10.47   63.76±10.49   74.93±10.35   75.78±11.12   65.84±9.74   66.51±12.07
      Ours w/ GIN   66.30±8.77   68.92±9.37   64.48±9.83    66.44±8.58    75.96±9.56    77.63±10.10   67.36±9.26   65.95±11.76
Table 4 reports the downstream performance of our full framework using GAT and GIN as backbone
encoders. In general, the two encoders deliver inferior performance compared to GCN, which sug-
gests that complex GNN convolutions (e.g., GAT and GIN) might not be as effective as they seem
when learning on bran network datasets.

D.2     A DDITIONAL A BLATION S TUDIES ON DTI V IEW


Figure 7: Additional ablation comparisons on DTI views. The left two subfigures refer to con-
trastive sampling considerations and the right two subfigures refer to atlas mapping regularizers.
The y-axis refers to the numeric values of evaluated metrics (in %).
Figure 7 presents our ablation studies on the DTI view following the same setup as discussed in
Section 4.2. We draw similar conclusions from the DTI-based analysis where each constituent
component of our two-level sampling consideration as well as the atlas mapping mechanism has
proven positive contribution and significance towards the overall performance and robustness.


                                                             16
