ROBUST A LGORITHMS ON A DAPTIVE I NPUTS FROM
B OUNDED A DVERSARIES
 Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri                Sandeep Silwal            David P. Woodruff
 UC Berkeley                             MIT                       Carnegie Mellon University
 yeshwanth@berkeley.edu                  silwal@mit.edu            dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu

 Fred Zhang                     Qiuyi (Richard) Zhang            Samson Zhou
 UC Berkeley                    Google Research                  UC Berkeley and Rice University
 z0@berkeley.edu                qiuyiz@google.com                samsonzhou@gmail.com



                                             A BSTRACT
         We study dynamic algorithms robust to adaptive input generated from sources
         with bounded capabilities, such as sparsity or limited interaction. For example, we
         consider robust linear algebraic algorithms when the updates to the input are sparse
         but given by an adversary with access to a query oracle. We also study robust algo-
         rithms in the standard centralized setting, where an adversary queries an algorithm
         in an adaptive manner, but the number of interactions between the adversary and
         the algorithm is bounded. We first recall a unified framework of (Hassidim et al.,
         2020; Beimel et al., 2022; Attias et al., 2023) for answering Q adaptive queries that
                 e √Q) overhead in space, which is roughly a quadratic improvement over
         incurs O(
         the naı̈ve implementation, and only incurs a logarithmic overhead in query time.
         Although the general framework has diverse applications in machine learning and
         data science, such as adaptive distance estimation, kernel density estimation, linear
         regression, range queries, point queries, and serves as a preliminary benchmark,
         we demonstrate even better algorithmic improvements for (1) reducing the pre-
         processing time for adaptive distance estimation and (2) permitting an unlimited
         number of adaptive queries for kernel density estimation. Finally, we complement
         our theoretical results with additional empirical evaluations.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Robustness to adaptive inputs or adversarial attacks has recently emerged as an important desirable
characteristic for algorithm design. An adversarial input can be created using knowledge of the
model to induce incorrect outputs on widely used models, such as neural networks (Biggio et al.,
2013; Szegedy et al., 2014; Goodfellow et al., 2015; Carlini & Wagner, 2017; Madry et al., 2018).
Adversarial attacks against machine learning algorithms in practice have also been documented in
applications such as network monitoring (Chandola et al., 2009), strategic classification (Hardt et al.,
2016), and autonomous navigation (Papernot et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2017; Papernot et al., 2017). The
need for sound theoretical understanding of adversarial robustness is also salient in situations where
successive inputs to an algorithm can be possibly correlated; even if the input is not adversarially
generated, a user may need to repeatedly interact with a mechanism in a way such that future updates
may depend on the outcomes of previous interactions (Mironov et al., 2011; Gilbert et al., 2012;
Bogunovic et al., 2017; Naor & Yogev, 2019; Avdiukhin et al., 2019). Motivated by both practical
needs and a lack of theoretical understanding, there has been a recent flurry of theoretical studies
of adversarial robustness. The streaming model of computation has especially received significant
attention Ben-Eliezer et al. (2021); Hassidim et al. (2020); Woodruff & Zhou (2021); Kaplan et al.
(2021); Braverman et al. (2021); Chakrabarti et al. (2022); Ajtai et al. (2022); Chakrabarti et al. (2022);
Ben-Eliezer et al. (2022); Assadi et al. (2022); Attias et al. (2023); Dinur et al. (2023); Woodruff et al.
(2023). More recently, there have also been a few initial results for dynamic algorithms on adaptive
inputs for graph algorithms (Wajc, 2020; Beimel et al., 2021; Bernstein et al., 2022). These works
explored the capabilities and limits of algorithms for adversaries that were freely able to choose the
input based on previous outputs by the algorithm.


                                                    1
However, in many realistic settings, an adversary is limited in its abilities. For example, adversarial
attacks in machine learning are often permitted to only alter the “true” input by a small amount
bounded in norm. For the L0 norm, this restriction means that the adversary can only add a sparse
noise to the true input. More generally, it seems reasonable to assume that adversarial input is
generated from a source that has bounded computation time or bounded interactions with an honest
algorithm.

1.1    O UR C ONTRIBUTIONS

In this paper, we study algorithms robust to adaptive/adversarial input generated from sources with
bounded capabilities. We first study dynamic algorithms for adaptive inputs from a source that is
restricted in sparsity. Namely, we consider robust linear algebraic algorithms when the updates to
the label can be adversarial but are restricted in sparsity. We then study robust algorithms in the
standard centralized setting, where an adversary queries an algorithm in an adaptive manner, but
the number of interactions between the adversary and the algorithm is bounded. We first show that
combining novel subroutines for each of these problems in conjunction with a simple but elegant
idea of using differential privacy to hide the internal randomness of various subroutines previously
used by Hassidim et al. (2020); Beimel et al. (2022); Attias et al. (2023) suffices to achieve robust
algorithms across these different settings.

Dynamic algorithms on adaptive input for regression. Motivated by the problem of label shift in
machine learning, we consider a dynamic version of least-squares regression, where the labels get
updated. In this model, we are given a fixed design matrix and a target label that receives a sequence
of updates. After each one, the algorithm is asked to output an estimate of the optimal least-squares
objective. The goal of the algorithm is to maintain the objective value within a multiplicative factor
(1 + ε) to the optimal.
More specifically, the algorithm is given a fixed design matrix A ∈ Rn×d with n ≥ d and an initial
response vector (i.e., label) b(1) , which receives updates over time. We are interested in estimating
the least-squares objective value F (A, b) = min ∥Ax − b∥22 as the target label b undergoes updates.
                                             x∈Rd
The updates to b are adaptively chosen by an adversary but can only affect at most K entries of b per
step. Formally, on the i-th round:

      (1) The adversary provides an update to K entries of b(i−1) , possibly depending on all previous
          outputs of the algorithm.

      (2) The algorithm updates its data structure and outputs an estimate Fbi of Fi = F A, b(i) .
      (3) The adversary observes and records the output Fbi .
                                                                 T
The goal of the adversary is to create a sequence of labels b(i) i=1 that induces the algorithm
to output an inaccurate estimate. To deal with adaptivity, a naı̈ve idea is to treat each step as
an independent least-squares regression problem. However, this approach uses a completely new
approximation of the objective value for each update, which seems potentially wasteful. On the
other hand, any randomness that is shared by computations over multiple updates can potentially be
leveraged by the adversary to induce an incorrect output.
Our main result is an algorithm that beats the naı̈ve algorithm in this challenging, adaptively adver-
sarial setting. We provide a general result with run-time dependence on n, d, K, and the number of
nonzero entries in A, nnz(A).
Theorem 1.1 (Informal; see Theorem 2.1). Let κ(A) = O(1) and ε ∈ (0, 1). There exists a dynamic
algorithm that given adaptively chosen K-sparse updates to b and a fixed design matrix A ∈ Rn×d ,
                                                                           (i)
outputs a (1 + ε) approximation to  p the least-squares  objective F (A, b ) every round with high
probability. The algorithm uses Oe      K nnz(A)/ε3 amortized time per step of update.

Specifically, the update time is d1.5 when K ≤ d and n = O(d) and square root of the input sparsity
when K = O(1). Notice that this significantly betters the naı̈ve approach of treating each step
independently and solving for the least-square objective, which requires nnz(A) + poly(d) time by
sketching (Woodruff (2014)).


                                                    2
We mention that a recent work by Jiang et al. (2022) considers a row-arrival model for dynamic linear
regression. Our setting is different since we allow arbitrary updates to the target label, whereas in
their setting the design matrix undertakes incremental change. We note that their algorithm maintains
a solution vector, while we focus on the cost only.

Adaptive query framework. We then consider robust algorithms in the standard centralized setting,
where an adversary queries an algorithm in an adaptive manner. In many key algorithmic applications,
randomization is necessary to achieve fast query time and efficient storage. This necessitates the need
for robust versions of these algorithm which can efficiently employ the power of randomness while
also being accurate across multiple possibly correlated inputs. Our main parameters of interest are
query time and the space used by a robust algorithm compared to their naı̈ve, non-robust, counterparts.
Formally, we define the model as a two-player game between an algorithm HonestAlg over a data set
X and an adversary A that makes adversarial queries about X to HonestAlg. At the beginning of the
game, HonestAlg uses pre-processing time to compute a data structure D from X to answer future
queries from A. The game then proceeds in at most Q rounds for some predetermined Q, so that in
the t-th round, where t ∈ [Q]:

     (1) A computes a query qt on X, which depends on all previous responses from HonestAlg.
     (2) HonestAlg uses D to output a response dt to query qt .
     (3) A observes and records the response dt .

The goal of A is to formulate a query qt for which the algorithm HonestAlg produces an incorrect
response dt . We remark that the algorithm may not have access to X, after constructing D, to respond
to the query qt . On the other hand, A can use previous outputs to possibly determine the internal
randomness of the data structure D and make future queries accordingly. In this case, the analysis
of many randomized algorithms fails because it assumes that the randomness of the algorithm is
independent of the input. Consequently, it does not seem evident how to handle Q adaptive queries
without implementing Q instances of a non-adaptive data structure, i.e., each instance handles a
separate query. Thus, a natural question to ask is whether a space overhead of Ω(Q) is necessary.
As a preliminary benchmark, we show that a space overhead of Ω(Q) is unnecessary by giving a
                               e √Q space overhead.

unified framework with only an O
Theorem 1.2. Given a data structure D that answers a query q with probability at least 34 using space
S and query time T , there exists a data structure that answers Q adaptive queries, with high probabil-
                   1
                                           √
                                                                         e T log(nQ) + log3 (nQ) .

ity, i.e., 1 − poly(n,Q) , using space O S Q log(nQ) and query time O

Theorem 1.2 invokes the framework of Hassidim et al. (2020); Beimel et al. (2022); Attias et al.
(2023) to the centralized setting, where a number of queries are made only after the data structure is
created.
To concretely instantiate our framework and state an example, we consider the adaptive distance
estimation problem defined as follows. In the adaptive distance estimation problem, there exists a set
X = {x(1) , . . . , x(n) } of n points in Rd . We are also given an accuracy parameter ε > 0. A query is
of the form q, and the algorithm must output a (1 + ε)-approximation to ∥x(i) − q∥p for all i. The
trivial solution of storing all n points and computing all n distances to a query point uses space
                                                                                                  and
                                                                                            n+d
query time O (nd).    Cherapanamjeri
                                                2   (2020) improved the query time to O ε2 at the
                                          & Nelson                                       e
                     (n+d)d
cost of using O e
                     ε   2     space and O nd2 pre-processing time, while permitting an arbitrary
                                           e
                                            ε
number of queries. By comparison, our data structure handles Q queries of approximate
                                                                               √   distances
from a specified point in X, using query time O ε2 , pre-processing time O ndε2 Q , and space
                                                n+d

                                              e                            e
         √
 e (n+d)2 Q . Thus, in the regime where d ≫ n√Q, our data structure already improves on the

O      ε
work of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020).
A noticeable weakness of our construction is that the Q queries return only the approximate distance
between a query point and a single point in X, whereas Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020) outputs
approximate distances to all points in X. Moreover,  Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2022) subsequently
                                     e nd2 . Thus we open up our framework to (1) show that it can

improve the pre-processing time to O    ε


                                                   3
be further improved to handle the case where we return the approximate distances of all points in X
                                                                     nd

from Q adaptive query points and (2) achieve pre-processing time O ε2 .
                                                                  e
Theorem 1.3. There is a data structure which, when instantiated with dataset X = {xi }i∈[n] ⊂ Rd
and query bound Q ≤ d, answers any sequence of Q adaptively chosen distance estimation queries
correctly with probability at least 0.99. Furthermore, the space complexity of the data structure is
e −2 · n√Q) and the setup and query times are O(ε
O(ε                                               e −2 · nd) and O(ε
                                                                   e −2 · (n + d)), respectively.

Another application of our framework is the adaptive kernel density estimation problem, where there
                     (1)        (n)                   d
exists a set X = {x
                  P , . . . , x(i) } of n points in R and the goal is to output a (1 + ε)-approximation
                1
to the quantity n i∈[n] k(x , q), for an accuracy parameter ε > 0, a query q, and a kernel function
k, under the promise that the output is at least some threshold τ > 0. Backurs      et al. (2019) give an
                                                         1                    d

algorithm for kernel density estimation that uses O τ ε2 space and O √τ ε2 query time, improving
over the standard algorithm that samples O τ 1ε2 points and then uses O τ dε2 query time to output

the empirical kernel density. However, the analysis for both of these algorithms fails for the adaptive
setting, where there can be dependencies between the query and the data structure. By using the data
structure of Backurs et al. (2019) as a subroutine, our √
                                                           framework immediately
                                                                                     implies an algorithm
                                                         Q                 d√log Q
for adaptive kernel density estimation that uses O τ ε2 space and O
                                                   e
                                                                              τ ε2
                                                                                     query time to answer
each of Q adaptive queries. In this case, we are again able to go beyond our framework and give a
data structure that handles an unlimited number of adaptive kernel density queries:
Theorem 1.4. Suppose the kernel function k is L-Lipschitz in the second variable for some L > 0, i.e.,
|k(x, y) − k(x, z)| ≤ L∥y − z∥2 for all x, y, z ∈ Rd . Moreover, suppose that for all ∥x − y∥2 ≤ ρ,
we have k(x, y) ≤ τ3 . Then an algorithm that produces a kernel density estimation data structure D
that is L-Lipschitz over a set X of points with diameter at most ∆ and outputs a (1+ε)-approximation
to KDE queries with value at least τ with probability at least 1 − δ using space S(n, ε, τ, log δ) and
query time T (n, ε, τ, log δ), then there exists a KDE data structure that with probability at least 0.99,
outputs
         a (1 + ε)-approximation
                                     to any
                                            number of KDE queries
                                                                                      τ using space
                                                                      with value at least
                                 (∆+ρ)L
S n, O (ε) , O (τ ) , O d log ετ             and query time T n, O (ε) , O (τ ) , O d log (∆+ρ)Lετ      .

Additionally, we show that our framework guarantees adversarial robustness for a number of other
important problems such as nearest neighbor search, range queries, point queries, matrix-vector
norm queries, and linear regression. Finally, we supplement our theoretical results with a number of
empirical evaluations, which are in the appendix.

1.2   O UR T ECHNIQUES

Dynamic regression on adaptive inputs. Our dynamic algorithm for dynamic maintenance of
least-squares objective exploits two main ideas. First, standard results in sketching and sampling
show that it suffices to solve for the sketched objective of minx∈Rd ∥SAx − Sb∥22 , where S is an ℓ2
subspace embedding for A. Here, we exploit several techniques from numerical linear algebra and in
particular use leverage score sampling to obtain a subspace embedding S of A. By standard results
in sketching, a (1 + ε) optimal solution is given by x∗ = (SA)† Sb. Moreover, since the goal is to
output the objective value instead of the solution vector, we may take a Johnson-Lindenstrauss (JL)
sketch to further reduce dimensionality and run-time. This allows us to focus on ∥GAx∗ − Gb∥22 ,
where G ∈ RO(log d)×n is a JL sketch.
As a result, our algorithm dynamically maintains a solution GA(SA)† b in this sketched space. To
achieve that, we first explicitly solve GA(SA)† in pre-processing. Since GA has few rows, this
reduces to a small number of linear solves and can be computed fast via conjugate gradient-type
methods. To handle the updates, we leverage their sparsity to efficiently maintain the solution and
show that each round takes roughly O (K) time. Amortizing the pre-processing with the update costs
over all iterations yields our desired run-time.
Finally, we apply techniques from differential privacy to ensure adversarial robustness, by aggre-
gating independent copies of the algorithm via a private median mechanism. Intuitively, the private
mechanism hides the internal randomness of the algorithm and therefore prevents the adversary from
otherwise choosing a “bad” input based on knowledge of internal parameters.


                                                    4
                                                               e √Q instances of the non-adaptive

Adaptive query framework. Our framework maintains O
data structure and crucially uses differential privacy (DP) to protect the internal randomness of the
data structures. In addition to our previous results for dynamic regression, the technique of using DP
to hide randomness has recently been used in the streaming model (Hassidim et al., 2020; Kaplan
et al., 2021) and the dynamic model (Beimel et al., 2021). These works elegantly use the advanced
composition property of DP to bound the number of simultaneous algorithms that must be used in
terms of the number of times the output changes “significantly” over the course of the stream. In the
streaming model, the robust algorithms proceed by instantiating many “hidden” copies of a standard
randomized algorithm. As the stream arrives, the algorithms are updated and an answer, aggregated
using DP, is reported. Crucially, many of these results exploit the fact that the output answer is
monotonic in the stream so that there is a known upper bound on the final output. Thus, the reported
answers can only increase by a multiplicative factor at most a logarithmic number of times, which
is used to bound the initial number of algorithms which are initialized. In our centralized setting,
this can be imagined as setting the parameter Q. The main parameter of interest in the streaming
literature is the space used by the streaming algorithms, whereas we are concerned with both space
usage and query times. Furthermore, stream elements are only accessed one at a time and cannot be
processed together unless memory is used. In our case, the dataset is given to us upfront and we can
pre-process it to construct a data structure towards solving a centralized problem.
The work by Beimel et al. (2021) shares many of these ideas: the authors are concerned with dynamic
graph algorithms where an adversary can update the graph in an adaptive fashion. Similar tools such
as multiple randomized initialization and aggregated responses using DP are utilized. The main
difference is their parameters of interest: the goal of Beimel et al. (2021) is to have a fast amortized
update time across many queries. This necessitates the need to “throw away” existing algorithms and
start with fresh randomness at intermittent points. In contrast, we study a centralized setting where
the underlying dataset is not updated but we wish to answer Q adaptive queries on the dataset.
Inspired by these works,   our main framework also uses advanced composition to show the sufficiency
of maintaining O e √Q data structures to answer Q adaptive queries in the centralized setting, which
gives a rich set of applications. Moreover, to improve the query time of our algorithms, we further
invoke the privacy amplification of sampling to show that it suffices to output the private median of a
                                                         e √Q data structures. Thus our framework

small subset, i.e., a subset of size O (log Q), of these O
                                                           e √Q overhead in space. Surprisingly,

only incurs a logarithmic overhead in query time and an O
our simple framework gives diverse applications for adaptive algorithms on a number of important
problems, including estimating matrix-vector norms, adaptive range query search, adaptive nearest
neighbor search, and adaptive kernel density estimation, to name a few. These applications are
discussed in depth in Section C.

Adaptive distance estimation. To achieve better pre-processing time for adaptive distance estima-
tion, our main technique is to sample groups of rows from a Hadamard transform and argue that an
interaction with a separate group should be considered in separate privacy budgets, effectively arguing
that outputting n approximate distances to a single adaptive query only uses one unit of privacy
budget. By contrast, our black-box framework charges one unit of privacy budget per approximate
distance, so that outputting n approximate distances would use n units of privacy budget.

Adaptive kernel density estimation. Theorem 1.4 is based on showing that with constant probabil-
ity, our data structure is accurate on all possible queries in Rd . In particular, we first show that our
data structure is accurate on a sufficiently fine net of points through a standard union bound argument,
which incurs the d overhead compared to the space required to handle a single query. We then show
that if the algorithm and the kernel function are both Lipschitz, which is true for sampling-based
algorithms and a number of standard kernel functions, then accuracy on the net implies accuracy on
all possible points in Rd .


2    DYNAMIC R EGRESSION UNDER L ABEL U PDATES

In this section, we consider the dynamic problem of maintaining the cost of the least-squares
regression, where the labels receive adaptively chosen updates. Let A ∈ Rn×d be the design matrix
and b ∈ Rn be the target label. A classic problem in numerical linear algebra and optimization is to


                                                   5
solve the ℓ2 least-squares regression objective
                                                       2                   2
                           F (A, b) = min ∥Ax − b∥2 = AA† b − b 2 .                               (2.1)
                                      x∈Rd

We consider a dynamic version of the problem, where the label receives adaptively chosen updates.
We assume that each update can only affect K entries of the label vector. In this setting, we show:
Theorem 2.1 (Main theorem; dynamic maintenance of regression cost). Let ε ∈ (0, 1/4) be an error
parameter and b(1) be the initial target label. Given ε, A, b(1) , a stream of T adaptively chosen,
K-sparse updates to the label, Algorithm 4 outputs an estimate Fbi such that Fbi = (1 ± ε)F (A, b(i) )
for all i with high probability.
Furthermore, the algorithm requires a preprocessing step in time O
                                                                 e (nnz(A) + poly(d)). The
amortized update time of the algorithm is
                                  p            p
                              Oe     K nnz(A)    κ(A) + ε−3 .

We defer the technical details to Appendix 3. Here, we describe the main ideas of the algorithm.
At a high-level, our algorithm implements a sketch-and-solve strategy. First, in pre-processing,
                                                                                                 the
algorithm samples a leverage score sketching matrix S ∈ Rk×n , where k = O d log d/ε2 . This
provides a (1 + ε) ℓ2 subspace embedding for A. Standard results in sketching imply that it suffices
to solve for the sketched objective of minx∈Rd ∥SAx − Sb∥22 (Sarlos (2006); Clarkson & Woodruff
(2013; 2017); Woodruff (2014)). Let A   b = SA. A (1 + ε) optimal solution is thus given by A    b † b.
Moreover, our goal is to maintain the regression cost, rather than this solution vector. Hence, we can
apply the Johnson–Lindenstrauss lemma and focus on
                                              2                            2
                           min ∥SAx − Sb∥2 ≈ GA(SA)† Sb − Gb 2 ,                                  (2.2)
                           x∈Rd
                       2
where G ∈ RO(log n/ε )×n is a JL sketch.
To track the cost value dynamically, the algorithm first computes and stores M = GA(SA)† in
pre-processing. In the 1-st step, given the initial target label b(1) , the algorithm computes Sb(i) ,
                                                                     2
M Sb(1) and Gb(1) . Then it outputs Fb1 = MSb(1) − Gb(1) 2 as an estimate of the regression
cost. For the later steps, we show how to maintain Gb(i) , Sb(i) efficiently, by exploiting the sparsity
of the updates. Finally, to remain robust under adaptive inputs, we aggregate multiple copies using
private median and carefully balance the parameters to achieve the run-time guarantee.

3     D ETAILS ON DYNAMIC R EGRESSION
In this section, we consider the dynamic problem of maintaining the cost of the least-squares
regression, where the labels receive adaptively chosen updates.
We first introduce the basic setting of the problem in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2, we design a key
subroutine under non-adaptive updates. The data structure enjoys a nearly linear update time. This
allows us to aggregate multiple copies of the procedure and thereby efficiently ensure adversarial
robustness against an adaptive adversary. The argument is via an application of differential privacy
and detailed subsequently in Section 3.3.

3.1   BASIC S ETTING

Let A ∈ Rn×d be the design matrix and b ∈ Rn be the target label. A classic problem in numerical
linear algebra and optimization is to solve the ℓ2 least-squares regression objective
                                                       2                   2
                           F (A, b) = min ∥Ax − b∥2 = AA† b − b 2 .                               (3.1)
                                      x∈Rd

We consider a dynamic version of the problem, where the design matrix A remains unchanged.
However, at each step (at most) K entries of b undergo an update. Moreover, we assume that the
updates are chosen adaptively by an adversary in the following manner.


                                                   6
       • The algorithm starts by receiving the input A ∈ Rn×d and b(1) ∈ Rn .
       • In the i-th step, the algorithm outputs an estimate Fbi of the cost F (A, b(i) ), where b(i) is
         the target label corresponding to the step.
       • The adversary observes Fbi and updates at most K labels to form b(i) .

Let b(1) , b(2) , . . . , b(T ) ∈ Rn be the resulting sequence of labels over T steps. The goal of the
algorithm is to output a (1 + ε) approximation to the optimal cost at every step, while minimizing the
update time.

3.2   DYNAMIC A LGORITHM FOR O BLIVIOUS I NPUTS

In this section, we provide a key subroutine that maintains a data structure under oblivious updates.
On a high-level, the data structure aims to enable a sketch-and-solve strategy dynamically. The
main ideas are two fold: (1) apply randomized sketching to reduce dimensionality and therefore
the run-time, and (2) exploit the sparsity of the updates to argue that the regression costs can be
maintained efficiently.
Before delving into the technical details, we give an overview of the algorithm.

Overview of the algorithm. We start by assuming that the algorithm has access to DLS (via
Lemma A.11), the row leverage score sampling data structure for A. In preprocessing, the algorithm
samples a leverage score sketching matrix S ∈ Rk×n from DLS , where k = O(d log d/ε2 ). This
provides a (1 + ε) ℓ2 subspace embedding for A. Standard results in sketching imply that it suffices
to solve for the sketched objective of minx∈Rd ∥SAx − Sb∥22 Sarlos (2006); Clarkson & Woodruff
(2013; 2017); Woodruff (2014). Let A b = SA. Then a (1 + ε) optimal solution is thus given by A   b † b.
Moreover, our goal is to maintain the regression cost, rather than this solution vector. Hence, we can
apply Johnson–Lindenstrauss lemma and focus on
                                                2                              2
                            min ∥SAx − Sb∥2 ≈ GA(SA)† Sb − Gb 2 ,                                      (3.2)
                            x∈Rd
                        2
where G ∈ RO(log n/ε )×n is a JL sketch.
Next, we describe how to track the cost value dynamically. We stress that the sketching matrices S and
G are sampled upfront in the preprocessing stage and remain fixed afterwards. The algorithm stores
G and M = GA(SA)† , both computed in preprocessing. Meanwhile, it maintains Gb(i) , Sb(i) ,
initialized at i = 1. In the first step, given the initial target label b(1) , the algorithm computes Sb(i) ,
                                                                           2
M Sb(1) and Gb(1) . Then it outputs Fb1 = MSb(1) − Gb(1) 2 as an estimate of the regression
cost.
Let’s consider the i-th step, where the label is updated to b(i) . First, we read the K labels that get
changed and update Sb(i−1) to Sb(i) accordingly. This can be done in O(K) time. Finally, we
                                                                                2
simply compute M(Sb(i) ) and Gb(i) and output Fbi = MSb(i) − Gb(i) 2 . We store Gb(i) for
the next iteration.
We now describe the algorithm formally, followed by an analysis of its run-time and accuracy.

Formal description of the algorithm. We assume DLS for A is given. The data structure is
initialized by drawing the sketching matrices G and S. We also compute M = GSA(SA)† in
preprocessing. This matrix is stored explicitly throughout.

Algorithm 1 Initialize the data structure, i.e., preprocessing
Input: Design matrix A ∈  Rn×d , initial label b(1) ∈ Rn , DLS , ε ∈ (0, 1)
 1: Let k = Θ d log d/ε2
 2: Sample a (1 + ε/2) ℓ2 leverage score row sampling matrix S ∈ Rk×n for A from DLS .
                                         −2
 3: Sample a JL sketch matrix G ∈ RCε log n×n , for a sufficiently large C, by Theorem A.6.
                                       †
 4: Compute and store M = GA(SA) .



                                                     7
At each step, the algorithm computes Sb(i) by reading all K entries of bi−1 that are updated in the
                                                                              2
step. After that, compute M(Sb(i) ) and Gb(i) and output Mb(i) − Gb(i) 2 . The algorithm is
formally given by Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 Update data structure and maintain regression cost
                                                               2
Input: Matrices G ∈ RCε log n×n , S ∈ Rk×n , M ∈ RO(1/ε )×k and the label b(i)
                          −2                             e
                                                (i)
Output: Estimate of the regression cost F A, b
 1: Compute Sb(i) by reading
                              all K entries of b(i−1) that are updated.
 2: Compute M Sb(i) and Gb(i) .                   ▷Store MSb(i) , Sb(i) , Gb(i) for the next round.
                       (i)       (i) 2
 3: Output Fbi = MSb − Gb             2
                                       .


Analysis of the algorithm. We now analyze the run-time of the algorithm. First, consider the
preprocessing stage performed by Algorithm 1.
Lemma 3.1 (Preprocessing time). Assuming access to the leverage score sampling data structure
DLS , the preprocessing time of Algorithm 1 is

                         p                    1 nnz(A)         d
                    O      κ(A) nnz(A) log +           log n + 2 log n .                (3.3)
                                              ε   ε2          ε

Proof. By Lemma A.11, the guarantee of the sampling data structure DLS , it takes O(k log(nd))
time to obtain a leverage score sample S of size k. Drawing the JL sketch is straightforward, and
standard constructions such as i.i.d. Gaussian entries require O(k log n/ε2 ) times to form G.

Finally, we need to compute M. Computing GA requires O nnz(A)        2   log n   time by sparse matrix
                                                                  ε
multiplication. Moreover, since GA is a matrix of O log    ε2
                                                              n
                                                                  rows, then computing (GA)(SA)†

reduces to O log ε2
                    n
                        number of linear system solves with respect to SA ∈ Rk×d . By conjugate
gradient
      ptype methods, since       κ(SA) = (1 ± ε)κ(A), each solve can be achieved to high accuracy
in O     κ(A) log(1/ε) number of matrix-vector products with respect to A Golub & Van Loan
                                              p
(2013). In total, this gives a run-time of O   κ(A) nnz(A) log(1/ε) .

Lemma 3.2 (Update time). The update time of Algorithm 2 is O εK2 log n per step.



Proof. First, the algorithm reads the K entries that are updated and compute the Sb(i) from Sb(i−1) .
This step takes O(K) time, since we just need to update the entries that lie in the support of the
row sampling matrix S. Similarly, in step 2 of Algorithm 2 we can update Gb(i−1) to Gb(i) in
O(K log n/ε2 ) time. Since S is a row sampling matrix and b(i) only has K entries updated, then
Sb(i) has at most K entries updated as well. It follows that given M Sb(i−1) from the prior round,
M Sb(i) can be updated in O εK2 log n time.


Lemma 3.3 (Accuracy). Given a stream of T = O(d2 ) non-adaptive updates and error parameter
ε ∈ (0, 1/4), Algorithm 2 outputs an estimate Fbi of the regression cost F (A, b(i) ) such that
Fbi = (1 ± ε)F (A, b(i) ) for all i with high probability.

Proof. First, we apply the subspace embedding property of S. This implies that with high probability,
                                           2                                     2
                     min SAx − Sb(i)            = (1 ± ε/2) min Ax − b(i)            .
                       x                   2                x                    2

Apply the JL lemma (Theorem A.6), where we consider the collection of O d2 (1 + ε) optimal
predictions {yi∗ }Ti=1 with yi∗ = A(SA)† b(i) . Via union bound, we have that with high probability
for all i ∈ [T ]
                                            2                            2
                            Gyi∗ − Gb(i)        = (1 ± ε/2) yi∗ − b(i)       .
                                            2                            2


                                                   8
Our algorithm precisely solves for yi∗ each iteration. Combining the two equations above finishes the
proof.

3.3   DYNAMIC A LGORITHM WITH A DVERSARIAL ROBUSTNESS

To put everything together and ensure adversarial robustness, we use a standard approach of
Hassidim √et al. (2020);
                       Beimel et al. (2022); Attias et al. (2023). Our full  algorithm
                                                                                          maintains
Γ=O        T log(nT ) independent copies of the key subroutine for T = O nnz(A)ε2 K   . Then at each
step, we output the private median of the outputs of these copies. Advanced composition of DP
ensures robustness up to T rounds. Afterwards, the algorithm reboots by rebuilding the copies, using
fresh randomness independently for sampling and computing the sketching matrices.

Algorithm 3 Preprocessing step for Algorithm 4
Input: A design matrix A ∈ Rn×d , an approximation factor ε ∈ (0, 1).
Output: The leverage score sampling data structure DLS for A.
 1: Compute the approximate row leverage scores of A.                                 ▷Lemma A.11
 2: Build and output the data structure DLS



Algorithm 4 Dynamic algorithm for maintaining regression cost under adaptive updates
                                           m
Input: A sequence of target labels b(i) i=1 and a fixed design matrix A ∈ Rn×d , an approximation
   factor ε ∈ (0, 1), the leverage score sampling data structure DLS for A.
                                                  (i)
Output: Estimates of the regression
                                          F (A, b ) under adaptively chosen updates to b.
                                      cost
                                 nnz(A)
 1: for every epoch of T = O      ε2 K        updates do
                          √
 2:     Initialize Γ = O  T log (nT ) independent instances of the data structure in Section 3.2
    via Algorithm 1.
 3:     Run PrivMed on the Γ instances with privacy parameter ε′ = O √T log(nT
                                                                            1
                                                                                 )
                                                                                     with failure
                         1
    probability δ = poly(m,T ).
 4:    For each query, return the output of PrivMed.

Theorem 3.4. [Main theorem; dynamic maintenance of regression cost] Let ε ∈ (0, 1/4) be an error
parameter and b(1) be the initial target label. Given ε, A, b(1) , a stream of T adaptively chosen,
K-sparse updates to the label, Algorithm 4 outputs an estimate Fbi such that Fbi = (1 ± ε)F (A, b(i) )
for all i with high probability.
Furthermore, the algorithm requires a preprocessing step in time O
                                                                 e (nnz(A) + poly(d)). The
amortized update time of the algorithm is
                                  p            p
                               O
                               e     K nnz(A)    κ(A) + ε−3

per round.

We defer the proof of Theorem 3.4 and a discussion on a deterministic algorithm to Section B.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Sandeep Silwal is supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. 1745302, and
NSF TRIPODS program (award DMS-2022448), NSF award CCF-2006798, and Simons Investigator
Award (via Piotr Indyk). This work was done in part while David P. Woodruff was at Google Research
and supported in part by a Simons Investigator Award and by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. CCF-1815840. Fred Zhang is supported by ONR grant N00014-18-1-2562. This work
was done in part while Samson Zhou was at Carnegie Mellon University and supported in part by a
Simons Investigator Award and by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. CCF-1815840.


                                                    9
R EFERENCES
Miklós Ajtai, Vladimir Braverman, T. S. Jayram, Sandeep Silwal, Alec Sun, David P. Woodruff,
 and Samson Zhou. The white-box adversarial data stream model. In PODS ’22: International
 Conference on Management of Data, pp. 15–27, 2022. 1

Josh Alman and Huacheng Yu. Faster update time for turnstile streaming algorithms. In Proceedings
  of the 2020 ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA, pp. 1803–1813, 2020. 20

Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, Thijs Laarhoven, Ilya Razenshteyn, and Ludwig Schmidt. Practical
  and optimal lsh for angular distance. Advances in neural information processing systems, 28, 2015.
  27

Sepehr Assadi, Amit Chakrabarti, Prantar Ghosh, and Manuel Stoeckl. Coloring in graph streams via
  deterministic and adversarially robust algorithms. CoRR, abs/2212.10641, 2022. 1

Idan Attias, Edith Cohen, Moshe Shechner, and Uri Stemmer. A framework for adversarial streaming
  via differential privacy and difference estimators. In 14th Innovations in Theoretical Computer
  Science Conference, ITCS, pp. 8:1–8:19, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 9, 17

Dmitrii Avdiukhin, Slobodan Mitrovic, Grigory Yaroslavtsev, and Samson Zhou. Adversarially robust
 submodular maximization under knapsack constraints. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD
 International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, KDD, pp. 148–156, 2019. 1

Arturs Backurs, Moses Charikar, Piotr Indyk, and Paris Siminelakis. Efficient density evaluation for
  smooth kernels. In 59th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pp.
  615–626, 2018. 24

Arturs Backurs, Piotr Indyk, and Tal Wagner. Space and time efficient kernel density estimation in
  high dimensions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, pp. 15773–15782, 2019. 4, 24, 25

Ainesh Bakshi, Piotr Indyk, Praneeth Kacham, Sandeep Silwal, and Samson Zhou. Sub-quadratic
  algorithms for kernel matrices via kernel density estimation. CoRR, abs/2212.00642, 2022. 24

Raef Bassily, Kobbi Nissim, Adam D. Smith, Thomas Steinke, Uri Stemmer, and Jonathan R. Ullman.
  Algorithmic stability for adaptive data analysis. SIAM J. Comput., 50(3), 2021. 14

Amos Beimel, Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, Kobbi Nissim, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Uri
 Stemmer. Dynamic algorithms against an adaptive adversary: Generic constructions and lower
 bounds. CoRR, abs/2111.03980, 2021. 1, 5

Amos Beimel, Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, Kobbi Nissim, Thatchaphol Saranurak, and Uri
 Stemmer. Dynamic algorithms against an adaptive adversary: generic constructions and lower
 bounds. In STOC ’22: 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, pp.
 1671–1684, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 9, 17

Omri Ben-Eliezer, Rajesh Jayaram, David P. Woodruff, and Eylon Yogev. A framework for adversari-
 ally robust streaming algorithms. SIGMOD Rec., 50(1):6–13, 2021. 1

Omri Ben-Eliezer, Talya Eden, and Krzysztof Onak. Adversarially robust streaming via dense-sparse
 trade-offs. In 5th Symposium on Simplicity in Algorithms, SOSA@SODA, pp. 214–227, 2022. 1

Aaron Bernstein, Jan van den Brand, Maximilian Probst Gutenberg, Danupon Nanongkai,
  Thatchaphol Saranurak, Aaron Sidford, and He Sun. Fully-dynamic graph sparsifiers against
  an adaptive adversary. In 49th International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Program-
  ming, ICALP, pp. 20:1–20:20, 2022. 1

Battista Biggio, Igino Corona, Davide Maiorca, Blaine Nelson, Nedim Srndic, Pavel Laskov, Giorgio
  Giacinto, and Fabio Roli. Evasion attacks against machine learning at test time. In Machine Learn-
  ing and Knowledge Discovery in Databases - European Conference, ECML PKDD Proceedings,,
  2013. 1


                                                10
Ilija Bogunovic, Slobodan Mitrovic, Jonathan Scarlett, and Volkan Cevher. Robust submodular
   maximization: A non-uniform partitioning approach. In Proceedings of the 34th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, pp. 508–516, 2017. 1

Vladimir Braverman, Avinatan Hassidim, Yossi Matias, Mariano Schain, Sandeep Silwal, and
  Samson Zhou. Adversarial robustness of streaming algorithms through importance sampling. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems, NeurIPS, pp. 3544–3557, 2021. 1

Hervé Brönnimann, Bernard Chazelle, and János Pach. How hard is half-space range searching?
  Discrete & Computational Geometry, 10(2):143–155, 1993. 19

Mark Bun, Kobbi Nissim, Uri Stemmer, and Salil P. Vadhan. Differentially private release and
 learning of threshold functions. In IEEE 56th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
 Science, FOCS, pp. 634–649, 2015. 13

Nicholas Carlini and David A. Wagner. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In
  2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP, pp. 39–57. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. 1

Amit Chakrabarti, Prantar Ghosh, and Manuel Stoeckl. Adversarially robust coloring for graph
 streams. In 13th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference, ITCS, pp. 37:1–37:23,
 2022. 1

Varun Chandola, Arindam Banerjee, and Vipin Kumar. Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Comput.
  Surv., 41(3):15:1–15:58, 2009. 1

Moses Charikar and Paris Siminelakis. Hashing-based-estimators for kernel density in high di-
 mensions. In 58th IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pp.
 1032–1043, 2017. 24, 25

Moses Charikar, Kevin C. Chen, and Martin Farach-Colton. Finding frequent items in data streams.
 Theor. Comput. Sci., 312(1):3–15, 2004. 20

Moses Charikar, Michael Kapralov, Navid Nouri, and Paris Siminelakis. Kernel density estimation
 through density constrained near neighbor search. In 61st IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations
 of Computer Science, FOCS, pp. 172–183, 2020. 24

Bernard Chazelle. The discrepancy method: randomness and complexity. Cambridge University
  Press, 2000. 19

Bernard Chazelle, Ding Liu, and Avner Magen. Approximate range searching in higher dimension.
  Computational Geometry, 39(1):24–29, 2008. 19

Nadiia Chepurko, Kenneth Clarkson, Lior Horesh, Honghao Lin, and David Woodruff. Quantum-
  inspired algorithms from randomized numerical linear algebra. In International Conference on
 Machine Learning (ICML), 2022. 15

Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri and Jelani Nelson. On adaptive distance estimation. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems 33: NeurIPS, 2020. 3, 20, 22, 27, 28

Yeshwanth Cherapanamjeri and Jelani Nelson. Uniform approximations for randomized hadamard
  transforms with applications. In STOC ’22: 54th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of
  Computing, pp. 659–671, 2022. 3, 20, 22, 27, 28

Kenneth L. Clarkson and David P. Woodruff. Low rank approximation and regression in input sparsity
  time. In Symposium on Theory of Computing Conference, STOC, pp. 81–90, 2013. 6, 7, 19

Kenneth L Clarkson and David P Woodruff. Low-rank approximation and regression in input sparsity
  time. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 63(6):1–45, 2017. 6, 7

Itai Dinur, Uri Stemmer, David P. Woodruff, and Samson Zhou. On differential privacy and adaptive
   data analysis with bounded space. CoRR, abs/2302.05707, 2023. 1


                                               11
Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam D. Smith. Calibrating noise to sensitivity
  in private data analysis. In Theory of Cryptography, Third Theory of Cryptography Conference,
  TCC, Proceedings, pp. 265–284, 2006. 13

Cynthia Dwork, Guy N. Rothblum, and Salil P. Vadhan. Boosting and differential privacy. In 51th
  Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS, pp. 51–60, 2010. 14

Cynthia Dwork, Vitaly Feldman, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Aaron Leon
  Roth. Preserving statistical validity in adaptive data analysis. In Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh
  Annual ACM on Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC, pp. 117–126. ACM, 2015. 14

Anna C. Gilbert, Brett Hemenway, Martin J. Strauss, David P. Woodruff, and Mary Wootters.
  Reusable low-error compressive sampling schemes through privacy. In IEEE Statistical Signal
 Processing Workshop, SSP, pp. 536–539, 2012. 1

Gene H Golub and Charles F Van Loan. Matrix computations. Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013.
  8

Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. In 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, Conference Track
  Proceedings, 2015. 1

Moritz Hardt, Nimrod Megiddo, Christos H. Papadimitriou, and Mary Wootters. Strategic classi-
 fication. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Innovations in Theoretical Computer
 Science, pp. 111–122, 2016. 1

Avinatan Hassidim, Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, Yossi Matias, and Uri Stemmer. Adversarially
  robust streaming algorithms via differential privacy. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2020. 1, 2,
  3, 5, 9, 14, 16, 17

Piotr Indyk. Stable distributions, pseudorandom generators, embeddings, and data stream computation.
  J. ACM, 53(3):307–323, 2006. 18

Shunhua Jiang, Binghui Peng, and Omri Weinstein. Dynamic least-squares regression. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2201.00228, 2022. 3

Haim Kaplan, Yishay Mansour, Kobbi Nissim, and Uri Stemmer. Separating adaptive streaming from
  oblivious streaming using the bounded storage model. In Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2021
 - 41st Annual International Cryptology Conference, CRYPTO, Proceedings, Part III, pp. 94–121,
  2021. 1, 5

Ping Li. Estimators and tail bounds for dimension reduction in ℓα (0 < α ≤ 2) using stable
  random projections. In Shang-Hua Teng (ed.), Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual ACM-SIAM
  Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA, pp. 10–19, 2008. 18

Yanpei Liu, Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. Delving into transferable adversarial
  examples and black-box attacks. In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations,
  ICLR, Conference Track Proceedings, 2017. 1

Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu.
  Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. In 6th International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, 2018. 1

Michael W Mahoney. Randomized algorithms for matrices and data. Foundations and Trends® in
 Machine Learning, 3(2):123–224, 2011. 14

Ilya Mironov, Moni Naor, and Gil Segev. Sketching in adversarial environments. SIAM J. Comput.,
   40(6):1845–1870, 2011. 1

Moni Naor and Eylon Yogev. Bloom filters in adversarial environments. ACM Trans. Algorithms, 15
 (3):35:1–35:30, 2019. 1


                                                 12
Nicolas Papernot, Patrick D. McDaniel, and Ian J. Goodfellow. Transferability in machine learning:
  from phenomena to black-box attacks using adversarial samples. CoRR, abs/1605.07277, 2016. 1

Nicolas Papernot, Patrick D. McDaniel, Ian J. Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z. Berkay Celik, and
  Ananthram Swami. Practical black-box attacks against machine learning. In Proceedings of the
  2017 ACM on Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security, AsiaCCS, pp. 506–519,
  2017. 1

Tamas Sarlos. Improved approximation algorithms for large matrices via random projections. In 47th
  annual IEEE symposium on foundations of computer science (FOCS), pp. 143–152, 2006. 6, 7

Christian Szegedy, Wojciech Zaremba, Ilya Sutskever, Joan Bruna, Dumitru Erhan, Ian J. Goodfellow,
  and Rob Fergus. Intriguing properties of neural networks. In 2nd International Conference on
  Learning Representations, ICLR, Conference Track Proceedings, 2014. 1

Csaba D Toth, Joseph O’Rourke, and Jacob E Goodman. Handbook of discrete and computational
  geometry. CRC press, 2017. 19

David Wajc. Rounding dynamic matchings against an adaptive adversary. In Proccedings of the 52nd
  Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC, pp. 194–207, 2020. 1

David P Woodruff. Sketching as a tool for numerical linear algebra. Foundations and Trends® in
 Theoretical Computer Science, 10(1–2):1–157, 2014. 2, 6, 7, 14, 15

David P. Woodruff and Samson Zhou. Tight bounds for adversarially robust streams and sliding
  windows via difference estimators. In 62nd IEEE Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
  Science, FOCS, pp. 1183–1196, 2021. 1

David P. Woodruff, Fred Zhang, and Samson Zhou. Streaming algorithms for learning with experts:
  Deterministic versus robust, 2023. 1

Vladimir M Zolotarev. One-dimensional stable distributions, volume 65. American Mathematical
  Soc., 1986. 19


A     P RELIMINARIES

Notations In this paper, we use [n] for a positive integer n > 0 to denote the set {1, . . . , n}. We
use poly(n) to denote a fixed polynomial in n. We say an event occurs with high probability if
                                  1
it occurs with probability 1 − poly(n) . For real numbers a, b and positive ε, we say a = (1 ± ε)b
if (1 − ε)b ≤ a ≤ (1 + ε)b. Let ei ∈ Rn be the i’th standard basis vector. Let X+ denote
the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse of matrix X. Let ∥X∥ denote the operator norm of X. Let
κ(X) = ∥X+ ∥ ∥X∥ denote the condition number of X.

A.1   D IFFERENTIAL P RIVACY

Much of our technical results leverage tools from DP. We recall its definition and several key
statements.
Definition A.1 (Differential privacy, Dwork et al. (2006)). Given ε > 0 and δ ∈ (0, 1), a randomized
algorithm A : X ∗ → Y is (ε, δ)-differentially private if, for every neighboring datasets S and S ′
and for all E ⊆ Y,
                             Pr [A(S) ∈ E] ≤ eε · Pr [A(S ′ ) ∈ E] + δ.
Theorem A.2 (Amplification via sampling, e.g., Bun et al. (2015)). Let A be an (ε, δ)-differentially
private algorithm for ε ≤ 1, δ ∈ (0, 1). Given a database S of size n, let A′ be the algorithm that
constructs a database T ⊂ S by subsampling (with replacement) s ≤ n2 rows of S and outputs A(T ).
Then A′ is (ε′ , δ ′ )-differentially private for
                                     6εk                         4kδ
                              ε′ =       ,    δ ′ = exp(6εk/n)       .
                                      n                           n

                                                 13
Theorem A.3 (Private median, e.g., Hassidim et al. (2020)). Given a database D ∈ X ∗ , there exists
an (ε, 0)-differentially private algorithm PrivMed that outputs an element x ∈ X such that with
probability at least 1 − δ, there are at least |S|
                                                2 − k elements
                                                               in S
                                                                    that are at least x, and at least
|S|                                                               1    |X|
 2 − k elements in S in S that are at most x, for k = O           ε log δ     .
Theorem A.4 (Advanced composition, e.g., Dwork et al. (2010)). Let ε, δ ′ ∈ (0, 1] and let δ ∈ [0, 1].
Any mechanism that permits k adaptive interactions with mechanisms
                                                                q that preserve (ε, δ)-differential
privacy guarantees (ε′ , kδ + δ ′ )-differential privacy, where ε′ =         2k ln δ1′ · ε + 2kε2 .
Theorem A.5 (Generalization of DP, e.g., Dwork et al. (2015); Bassily et al. (2021)). Let ε ∈ (0, 1/3),
δ ∈ (0, ε/4), and n ≥ ε12 log 2ε                  n      X
                                δ . Suppose A : X → 2 is an (ε, δ)-differentially private algorithm
that curates a database of size n and produces a function h : X → {0, 1}. Suppose D is a distribution
over X and S is a set of n elements drawn independently and identically distributed from D. Then
                                     "                                   #
                                        1 X                                    δ
                           Pr                 h(x) − E [h(x)] ≥ 10ε < .
                     S∼D,h←A(S)        |S|             x∼D                     ε
                                               x∈S


A.2   N UMERICAL L INEAR A LGEBRA

Our results on dynamic regression relies upon some tools in numerical linear algebra. We first recall
the dimensionality reduction techniques.
Theorem A.6 (Johnson-Lindenstrauss transformation,     ε-JL). Given ε > 0, there exists a family of
random maps Πm,d ∈ Rm×d with m = O ε12 such that for any x ∈ Rd , we have


                                                                                    3
                            Pr      [(1 − ε)∥x∥2 ≤ ∥Πx∥2 ≤ (1 + ε)∥x∥2 ] ≥            .
                       Π∼Πm,d                                                       4
                         d

Moreover, Πx takes O     ε2       time to compute.
                                                                                  m×d
        A.7 (Fast JL). Given ε > 0, there exists a family of random maps Πm,d ∈ R
Theorem                                                                               with
        log d
m = O ε2 such that for any x ∈ Rd , we have

                                                                                    3
                            Pr      [(1 − ε)∥x∥2 ≤ ∥Πx∥2 ≤ (1 + ε)∥x∥2 ] ≥            .
                       Π∼Πm,d                                                       4

                            log d
Moreover, Πx takes O         ε2 + d log d      time to compute.

A row sampling matrix S has rows that are multiples of natural basis vectors, so that SA is a
(weighted) sample of the rows of A. A column sampling matrix is defined similarly. The size of
a row/column sampling matrix is defined as the number of rows/columns it samples. The leverage
score of the ith row a⊤
                      i of A is
                                         def           +
                                  τi (A) = a⊤     ⊤
                                              i A A       ai .
For a survey on leverage score and applications, we refer the reader to Mahoney (2011).
Definition A.8 (Leverage score sampling). Let u be a vector of leverage score overestimates, i.e.,
τi (A) ≤ ui . Let α be a sampling rate parameter and c be a fixed positive constant. For each row, we
define a sampling probability pi = min {1, α · ui c log d}. The leverage score sampling matrix is a
row sampling matrix S with independently chosen entries such that Sii = √1pi with probability pi
and 0 otherwise.
Definition A.9 (Subspace embedding). A (1 ± ε) ℓ2 subspace embedding for the column space of an
n × d matrix A is a matrix S for which for all x ∈ Rd
                                         ∥SAx∥22 = (1 ± ε)∥Ax∥22 .
Theorem A.10 (Leverage sampling implies subspace embedding, Theorem 17 of Woodruff (2014)).
Let α = ε−2 and c be a sufficiently large constant. With high probability, the leverage
                                                                                        score sampling
matrix is a (1 ± ε) ℓ2 subspace embedding. Furthermore, it has size O d log d/ε2 .


                                                      14
The approximate leverage scores can be computed in input-sparsity time. Afterwards, repeated
sampling from the leverage score distribution can be done efficiently using the binary tree data
structure in quantum-inspired numerical linear algebra.
Lemma A.11 (Leverage score computation and sampling data structure; see Woodruff (2014);
Chepurko et al. (2022)). Let A ∈ Rn×d . There exists an algorithm that given A outputs a vector of
row leverage score overestimates with high probability and in run-time O
                                                                       e (nnz(A) + poly(d)).
Furthermore, there exists a sampling data structure DLS that stores the row leverage scores of
A such that given a positive integer m ≤ n, returns a leverage score sample of A of size m in
O (m log(mn)) time. In total, the pre-processing takes O (nnz(A) + poly(d)) time.

B    A DDITIONAL D ETAILS ON DYNAMIC R EGRESSION
Theorem 3.4. [Main theorem; dynamic maintenance of regression cost] Let ε ∈ (0, 1/4) be an error
parameter and b(1) be the initial target label. Given ε, A, b(1) , a stream of T adaptively chosen,
K-sparse updates to the label, Algorithm 4 outputs an estimate Fbi such that Fbi = (1 ± ε)F (A, b(i) )
for all i with high probability.
Furthermore, the algorithm requires a preprocessing step in time O
                                                                 e (nnz(A) + poly(d)). The
amortized update time of the algorithm is
                                  p            p
                               O
                               e     K nnz(A)    κ(A) + ε−3

per round.

Proof. We focus on any fixed epoch of T iterations. Let {Ai }Γi=1 be the collection of Γ data structures
maintained by the Algorithm 4 and Ti be the transcript between Algorithm 4 and the adversary at
round i, consisting of the algorithm’s output and the update requested by the adversary.
To handle a sequence of T adaptive queries, consider the transcript T (R) = {T1 , . . . , TT },
    R denotes
where               the  internal randomness of Algorithm 4. Note that for a fixed iteration, Ti is
           1
 O √T log(nT    )
                    , 0 -differentially private with respect to the algorithms A1 , . . . , AΓ , since the pri-

                                                1
vate median algorithm PrivMed is O √T log(nT          )
                                                         , 0 -differentially private. By the advanced com-

                                                                                        1
position of differential privacy, i.e., Theorem A.4, the transcript T is O (1) , poly(n)       -differentially
private with respect to the algorithms A1 , . . . , AΓ .
Algorithm 4 runs Γ instances of the data structure with error parameter ε. For any given round i ∈ [T ],
we say that an instance j ∈ [Γ] is correct if its output fi,j is within a (1 ± ε) factor of F (A, b(i) ) and
incorrect otherwise. For a fixed i, let Yj be the indicator variable for whether fi,j is correct.
From the generalization properties of differential privacy, i.e., Theorem A.5, we have that for any
fixed iteration i,                                      
                             1   X                     1             1
                       Pr           Yj − E [Y ] ≥       <                ,
                             Γ                        10       poly(m, T )
                                     j∈[Γ]

where Y denotes the indicator random variable for whether a random instance of the algorithm A
(not necessarily restricted to the m instances maintained by the algorithm) is correct at the given
round i. Since a random instance A has randomness that is independent of the adaptive update, then
E [Y ] ≥ 34 . Therefore, by a union bound over all T rounds, we have
                                                  
                                   1 X                           1
                              Pr        Yi > 0.6 > 1 −                ,
                                   Γ                        poly(m, T )
                                       i∈[Γ]

                                                                                            1
which implies that the output on the ith round is correct with probability at least 1 − poly(m,T ) , since
T = d. Then by a union bound over i ∈ [T ] for all T rounds within an epoch, we have that the data
structure answers all T queries with probability 1 − m12 , under the adaptively chosen updates. Finally,


                                                     15
by a union bound over all m updates, we have that the algorithm succeeds with probability at least
     1
1− m   .
We now analyze the run-time of the algorithm. The preprocessing time follows from the guarantee
of  Lemma A.11. For update time, we amortize over each epoch. Within an epoch, we invoke Γ =
     √
O      T log(nT ) copies of the data structure in Section 3.2, and so we consider the preprocessing
and update
         ptime from there and amortize over the epoch length
                                                                 T . By Lemma 3.1, each copy takes
                              1    nnz(A)          d
β =O        κ(A) nnz(A) log ε + ε2 log n + ε2 log n time to pre-process. For every step of
update, each copy takes O εK2 log n time

                                         by Lemma 3.2. Therefore, the amortized update time for
                                nnz(A)
every epoch of length T = O ε2 K         is

                 1               K                    p               p
                                                                                  −3

            O       Γβ + ΓT         log n       = Oe    K  nnz(A)       κ(A) +  ε       .
                T                ε2
This completes the proof.

B.1   A N E XACT AND D ETERMINISTIC A LGORITHM

We now give a simple deterministic algorithm for the dynamic regression problem based on an SVD
trick. Let A = UΣV⊤ be the SVD of A, where U ∈ Rn×d , Σ ∈ Rd×d and V ∈ Rd×d . The
starting observation is that for any solution vector x, we can write the regression cost as
                       ∥Ax − b∥ = UΣV⊤ x − b = ΣV⊤ x − U⊤ b ,                                    (B.1)
since U is orthonormal. The goal is the maintain the solution vector x = A† b and the associated
right-side quantity ΣV⊤ x − U⊤ b .
Now suppose we compute A† ∈ Rd×n and U⊤ ∈ Rd×n in pre-processing, and A† b(1) and U⊤ b(1)
in the first round. Then since all subsequent updates to b are all K-sparse, we only pay O(dK) time
per step to maintain A† b(i) and U⊤ b(i) .

Algorithm 5 A simple SVD-based algorithm for dynamic regression
Input: Design matrix A ∈ Rn×d , its pseudoinverse A† ∈ Rd×n and its SVD A = UΣV⊤ , a
    sequence of labels b(i) ∈ Rn
 1: Compute and store SVD A = UΣV⊤ , where U ∈ Rn×d , Σ ∈ Rd×d , V ∈ Rd×d
 2: Compute and store A† from the SVD. ▷In the 1st-round, compute and store A† b(1) , U⊤ b(1) .
 3: for each update b(i) do
 4:     Update and store x(i) = A† b(i)
 5:     Update and store U⊤ b(i)
                                        2
 6:     Output Fi = ΣV⊤ x(i) − U⊤ b(i) 2

The algorithm is formally given by Algorithm 5. Observe that the algorithm always maintains
the exact optimal regression cost. Moreover, the procedure does not require any randomness, and
therefore it is adversarially robust to adaptive inputs. We formally claim the following guarantees of
the algorithm.
Theorem B.1 (Deterministic maintenance of regression costs). Given A, b(1) and a stream of
adaptively chosen, K-sparse updates to the label, Algorithm 5 takes O(dK) time to update and
maintain the exact regression cost F (A, b(i) ) at all iterations i. The pre-processing requires an SVD
of A, in O(n2 d) time.

C     A F RAMEWORK FOR A DVERSARIAL ROBUSTNESS

                             the benchmark framework that enables Q adaptive queries to a data
In this section, we describe
                   e √Q copies of a non-adaptive data structure. The framework and corresponding
structure by using O
analysis of correctness are simply compartmentalizations of the techniques in Hassidim et al. (2020);


                                                  16
Beimel et al. (2022); Attias et al. (2023). For the sake of completeness, we include them here and
discuss additional applications. Namely,
                                         we show that through advanced composition of differential
privacy, the private median of Oe √Q copies protects the internal randomness of each non-adaptive
data structure while still adding sufficiently small noise to guarantee accuracy. Moreover, we use
                                                                              e √Q non-adaptive

amplification of privacy by sampling to only consider a small subset of the O
data structures to further improve the runtime.

Algorithm 6 Adaptive Algorithm Interaction
             √
                Q log2 (nQ) , k ← O (log(nQ))

 1: r ← O
 2: for i ∈ [r] do
 3:     Implement data structure Di on the input
 4: for each query qi , i ∈ [Q] do
 5:     Let S be a set of k indices sampled (with replacement) from [r]
 6:     For each j ∈ [k], let di,j be the output of DSj on query qi
 7:     di ← PrivMed({di,j }j∈[k] ), where PrivMed is (1, 0)-DP


We first argue that Algorithm 6 maintains accuracy against Q rounds of interaction with an adaptive
adversary. Let R = {R(0) , R(1) , . . . , R(r) }, where R(1) , . . . , R(r) denotes the random strings used
by the oblivious data structures D1 , . . . , Dr and R(0) denotes the additional randomness used by
Algorithm 6, such as in the private median subroutine PrivMed. Consider a transcript T (R) =
{T1 , . . . , TQ } such that for each i ∈ [Q], we define Ti = (qi , di ) to be the ordered pair consisting of
the query qi and the corresponding answer di by Algorithm 6 using the random string R(0) , as well
as the oblivious data structures D1 , . . . , Dr with random strings R(1) , . . . , R(r) . We remark that di is
a random variable due to the randomness of each data structure, as well as the randomness of the
private median subroutine PrivMed.
We will first argue that the transcript TR is differentially private with respect to R. We emphasize that
similar arguments were made in the streaming model by Hassidim et al. (2020) and in the dynamic
model Beimel et al. (2022); Attias et al. (2023).

                                                        1
Lemma C.1. For a fixed iteration, Ti is O √Q log(nQ)             , 0 -differentially private with respect to
R.


    √ We first observe
Proof.                     that PrivMed is (1, 0)-differentially private on the outputs of the r =
O Q log2 (nQ) data structures. Algorithm 6 samples k = O (log(nQ)) groups of data structures

from
    the  r total data
                     structures.
                                   Thus by amplification via sampling,              A.2, PrivMed
                                                                       i.e., Theorem
             1                                                             1
is O √Q log(nQ)       , 0 -differentially private. Therefore, Ti is O √Q log(nQ)  , 0 -differentially
private with respect to R.

We next argue that the entire transcript is differentially private with respect to the randomness R.

                                 1
Lemma C.2. T is O (1) , poly(nQ)        -differentially private with respect to R.


                                                                                                 1
Proof. By Lemma C.1, for each fixed iteration i ∈ [Q], the transcript Ti is O √Q log(nQ)               ,0 -
differentially private with respect to R. Note that the transcript T is an adaptive composition of the
transcripts T1 , . . . , TQ . Thus, by the  advanced composition of differential privacy, i.e., Theorem A.4,
                                1
the transcript T is O (1) , poly(nQ) -differentially private with respect to R.


We now prove the correctness of our unifying framework.

Proof of Theorem 1.2: For a fixed query qi with i ∈ [Q], let S be the corresponding set of k indices
sampled from [r]. Let V be the set of valid answers on query qi . Let Ij be an indicator variable


                                                      17
for whether the output di,j on query qi by DSj is correct, so that Ij = 1 if di,j ∈ V and Ij = 0 if
di,j ∈
     / V. By assumption, we have that for each j ∈ [k],
                                                             3
                                               Pr [Ij = 1] ≥   ,
                                                             4
so that E [Ij ] ≥ 43 . We define the random variable I = k 1
                                                             P
                                                               j∈[k] Ij so that by linearity of expectation,
E [I] = k1 j∈[k] E [Ij ] ≥ 34 .
           P

To handle a sequence of Q adaptive queries, we consider the transcript T (R) = {T1 , . . . , TQ } for
the randomness R = {R(0) , R(1) , . . . , R(r) } previously defined, i.e., for each i ∈ [Q], Ti = (qi , di )
is the ordered pair consisting of the query qi and the corresponding answer di by Algorithm 6 using
the random string R(0) , as well as the oblivious data    structures D1 , . . . , Dr with random strings
  (1)        (r)                                                      1
R , . . . , R . By Lemma C.2, we have that T is O (1) , poly(nQ)              -differentially private with
respect to R.
For j ∈ [k], we define the function success(R(Sj ) ) to be the indicator variable for whether the output
di,Sj by data structure DSj is successful on query qi . For example, if D is supposed to answer
queries within (1 + α)-approximation, then we define success(R(Sj ) ) to be one if di,Sj is within a
(1 + α)-approximation to the true answer on query qi , and zero otherwise. From the generalization
properties of differential privacy, i.e., Theorem A.5, we have
                                                                       
                     1  X                                             1            1
                             success(R(Sj ) ) − E success(R) ≥

              Pr                                                       <               ,
                     k                          R                    10       poly(n, Q)
                       j∈[k]

for sufficiently small O (1). Therefore, by a union bound over all Q queries, we have
                                                 
                                   1 X                          1
                              Pr         Ii > 0.6 > 1 −              ,
                                   k                       poly(n, Q)
                                       i∈[k]

which implies that di is correct on query qi . Then by a union bound over i ∈ [Q] for all Q adaptive
queries, we have that the data structure answers all Q adaptive queries with high probability.    □


D     A PPLICATIONS OF O UR F RAMEWORK
Theorem 1.2 has applications to a number of central problems in data science and machine learning.
In this section, we formally describe the range queries, point queries, matrix-vector norm queries,
and linear regression problems; we defer discussion of adaptive distance estimation, kernel density
estimation, and nearest neighbor search to the the appendix.

D.1    A PPLICATION : M ATRIX -V ECTOR N ORM Q UERIES

In the matrix-vector norm query problem, we are given a matrix A ∈ Rn×d and we would like
to handle Q adaptive queries x(1) , . . . , x(Q) for an approximation parameter ε > 0 by outputting
a (1 + ε)-approximation to ∥Ax(i) ∥p for each query x(i) ∈ Rd with i ∈ [Q]. Here we define
∥v∥pp =                p                       d                             (i)
         P
            i∈[d] |vi | for a vector v ∈ R . Observe that computing Ax           explicitly and then
computing its p-norm requires O (nd) time. Thus for n ≫ d, a much faster approach is to produce a
subspace embedding, i.e., to compute a matrix M ∈ Rm×d with m ≪ n, such that for all x ∈ Rd ,
                               (1 − ε)∥Ax∥p ≤ ∥Mx∥p ≤ (1 + ε)∥Ax∥p .
However, because subspace embeddings   must be correct over all possible queries, the number of
rows of M is usually m = Ω εd2 due to requiring correctness over an ε-net.


Theorem D.1 (Indyk (2006); Li (2008)). Given A ∈ Rn×d , p ∈ (0, 2], and an accuracy   parameter
ε > 0, there exists an algorithm that creates a data structure that uses O ε12 log n bits of space
and outputs a (1 + ε)-approximation to ∥Ax∥p for a query x ∈ Rd , with high probability, in time
O εd2 log n .


                                                     18
Theorem D.1 essentially creates a matrix R ∈ Rm×n of random variables sampled from p-stable
distribution (Zolotarev, 1986) and then stores the matrix RA. Once the query x arrives, the data
structure then outputs a (1 + ε)-approximation to ∥Ax∥p by computing a predetermined function
on RAx. The restriction on p ∈ (0, 2] is due to the fact that p-stable distributions only exist for
p ∈ (0, 2]. From Theorem D.1 and Theorem 1.2, we have the following:
Theorem D.2. Given A ∈ Rn×d , p ∈ (0, 2], and an  accuracy parameter        ε > 0, there exists an
                                                          √
                                                            Q    2
algorithm that creates a data structure that uses O        ε2 log (nQ)     bits of space and outputs a
(1 + ε)-approximation to ∥Ax ∥p with i ∈ [Q] for Q adaptive queries x(1) , . . . , x(Q) ∈ Rd , with
                                (i)

                          e d2 log2 (nQ) + log3 (nQ) .

high probability, in time O ε


D.2    A PPLICATION : L INEAR R EGRESSION

In the linear regression problem, we are given a fixed matrix A ∈ Rn×d and we would like to
handle Q adaptive queries b(1) , . . . , b(Q) , for an approximation parameter ε > 0, by outputting a
(1 + ε)-approximation to minx∈Rd ∥Ax − b(i) ∥2 for each query b(i) ∈ Rn with i ∈ [Q]. For linear
regression, we can again compute a subspace embedding M = SA ∈ Rm×n and answer a query
b(i) by approximately solving minx∈Rd ∥SAx − Sb(i) ∥2 , where S is a sketching matrix (Clarkson
& Woodruff, 2013).
Theorem D.3 (Clarkson & Woodruff (2013)). Given A ∈ Rn×d , b ∈ Rn , and                 2an accuracy

parameter ε > 0, there exists an algorithm that creates a data structure that uses O dε2 log2 (nQ)
bits of space and outputs a (1 + ε)-approximation to minx∈Rd ∥Ax − b∥2 with high probability.

However, this may fail for multiple interactions with the data structure. For example, suppose the
adversary learns the kernel of S. Then the adversary could query some vector b(i) in the kernel of S
so that Sb(i) is the all zeros vector, so that the output is the all zeros vector of dimension d, which
could be arbitrarily bad compared to the actual minimizer. Thus the naı̈ve approach is to  maintain

Q subspace embeddings, one for each query, resulting in a data structure with space O       e Qd
                                                                                               ε2 . By
comparison, Theorem D.3 and Theorem 1.2 yield the following:
Theorem D.4. Given A ∈ Rn×d and an            √accuracy  parameter
                                                                       ε > 0, there exists an algorithm
                                                Qd2    3
that creates a data structure that uses O       ε2 log (nQ) bits of space and with high probability,
outputs (1 + ε)-approximations to minx∈Rd ∥Ax − b(i) ∥2 for Q adaptive queries b(1) , . . . , b(Q) .

D.3    A PPLICATION : H ALF -S PACE Q UERIES

Given a set P of n points in Rd , the range query or search problem asks us to pre-process P so that
given a region R, chosen from a predetermined family, one can quickly count or return the points in
P ∩ R. This is an extremely well-studied class of problems in computational geometry Toth et al.
(2017) and the case where the regions R are hyperplanes (also called half-spaces) is of special interest
since many algebraic constraints can be “lifted” to be hyperplanes in a higher dimension.
Unfortunately, exact versions of the problem are known to have the “curse of dimensionality” and
suffer from exponential dependence on d in the query time (Brönnimann et al., 1993; Chazelle, 2000).
Nonetheless, Chazelle et al. (2008) gave a data structure capable of answering hyperplane queries
approximately with polynomial query time. Their notion of approximation is as follows: given a set
of points P in the unit ℓ2 ball, hyperplane R, and ε > 0, we return the number of points that are on
a given side of the hyperplane R up to additive error equal to the number of points in P which lie
within distance ε of the boundary of R. We will refer to this query as an ε-approximate hyperplane
query. Chazelle et al. (2008) proved the following theorem.
Theorem D.5 (Chazelle et al. (2008)). Given a set of points     P that  lie in the unit ℓ2 ball, there
                                                               O(ε−2 )
exists a data structure that pre-processes P using space O dn
                                                         e              such that any ε-approximate

hyperplane range query is answered correctly with high probability. The query time is O  e d/ε2 .

The data structure of Chazelle et al. (2008) is randomized and in particular employs randomized
dimensionality reduction. Thus, it is feasible that queries might fail for multiple adaptive interactions


                                                   19
with the data structure. By utilizing our framework of Section C and Theorem 1.2, we can obtain the
following robust guarantee.
Theorem D.6. Given a set of points  √ P that lie     the unit ℓ2 ball, there exists a data structure which
                                                  in
                                           O(ε−2 )
pre-processes P using space O   e     Qdn            such that Q adaptive ε-hyperplane range queries

are answered correctly with high probability. The query time is O    e d/ε2 .

D.4    A PPLICATION : P OINT Q UERIES ON T URNSTILE S TREAMS

In the problem of point queries on turnstile streams, there exists a stream of m updates. Each update
specifies a coordinate i ∈ [n] of an underlying frequency vector f ∈ Rn and changes fi by some
amount between ∆i ∈ [−∆, ∆], where ∆ = poly(n). Given any constant accuracy parameter ε > 0
any time t ∈ [m], we define f (t) to be the frequency vector implicitly defined after the first t updates.
                                               (t)
Then the point query problem is to output fi for various choices of t ∈ [m] and i ∈ [n] within an
additive error of ε∥f (t) ∥1 .
Theorem D.7 (Alman & Yu (2020)). There exists an algorithm that uses space O log2 n bits,


worst-case update time O log0.582 n , and query time O log1.582 n , that supports point queries

with ε = 0.1 with high probability.
An important quality of Theorem D.7 is that it significantly improves the update time over previous
data structures, e.g., Charikar et al. (2004), at a cost in query time. By applying Theorem 1.2, we can
avoid a blow-up in query time while still enjoying the update time improvements:
                                                                     √
Theorem D.8. There exists an algorithm that uses space O Q log3 (nQ) bits, has worst-case

                  √
update time O Q log1.582 (nQ) and query time O            e log3 (nQ) , and supports Q adaptive point

queries with ε = 0.1 and with high probability.

E     A DAPTIVE D ISTANCE E STIMATION
In the adaptive distance estimation problem, there exists a set X = {x(1) , . . . , x(n) } of n points in Rd .
Given an accuracy parameter ε > 0, the goal is to output a (1 + ε)-approximation to ∥x(i) − q∥p for
each query q across all points x(i) ∈ X, while minimizing the space, query time, or pre-processing
time for the corresponding data structures. The trivial solution stores all n points and computes all
n distances to each query point and thus can handle an unlimited number of queries. Since each
point has dimension d, the trivial solution uses space and query time O (nd).  Cherapanamjeri              &
                                                  e n+d
                                                                                        (n+d)d
Nelson (2020) first improved the query time to O      ε2    at the cost of using    O
                                                                                    e
                                                                                           ε2     space  and
     2
     nd
Oe
      ε2  pre-processing time. Like the trivial solution, the algorithm of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson
(2020) also permits an arbitrary number of queries.

                                                                                handle Q queries of
In this section, we first apply our framework to show a data structure that can
approximate    distances from  a                    X, using query time e n+d
                                                                        O
     √                           specified
                                    √
                                           point in                        ε2 , pre-processing time
     nd   Q

                              (n+d)  Q                     √
Oe
      ε 2    , and space Oe
                                 ε2      . Hence for d ≫ n Q, our data structure already improves on
the work of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020).
However in this setting, each of the Q queries returns only the approximate distance between a query
point and a single point in X. By comparison, Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020) outputs approximate
distances to all points in X and moreover, follow-up work by Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2022)
improved the pre-processing time to O e nd2 . Therefore, we address these two shortcomings of our
                                          ε
framework by giving a data structure that (1) handles the case where we return the approximate
         of all points in X from Q adaptive query points and (2) achieves pre-processing time
distances
Oe nd2 .
    ε
For completeness, we now show correctness of our algorithm across all Q adaptive queries, though
we remark that the proof can simply be black-boxed into Theorem 1.2.
Theorem E.1. With high probability, we have
                        (1 − ε)∥xiq − yq ∥2 ≤ di ≤ (1 + ε)∥xiq − yq ∥2 ,


                                                     20
Algorithm 7 Adaptive Distance Estimation
              √
                  Q log2 (nQ) , k ← O (log(nQ))

 1: r ← O
 2: Let Π1 , . . . , Πr ∈ Rm×d be a JL transformation matrix (see Theorem A.6 or Theorem A.7)
 3: for j ∈ [r] do
 4:     Compute Πj xi
 5: for each query (y, i) with y ∈ Rd , i ∈ [n] do                               ▷Adaptive queries
 6:     Let S be a set of k indices sampled (with replacement) from [r]
 7:     for j ∈ [k] do
 8:         di,j ← ∥ΠSj (xi − y)∥2
 9:     di ← PrivMed({di,j }j∈[k] ), where PrivMed is (1, 0)-DP.
10:     return di


for all q ∈ [Q].

Proof. Fix query (yq , iq ) with q ∈ [Q] and iq ∈ [n]. Let S be a set of k indices sampled (with
replacement) from [r]. By Theorem A.6 or Theorem A.7, then we have for each j ∈ [k],
                                                                               3
            Pr (1 − ε)∥xiq − yq ∥2 ≤ ∥ΠSj (xiq − yq )∥2 ≤ (1 + ε)∥xiq − yq ∥2 ≥ .
                                                                               4
Let Ij be an indicator variable so that Ij = 1 if (1 − ε)∥xiq − yq ∥2 ≤ ∥ΠSj (xiq − yq )∥2 ≤
(1 + ε)∥xiq − yq ∥2 and Ij = 0 otherwise, so that we have Pr [Ij = 1] ≥ 34 , or equivalently,
E [Ij ] ≥ 34 . Let I = k1 j∈[k] Ij so that by linearity of expectation, E [I] = k1 j∈[k] E [Ij ] ≥ 34 .
                         P                                                        P

To address adaptive queries, we first note that PrivMed is (1, 0)-differentially private on
                                                                                          √the outputs of
the r Fast JL transforms. Since we sample k = O (log(nQ)) groups from the r = O Q log2 (nQ)
groups
    with replacement,
                              then by amplification via sampling, i.e., Theorem A.2, PrivMed is
            1
  O   √
        Q log(nQ)
                    , 0 -differentially private. Thus, by the advanced composition of differential

                                                                                                  1
privacy, i.e., Theorem A.4, the mechanism permits Q adaptive queries and is O (1) , poly(nQ)              -
differentially private. By the generalization properties of differential privacy, i.e., Theorem A.5, we
have                                                      
                                  1  X                  1            1
                            Pr          Ij − E [I] ≥        <                ,
                                  k                    10        poly(Q, n)
                                    j∈[k]

for sufficiently small O (1). Thus we have
                                                
                                   1 X                       1
                              Pr        Ii > 0.6 > 1 −            ,
                                   k                     poly(Q, n)
                                      i∈[k]

which implies that (1−ε)∥xiq −yq ∥2 ≤ di ≤ (1+ε)∥xiq −yq ∥2 . Therefore, by a union bound across
Q adaptive queries (yq , xiq ) with q ∈ [Q], we have that (1−ε)∥xiq −yq ∥2 ≤ di ≤ (1+ε)∥xiq −yq ∥2
for all q ∈ [Q] with high probability.

Theorem E.2. There exists an  algorithm that answers
                                                      Q  adaptive distance estimation   queries
                                                                                         √
                                                                                                 within

                               log d                                                   n Q log3 (nQ)
a factor of (1 + ε). For O      ε 2   + d log d  log(nQ)   query  time,   it stores O        ε 2
                                                              √        2

words of space. For O εd2 log(nQ) query time, it stores O n Q log        (nQ)

                                                                    ε2          words of space.


Proof. By Theorem A.7, each fast JL transform uses O log
                                                       ε 2
                                                           d
                                                             + d log d  runtime and stores m =

O log   d
            rows. On the other hand, by Theorem A.6, each JL transform uses O εd2 + d log d

     ε2

runtime and stores m = O log ε2
                                d
                                    rows.


                                                   21

                                                                  nd log n                              d

By comparison, Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020) uses O                ε2           words of space and O   ε2
query time.

E.1   FASTER P RE - PROCESSING T IME FOR A DAPTIVE D ISTANCE E STIMATION

In this section, we present an improved algorithm for Adaptive Distance Estimation, which allows
the release of distances to all n points in the dataset for a single query, matching the√query time
of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020) with an improved space complexity of O(ε−2 Qn). Our
results utilize a class of structured randomized linear transformations based on Hadamard matrices
recursively defined below:

                                                      Hd/2 Hd/2
                                 H1 = [1]     Hd =                     .
                                                      Hd/2 −Hd/2

The associated class of randomized linear transformations are now defined below:

                          j           d×d       j iid N (0, I) if k = l
                       {D }j∈[m] ⊂ R       s.t Dk,l ∼
                                                        0        otherwise
                                                           1
                                                      Hd D
                                                    
                                                      Hd D2 
                                ∀z ∈ Rd : h(z) = 
                                                    
                                                     ..  · z.                                   (SRHT)
                                                            
                                                        .
                                                       Hd Dm

Note that for any vector z, h(z) may be computed in time O(md log d) due to the recursive definition
of the Hadamard transform. We now let ϕ and Φ denote the pdf and cdf of a standard normal random
variable, Quantα ({ai }i∈[l] ) the αth quantile of a multi-set of real numbers {ai }i∈[l] for any l ∈ N
and define ψr as follows:
                               ∀r > 0, a ∈ R : ψr (a) := min(|a|, r).

Through the remainder of the section, we condition on the event defined in the following lemma:
Lemma E.3 (Claims 5.1 and 5.2 Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2022)). For any δ ∈ 0, 12 , with

probability at least 1 − δ:

    ∀z s.t ∥z∥ = 1 : 2 ≤ Quantα−β/4 {h(z)i }i∈[md] ≤ Quantα+β/4 {h(z)i }i∈[md] ≤ 4
                                                           r
                            p                ε       1       π X                           ε
    ∀z s.t ∥z∥ = 1, r ≥ 4 log(1/ε) : 1 −         ≤       ·     ·       ψr (hi (z)) ≤ 1 +
                                             2      md       2                             2
                                                                     i∈[md]


as long as m ≥ Cε−2 log(2/δ) log5 (d/ε) for some absolute constant C > 0.

We will additionally require the following technical result from Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2022),
where for any vector v ∈ Rd and multiset S = {ij }j∈[k] with ij ∈ [d], vS denotes the vector
[vi1 , . . . , vik ]:
Lemma E.4 (Theorem 1.4 Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2022)). Assume h : Rd → Rmd (SRHT)
satisfies the conclusion of Lemma E.3. Then, there is an algorithm, RetNorm, which satisfies for all
x ∈ Rd :
                                                                                                  iid
PS {(1 − ε) · ∥x∥ ≤ RetNorm(h(x)S ) ≤ (1 + ε) · ∥x∥} ≥ 1−δ for S = {ij }j∈[k] with ij ∼ Unif([md])

when k ≥ Cε−2 log(2/ε) log(2/δ) for some C > 0. Furthermore, RetNorm runs in time O(k).

With these primitives, we will construct our data structure for adaptive distance estimation. Our
constructions is formally described in Algorithm 8.


                                                  22
Algorithm 8 Adaptive Distance Estimation with SRHTs
 1: m ← Cε−2 log6 (2dn/ε)
 2: Let h be an SRHT as defined in SRHT                                       ▷Revealed to analyst
           √        3                −2
 3: r ← C Q log (nd), k ← Cε log(2/ε) log(2nd)
 4: for i ∈ [n] do
 5:     Compute yi = h(xi )
 6:     for j ∈ [r] do
 7:         Let Si,j be a set of k indices sampled with replacement from [md]
 8: l ← C log(nd)
 9: for j ∈ 1 : Q do                                                                ▷Adaptive queries
10:     Receive query qj
11:     vj ← h(qj )
12:     for i ∈ [n] do
13:         Let {ti,j,p }p∈[l] be a set of l indices sampled (with replacement) from [r]
14:         for p ∈ [l] do
15:             di,j,p ← RetNorm((vj − yi )Si,ti,j,p )
16:         di,j ← PrivMed({di,j,p }p∈[l] ), where PrivMed is (O (1) , 0)-DP.
17:     return {di,j }i∈[n]


The proof of correctness of Algorithm 8 will follow along similar lines to that of Algorithm 6 with
a more refined analysis of the privacy loss incurred due to the adaptivity of the data analyst. In
particular, each input query results in n different queries made to a differentially private mechanism
PrivMed leading to a total of nQ queries. A naı̈ve application of Theorem 1.2 would thus result in a
                                                  e 3/2 √Q) as opposed to the desired O(n
data structure with space complexity scaling as O(n                                        e √Q) and
                   e −2 nd). The key insight yielding the improved result is the privacy loss incurred
query complexity O(ε
by a single query is effectively amortized across n independent differentially private algorithms each
capable of answering Q adaptively chosen queries correctly with high probability.
To start, we first condition on the event in Lemma E.3 and assume public access to the correspondingly
defined SRHT h. We now use R to denote the randomness used to instantiate the multisets, Si,j ,
in Algorithm 8 and decompose it as follows R = {Ri }i∈[n] with Ri = {Ri,j }j∈[r] where Ri,j
corresponds to the randomness used to generate the set Si,j and the random elements ti,p . As in the
proof of Theorem 1.2, we define a transcript T = {Tj }j∈[Q] with Tj = (qj , {di,j }i∈[n] ) denoting the
j th query and the responses returned by Algorithm 8 as a single transaction.

                                                        1
Lemma E.5. For all i ∈ [n], j ∈ [Q], Tj is o √Q log(nQ)        , 0 -differentially private with Ri .

Proof. The proof is identical to that of Lemma C.1 with the observation that each transaction Tj only
results in a single query to a differentially private mechanism operating on Ri .

                                                 1
Lemma E.6. For all i ∈ [n], T is o(1), poly(nQ)         -differentially private with respect to Ri .

Proof. The proof is identical to Lemma C.2 and follows from Theorem A.4 and Lemma E.5.

We now prove the correctness of our improved procedure for adaptive distance estimation.

Proof of Theorem 1.3: We condition on the event in the conclusion of Lemma E.3 start by bounding
the failure probability of a single query. The bound for the whole sequence of adaptively chosen
queries follows by a union
                                         fixing i ∈ [n] and j ∈ [Q], note that the sub-transcript
                              bound. Now,
  (j)                              1
T = {Tp }p∈[j−1] is o(1), poly(nQ) -differentially private with respect to Ri . Furthermore, define
the indicator random variables:
                     n                                                                           o
 ∀p ∈ [l] : Wp := 1 (1 − ε) · ∥qj − xi ∥ ≤ RetNorm (vj − yi )Si,ti,j,p ≤ (1 + ε) · ∥qj − xi ∥


                                                  23
                              Pl
Additionally, defining W := p=1 Wp , we get by the differential privacy of the sub-transcript, T (j) ,
Lemma E.4 and Theorem A.5:

                                             3               1
                                  P W ≤ ·l ≤                        .
                                             4         400 · (nQ)2
Consequently, we get from Theorem A.3 and another union bound:
                                                                                  1
             P {(1 − ε) · ∥qj − xi ∥ ≤ di,j ≤ (1 + ε) · ∥qj − xi ∥} ≥ 1 −               .
                                                                            200 · (nQ)2
A subsequent union bound over all i ∈ [n], j ∈ [Q] yields:
                                                                                          1
    P {∀i ∈ [n], j ∈ [Q] : (1 − ε) · ∥qj − xi ∥ ≤ di,j ≤ (1 + ε) · ∥qj − xi ∥} ≥ 1 −            .
                                                                                     200 · (nQ)
A final union bound over the conclusion of Lemma E.3 concludes the proof. The runtime guarantees
follow from the fact that for all z ∈ Rd , h(z) is computable in time O(md log d) and the runtime
guarantees of RetNorm.                                                                            □


F    A DAPTIVE K ERNEL D ENSITY E STIMATION
Kernel density estimation is an important problem in learning theory and statistics that has recently
attracted significant interest, e.g., (Charikar & Siminelakis, 2017; Backurs et al., 2018; Charikar
et al., 2020; Bakshi et al., 2022). In the adaptive kernel density estimation problem, the input is a
set X = {x(1) , . . . , x(n) } of n points in Rd . Given an accuracy parameter ε > P  0 and a threshold
parameter τ > 0, the goal is to output a (1 + ε)-approximation to the quantity n1 i∈[n] k(x(i) , q),
for a kernel function    k under the promise that
                                                 the output is at least τ . A standard approach is to
sample O τ 1ε2 points and then use O τ dε2 query time to output the empirical kernel density for  a

                                                                                                    1
                        et al. (2019) give an algorithm for kernel density estimation that uses O τ ε2
specific query.  Backurs
space and O    √d 2   query time, improving over the standard sampling approach.
                τε
                                                                                                    1

                    et al. (2019) Given ε, τ > 0, there exists a data structure D that uses O
Theorem F.1. Backurs                                                                              τ ε2
space and O ε2d√τ query time that outputs a (1 + ε)-approximation D(y) to a kernel density
estimation query y that has value at least τ , i.e.,
                                                                 3
                        Pr [|D(y) − KDE(X, y)| ≤ ε · KDE(X, y)] ≥ .
                                                                 4
However, the analysis for both these algorithms fails for the adaptive setting, where there can be
dependencies between the query and the data structure. By using the data structure of Backurs
et al. (2019) as a subroutine, our
                                 √ framework
                                             immediately
                                                           implies an algorithm for adaptive kernel
                                   Q              d√log Q
density estimation that uses O τ ε2 space and O
                             e
                                                     τ ε2
                                                            query time to answer each of Q adaptive
queries.

Algorithm 9 Adaptive Kernel Density Estimation
Input: Number√ Q of2 queries,
                                accuracy ε, threshold τ
 1: r ← O       Q log Q
 2: for i ∈ [r] do                                                                    ▷Pre-processing
 3:     Let Ti be a KDE data structure
 4: for each query yq ∈ Rd with q ∈ [Q] do                                         ▷Adaptive queries
 5:     Let S be a set of k indices sampled (with replacement) from [r]
 6:     for i ∈ [k] do
 7:         Let Di be the output of TSi on query yq
 8:     return dq = PrivMed({Di }i∈[k] ), where PrivMed is (1, 0)-DP.

For completeness, we now show adversarial robustness of our algorithm across Q adaptive queries.
Again we remark that the proof can simply be black-boxed into Theorem 1.2, though we include the
specific kernel density details in the following proof as a warm-up for the following section.


                                                  24
Lemma F.2. Algorithm 9 answers Q adaptive kernel density estimation queries within a factor of
(1 + ε), provided each query has value at least τ .

Proof. Fix query yq ∈ Rd with q ∈ [Q]. Let S be a set of k indices sampled (with replacement) from
[r]. Then by Theorem F.1, we have that for each j ∈ [k],
                                                                3
                        Pr DSj (y) − KDE(X, y) ≤ ε · KDE(X, y) ≥ .
                                                                4
Let Ij be an indicator variable so that Ij = 1 if DSj (y) − KDE(X, y) ≤ ε · KDE(X, y) and
Ij = 0 otherwise, so that we have Pr [Ij = 1] ≥ 34 or equivalently, E [Ij ] ≥ 34 . Let I = k1 j∈[k] Ij
                                                                                             P

so that E [I] = k1 j∈[k] E [Ij ] ≥ 34 .
                  P

To handle adaptive queries, we first note that PrivMed is (1, 0)-differentially private on the out-
puts of the r√kernel density estimation data structures. We sample k = O (log Q) indices from
the r = O Q log2 Q data

                               structures
                                          with
                                               replacement.
                                                            Thus by amplification via sampling,
i.e., Theorem A.2, PrivMed is O √Q 1log Q , 0 -differentially private. By the advanced compo-
sition
                    privacy, i.e., Theorem A.4, our algorithm can answer Q adaptive queries with
       of differential
             1
  O (1) , poly(Q)  -differentially privacy. By the generalization properties of differential privacy, i.e.,
Theorem A.5, we have                                          
                                       1 X                   1
                                Pr          Ij − E [I] ≥       < 0.01,
                                       k                    10
                                        j∈[k]

for sufficiently small constant O (1) in the private median algorithm PrivMed. Therefore,
                                                        
                                          1 X
                                   Pr           Ii > 0.6 > 0.99,
                                          k
                                              i∈[k]

so that |dq − KDE(X, yq )| ≤ ε · KDE(X, y) across Q queries yq with q ∈ [Q].
                                                    √
                                                      Q log2 Q
Theorem F.3. There exists an algorithm that uses O     τε 2      space and answers Q adaptive
kernel density estimation
                                within a factor of (1 + ε), provided each query has value at least τ .
                          queries
                       d log(nQ)
Each query uses O           √
                          ε2 τ
                                   runtime.

By comparison, random sampling, e.g., Charikar & Siminelakis (2017), uses τQε2 samples to answer
                                 d

                      uses O τ ε2 runtime
Q queries and each query                     and using Q copies of the data structure by Backurs
                        Q                          d
et al. (2019) uses O   τ ε2   space and O     ε2
                                                   √
                                                       τ
                                                           runtime.

F.1   U NLIMITED A DAPTIVE Q UERIES FOR K ERNEL D ENSITY E STIMATION

In this section, we go beyond the limits of our framework and analyze the case where there may be
an unbounded number of adversarial queries.
Theorem 1.4. Suppose the kernel function k is L-Lipschitz in the second variable for some L > 0, i.e.,
|k(x, y) − k(x, z)| ≤ L∥y − z∥2 for all x, y, z ∈ Rd . Moreover, suppose that for all ∥x − y∥2 ≤ ρ,
we have k(x, y) ≤ τ3 . Then an algorithm that produces a kernel density estimation data structure D
that is L-Lipschitz over a set X of points with diameter at most ∆ and outputs a (1+ε)-approximation
to KDE queries with value at least τ with probability at least 1 − δ using space S(n, ε, τ, log δ) and
query time T (n, ε, τ, log δ), then there exists a KDE data structure that with probability at least 0.99,
outputs
         a (1 + ε)-approximation
                                     to any
                                            number of KDE queries
                                                                                      τ using space
                                                                      with value at least
                                 (∆+ρ)L
S n, O (ε) , O (τ ) , O d log ετ             and query time T n, O (ε) , O (τ ) , O d log (∆+ρ)Lετ      .

Proof. Given a set X ⊆ Rd of n points with diameter ∆, let N be an ετL -net over a ball of radius
∆ + ρ that contains X. More formally, let B be a ball of radius (∆ + ρ) that contains X and for


                                                           25
every y ∈ B, there exists a point z ∈ N such that ∥y − z∥2 ≤ ετ
                                                             L . We can construct the net greedily
                          d
so that |N | ≤ 2(∆+ρ)L
                   ετ       .

We implement a data structure D that answers    each (non-adaptive) kernel density estimation query
with multiplicative approximation 1 + 3ε for any kernel density estimation query with value at least

τ                                                 1
2 , with probability at least 1 − δ, where δ ≤ 100|N | . Then by a union bound, D correctly answers
each kernel density estimation query in N with probability at least 0.99.
Let q ∈ Rd be an arbitrary query such that KDE(X, q) ≥ τ . By assumption, we have that
∥q − x∥2 ≤ ρ for some x ∈ X and thus q ∈ B. By the definition of N , there exists some y ∈ N
                     ετ
such that ∥q − y∥2 ≤ 3L . Then since k is L-Lipschitz in the second variable, we have

                                       1 X           1 X          L           ετ
    | KDE(X, q) − KDE(X, y)| =             k(x, q) −     k(x, y) ≤ ∥q − y∥2 ≤    .
                                       n             n            n           3n
                                         x∈X               x∈X

Hence, KDE(X, q) ≥ τ implies that KDE(X, y) ≥ τ2 . Let Ky be the output of the data structure
D on query y. Then by correctness of D on N for any query with threshold at least τ2 , we have
                                                      ε
                              |Ky − KDE(X, y)| ≤        KDE(X, y).
                                                      3
Let Kq be the output of the data structure D on query y. Since the algorithm itself is L-Lipschitz,
then
                                                             ετ
                                |Kq − Ky | ≤ L∥q − y∥2 ≤        .
                                                              3
Therefore by the triangle inequality, we have that

    |Kq − KDE(X, q)| ≤ |Kq − Ky | − |Ky − KDE(X, y)| − | KDE(X, y) − KDE(X, q)|
                       ετ   ε              ετ
                     ≤    + KDE(X, y) +       .
                        3   3              3n
                              ετ
Since KDE(X, y) ≤ KDE(X, q) + 3n , then it follows that

                                    ετ  ε            ε2 τ   ετ
             |Kq − KDE(X, q)| ≤        + KDE(X, q) +      +    ≤ ε KDE(X, q),
                                     3  3             n     3n
for n ≥ 6.


In particular, sampling-based algorithms for kernels that are Lipschitz are also Lipschitz. Thus to
apply Theorem 1.4, it suffices to identify kernels that are L-Lipschitz and use the data structure
                                                                            C
of Theorem F.1. To that end, we note that the kernels k(x, y) = C+∥x−y∥          2
                                                                                   for C > 0 and
k(x, y) = Ce−∥x−y∥2 are both Lipschitz for some function of C. In particular, we have

                                                 C               C
                     |k(x, y) − k(x, z)| =                −
                                            C + ∥x − y∥2    C + ∥x − z∥2
                                              C|∥x − z∥2 − ∥x − y∥2 |
                                         =
                                           (C + ∥x − y∥2 )(C + ∥x − z∥2 )
                                           ∥y − z∥2
                                         ≤          ,
                                              C
                C
so k(x, y) = C+∥x−y∥ 2
                       is C1 -Lipschitz. Similarly, since e−x is 1-Lipschitz, then

                  |k(x, y) − k(x, z)| = Ce−∥x−y∥2 − Ce−∥x−z∥2
                                      ≤ C|∥x − z∥2 − ∥x − y∥2 | ≤ C∥y − z∥2 ,

so k(x, y) = Ce−∥x−y∥2 is C-Lipschitz.


                                                 26
G        E MPIRICAL E VALUATION

We empirically demonstrate the space and query time efficiency of our framework of Section C. We
consider the problem of ℓ2 norm estimation where queries q1 , q2 , . . . are generated in an adaptive
fashion and our goal is to output an estimate of ∥qi ∥2 for all i. This setting is a special case of
adaptive distance estimation and captures the essence of our adversarial robustness framework. In
addition, this same setting was investigated empirically in prior works Cherapanamjeri & Nelson
(2020).

Experimental Setup. Consider the setting of Algorithm 6: it creates r copies of an underlying
randomized data structure and upon a query, it subsamples k of them and outputs an answer aggregated
via the private median. In our setting, the underlying algorithm will be the fast Johnson-Lindenstrauss
(JL) transform which is defined as follows: it is the matrix P HD : Rd → Rm where D is a diagonal
matrix with uniformly random ±1 entries, H is the Hadamard transform, and P is a sampling matrix
uniformly samples m rows of HD. Our algorithm will initialize r copies of this matrix where the
sampling matrix P and diagonal D will be the randomness which is “hidden” from the adversary.
Upon query q, we sample k different Fast JL data structures, input q to all of them, and proceed as
in Algorithm 6. Note that this setting exactly mimics the theoretical guarantees of Section C and is
exactly Algorithm 7 of Section E. In our experiments, d = 4096, m = 250, r = 200, and k = 5.
These are exactly the parameters chosen in prior works Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020). We will
have 5000 adaptive queries qi which are described shortly. Our experiments are done on a 2021 M1
Macbook Pro with 32 gigabytes of RAM. We implemented all algorithms in Python 3.5 using Numpy.
The Hadamard transform code is from Andoni et al. (2015)1 and we use Google’s differential privacy
library2 for the private median implementation.

Baselines. We will consider three baselines. JL will denote a standard (Gaussian) JL map from
dimension 4096 to 250. Baseline 1 will denote the algorithm of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020). At
a high level, it instantiates many independent copies of the standard Gaussian JL map and only feeds
an incoming query into a select number of subsampled data structures. Note that our experimental
setting is mimicking exactly that of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020) where the same parameters r
(number of different underlying data structures) and k (number of subsampled data structures to use
for a query) were used. This ensures that both our algorithm and theirs have access to the same number
of different JL maps and thus allows us to compare the two approaches on an equal footing. The last
baseline, denoted as Baseline 2, is the main algorithm of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2022) which is
the optimized version of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020). At a high level, their algorithm proceeds
similarly to that of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020), except they employ Hadamard transforms
(after multiplying the query entry-wise by random Gaussians), rather than using Gaussian JL maps.
Furthermore, instead of subsampling, their algorithm feeds an incoming query into all the different
copies of the Hadamard transform, and subsamples the coordinates of the concatenated output for
norm estimation. We again set the parameters of their algorithm to match that of our algorithm and
Baseline 1 by using r copies of their Hadamard transform and subsampling mk total coordinates.
We refer to the respective papers for full details of their algorithms.

Summary of adaptive queries. Our input queries are the same adaptive queries used in Chera-
panamjeri & Nelson (2020). To summarize, let Π denote the map used in the JL benchmark stated
                                                                  Pi
above. The i-th query for 1 ≤ i ≤ 5000 will be of the form qi = j=1 (−1)Wi zi , which we then
normalize to have unit norm. The zi are standard Gaussian vectors. Wi is the indicator variable for
the event ∥Π(zi − e1 )∥2 ≤ ∥Π(zi + e1 )∥2 where e1 is the first standard basis vector. Intuitively,
the queries become increasingly correlated with the matrix Π since we successively “augment” the
queries in a biased fashion. See Section 5 of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020) for a more detailed
discussion of the adaptive inputs.

Results. Our results are shown in Figure 1. In Figure 1a, we plot the norm estimated by each of
the algorithms in each of the queries across iterations. We see that the naı̈ve JL map increasingly
deviates from the true value of 1.0. This is intuitive as the adaptive queries are increasingly correlated
    1
        available in https://github.com/FALCONN-LIB/FFHT
    2
        available in https://github.com/google/differential-privacy


                                                   27
                                                               1600
                3.0                                                                              Baseline 1
                          Baseline 1                           1400                              Baseline 2                            8       Baseline 1
                          Baseline 2                                                             Ours                                  7       Baseline 2
                                                               1200


                                                                                                              Cumulative Runtime (s)
                2.5       Ours                                                                                                                 Ours
Norm Estimate             JL                                   1000                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                       5


                                                       Count
                2.0                                             800                                                                    4
                                                                600                                                                    3
                1.5
                                                                400                                                                    2
                1.0                                             200                                                                    1
                                                                  0                                                                    0
                      0    1000 2000 3000 4000 5000                   0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 1.05 1.10 1.15                                   0    1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
                                  Iteration                                     Norm Estimate                                                          Iteration

                                       (a)                                       (b)                                                                        (c)

                                                      Fig. 1: Figures for our experiments.


 with the map Π. The performance of all other algorithms are indistinguishable in Figure 1a. Thus,
 we only zoom into the performances of our algorithm and Baseline 1 and Baseline 2, shown in
 Figure 1b. For these three algorithms, we plot a histogram of answers outputted by the respective
 algorithms across all iterations. We see that the algorithm of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2020), shown
 in the blue shaded histogram, is the most accurate as it has the smallest deviations from the true
 answer of 1.0. Our algorithm, shown in green, is noisier than Baseline 1 since it has a wider range of
 variability. This may be due to the fact that we use a differentially private median algorithm, which
 naturally incurs additional noise. Lastly, Baseline 2 is also noisier than Baseline 1 and comparable to
 our algorithm. This may be due to the fact that the algorithm of Cherapanamjeri & Nelson (2022)
 requires very fine-tuned constants in their theoretical bounds, which naturally deviate in practice.
 Lastly, Figure 1c shows the cumulative runtime of all three algorithms across all iterations. Our
 algorithm, shown in green, is the fastest while Baseline 2 is the slowest. This is explained by the fact
 that Baseline 2 calculates many more Hadamard transforms than our algorithm does.


                                                                                 28
