Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


VC T HEORETICAL E XPLANATION OF D OUBLE D E -
SCENT

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         There has been growing interest in generalization performance of large multilayer
         neural networks that can be trained to achieve zero training error, while general-
         izing well on test data. This regime is known as ‘second descent’ and it appears
         to contradict the conventional view that optimal model complexity should reflect
         an optimal balance between underfitting and overfitting, i.e., the bias-variance
         trade-off. This paper presents a VC-theoretical analysis of double descent and
         shows that it can be fully explained by classical VC-generalization bounds. We
         illustrate an application of analytic VC-bounds for modeling double descent for
         classification, using empirical results for several learning methods, such as SVM,
         Least Squares, and Multilayer Perceptron classifiers. In addition, we discuss sev-
         eral reasons for the misinterpretation of VC-theoretical results in Deep Learning
         community.


1    I NTRODUCTION
There have been many recent successful applications of Deep Learning (DL). However, at present,
various DL methods are driven mainly by heuristic improvements, while theoretical and conceptual
understanding of this technology remains limited. For example, large neural networks can be trained
to fit available data (achieving zero training error) and still achieve good generalization for test data.
This contradicts the conventional statistical wisdom that overfitting leads to poor generalization.
This phenomenon has been systematically described by Belkin et al. (2019) who introduced the term
‘double descent’ and pointed out the difference between the classical regime (first descent) and the
modern one (second descent). The disagreement between the classical statistical view and modern
machine learning practice provides motivation for new theoretical explanations of the generaliza-
tion ability of DL networks and other over-parameterized estimators. Several different explanations
include: special properties of multilayer network parameterization (Bengio, 2009), choosing proper
inductive bias during second descent (Belkin et al., 2019), the effect of Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) training (Zhang et al., 2021; Neyshabur et al., 2014; Dinh et al., 2017), the effect of various
heuristics (used for training) on generalization (Srivastava et al., 2014), and the effect of margin on
generalization (Bartlett et al., 2017). The current consensus view on the ‘generalization paradox’ in
DL networks is summarized below:
      – Existing indices for model complexity (or capacity), such as VC-dimension, cannot explain
        generalization performance of DL networks.
      – ‘Classical’ theories developed in ML and statistics cannot explain generalization perfor-
        mance of DL networks and the double descent phenomenon. Specifically, Zhang et al.
        (2021) argues that the ability of large DL networks to achieve zero training error (during
        second descent mode) effectively “rules out all of the VC-dimension arguments as a possi-
        ble explanation for the generalization performance of state-of-the-art neural networks.”
This paper demonstrates that these assertions are incorrect, and that classical VC-theoretical re-
sults can fully explain generalization performance of DL networks, including double descent, for
classification problems. In particular, we show that proper application of VC-bounds using correct
estimates of VC-dimension provides accurate modeling of double descent, for various classifiers
trained using SGD, least squares loss and standard SVM loss. The proposed VC-theoretical expla-
nation provides additional insights on generalization performance during first descent vs. second
descent, and on the effect of statistical properties of the data on double descent curves.


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Next, we briefly review VC-theoretical concepts and results necessary for understanding general-
ization performance of all learning methods based on minimization of training error (Vapnik, 1998;
1999; 2006; Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007):

      1. Finite VC-dimension provides necessary and sufficient conditions for good generalization.
      2. VC-theory provides analytic bounds on (unknown) test error, as a function of training error,
         VC-dimension and the number of training samples.

Clearly, these VC-theoretical results contradict an existing consensus view that VC-theory cannot
account for generalization performance of large DL networks. This disagreement results from a
misinterpretation of basic VC-theoretical concepts in DL research. These are a few examples of
such misunderstanding:

      – A common view that VC-dimension grows with the number of parameters (weights), and
        therefore, “traditional measures of model complexity struggle to explain the generalization
        ability of large artificial neural networks” (Zhang et al., 2021). In fact, it is well known that
        VC-dimension can be equal, or larger, or smaller, than the number of parameters (Vapnik,
        1998; Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007).
      – Another common view is that “VC-dimension depends only on the model family and data
        distribution, and not on the training procedure used to find models” (Nakkiran et al., 2021).
        In fact, VC-dimension does not depend on data distribution (Vapnik, 1998; Cherkassky &
        Mulier, 2007; Schölkopf & Smola, 2002). Furthermore, VC-dimension certainly depends
        on SGD algorithm (Vapnik, 1998; Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007).

For classification problems, VC-theory provides analytic generalization bounds for (unknown) Pre-
diction Risk (or test error Rtst ), as a function of Empirical Risk (or training error Rtrn ) and VC-
dimension (h) of a set of admissible models. That is, for a given training data set (of size n),
VC-bound has the following form (Vapnik, 1998; 1999; 2006; Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007):
                                r              !
                        ε                4Rtrn                a1       a2 n                  η
       Rtst ≤ Rtrn +        1+ 1+                , where ε =       h ln          + 1 − ln          (1)
                        2                  ε                   n            h                4

This VC-bound (1) holds with a probability of 1−η for all possible models √  (functions) including the
one minimizing Rtrn . The value of η is preset to a small value, i.e., η = 4/ n. The second additive
term in (1), called the confidence interval (also known as excess risk), depends on both Rtrn and h.
This bound describes the relationship between training error, test error, and VC-dimension, and it is
used for conceptual understanding of model complexity control, i.e. the effect of VC-dimension on
test error. Application of this bound for accurate modeling of double descent curves requires:

      – Selecting proper values of positive constants a1 and a2 . The worst-case values a1 = 4
        and a2 = 2, provided in VC-theory (Vapnik, 1998; 1999) correspond to the worst-case
        “heavy-tailed” distributions, resulting in VC-bounds that are too loose for real-life data
        sets (Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007). For real-life data sets, when distributions are unknown,
        we suggest the values a1 = 3 and a2 = 1, that were used for all empirical results in
        this paper. For additional discussion about selecting these values (incorporating a-priori
        knowledge about unknown distributions), see Appendix A.
      – Analytic estimates of VC-dimension. For many learning methods (including DL), analytic
        estimates of VC-dimension are not known. For example, for SGD-style algorithms, the
        effect of various heuristics (e.g., initialization of weights, etc.) on VC-dimension is difficult
        (or impossible) to quantify analytically.

Note that VC-bound (1) provides a conceptual explanation of both first and second descent. That is,
first descent corresponds to minimizing this bound when training error is non-zero (Vapnik, 1998;
1999; Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007). Second descent corresponds to minimizing this bound when
training error is kept at zero, using models having small VC-dimension. This can be shown by
setting the training error in bound (1) to zero, resulting in the following bound for test error during
the second descent (uisng values a1 = 3 and a2 = 1):
                                                         3h     n
                             Rtst ≤ ε,      where ε =         ln       +1                           (2)
                                                         n         h

                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Technically, since VC-bound (1) depends only on two factors, training error and VC-dimension,
there are two different strategies for minimizing this bound (Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007):
      – Strategy 1: for a set of functions (models) with fixed VC-dimension, reduce the training er-
        ror. This leads to well-known classical bias-variance trade-off, also known as first descent;
      – Strategy 2: for small (fixed) training error, minimize the VC-dimension. This strategy
        corresponds to second descent.
These are two different strategies for controlling VC-dimension, leading to different implementa-
tions of Structural Risk Minimization (SRM) in VC-theory. Strategy 2 is formally described in
VC-theory by considering a set of functions (models) where the training error remains constant,
called an equivalence class (Vapnik, 1998; 1999; Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007). For example, all
models during second descent form an equivalence class (since the training error is zero). For each
equivalence class, we define a structure, or complexity ordering, according to the norm squared of
weights (of a linear classifier). Then an optimal model (minimizing the norm squared of weights)
is found using training data. Such a strategy has been implemented via maximization of margin in
SVM classifiers. Most learning methods typically implement a single strategy, whereas practitioners
in DL observed the effect of both strategies when varying a single hyper-parameter, such as network
size or the number of epochs. Therefore, double descent curve has a simple VC-theoretical explana-
tion. For instance, consider the effect of increasing the number of hidden units N (in a single-layer
network) on the test error. When the number of hidden units is small, SGD training aims to minimize
training error, and VC-dimension is increasing with the number of hidden units. This corresponds
to Strategy 1 for minimizing the VC-bound (1). On the other hand, for over-parameterized networks
(large N), SGD training finds a minimum norm of weights solution - effectively implementing Strat-
egy 2 for minimizing VC bound (1). The mystery of improved generalization performance during
second descent is explained by noting that for larger networks, VC-dimension is actually decreasing.
This is confirmed by the empirical modeling results presented later in Section 2.
Another technical reason for misapplication of VC-theory, besides misinterpretation of VC-
dimension, is that VC-bound (1) remains virtually unknown in the DL community. Many papers
suggesting that VC-theory is unable to explain double descent, are based on analysis of uniform
convergence bounds (Belkin et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021; Tewari & Bartlett, 2014; Bartlett et al.,
2021; Koltchinskii, 2001; Sokolić
                                  pet al.,  2017). In such bounds, the confidence interval term (or
excess error), is of the order O   h/n . However, VC-theory also provides a more accurate uni-
form relative convergence bounds, such as VC-bound (1), presented in (Vapnik, 1998; 1999; 2006;
Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007), where the excess error is of the order O (h/n) . For small values
of h/n, common in practical applications, this difference is large. For example, for h/n = 0.1,
     √ relative convergence bounds give ∼ 10% excess error, but the uniform convergence bounds
uniform
give 0.1 or ∼ 33%. So, while it is true that uniform convergence bounds cannot accurately model
second descent, it can be done using uniform relative convergence bounds.
Training of DL networks is based on SGD, which incorporates several heuristic rules to ensure that
the norm of weights remains small. These rules include: initialization of weights to small random
values, weight decay, and re-normalization during training. Consequently, for large networks, model
complexity is determined by the norm of weights, rather than the number of weights (parameters).
Further, this dependence of VC-dimension on the training algorithm helps explain why theoretical
estimates of VC-dimension based on network topology (network size) have found little practical use
(Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007).

2   A PPLICATION OF VC B OUNDS FOR M ODELING D OUBLE D ESCENT
This section presents a VC-theoretical explanation of double descent for classification, for a single-
layer network shown in Figure 1. The same network setting was used for analysis of double descent
in recent papers (Belkin et al., 2019; 2020; Neal et al., 2018; Hastie et al., 2019). In this network, a
classifier is estimated in two steps:
      – First, input vector x is encoded using N nonlinear features in Z-space. Commonly, ran-
        dom features (weak features) are used, such as random ReLU or Random Fourier Features
        (RFF);


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 Figure 1: A single hidden layer network estimating a linear classifier in nonlinear feature space.


      – Second, a linear model is estimated in this N-dimensional feature space.

This simplified setting enables VC theoretical analysis of double descent, because the analytic esti-
mates of VC-dimension are known. That is, since the network output is formed as a linear combina-
tion of N features, the analytic estimate of VC-dimension for linear hyperplanes f (z, w) = (wz)+b
is known (Vapnik, 1998; 1999; 2006):
                                       h ≤ min ||w||2 , N + 1

                                                                                                 (3)

This bound holds under the assumption that all training samples are enclosed within a sphere of
radius 1, in Z-space. In summary, VC-dimension can be bounded by the input dimensionality (N),
or by the norm squared of weights w. These are two different mechanisms for controlling VC-
dimension. In machine learning literature, the expression (3) is widely known as scale-sensitive or
fat-shattering VC-dimension (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002; Shawe-Taylor et al., 1996), where shatter-
ing is performed by delta margin hyperplanes (with constraints on margin size or ||w||2 ).
The double descent phenomenon can be observed for various learning methods used to estimate
weights w for the network structure in Figure 1. Next, we present empirical results showing the
application of VC-bounds (1) and (3) for modeling double descent when network weights are esti-
mated using SVM or Least-Squares (LS) classifiers. For large networks trained using LS, when N is
larger than sample size (n), minimization of squared error is performed using pseudo-inverse, which
finds a solution corresponding to the minimization of the norm squared ||w||2 .
In all experimental results in this section, double descent is observed when the network size (N) is
gradually increased. Specifically, according to analytic bound (3):

      – When network size (N) is small, the VC-dimension initially grows linearly with N. This
        corresponds to the first descent, or traditional bias-variance trade-off.
      – For overparameterized networks (large N), VC-dimension is controlled by the norm
        squared of weights, leading to second descent.

We use two types of random nonlinear features (Belkin et al., 2019; Rahimi & Recht, 2008), ReLU
and RFF. Random ReLU features are formed as:
                               Zi = max (⟨vi , X⟩, 0) ,     i = 1, ..., N
where random vectors v1 , . . . , vN are sampled uniformly from the range [-1,1]. Random Fourier
Features (RFF) are formed as:
                                         √
                             Zi = exp        −1⟨vi , X⟩ ,    i = 1, ..., N
Where random v1 , . . . , vN are sampled from Gaussian distribution with standard deviation σ =
0.05. In all experiments, input (x) values were pre-scaled to [0, 1] range, for training and test data.
Following the nonlinear mapping X → Z, all z-values are re-scaled to [-1, 1] range. Such rescaling is
performed to satisfy the condition for bound (3), stating that all training samples in Z-space should
be enclosed within a sphere of radius 1.


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Application of VC-bounds for MNIST digit 5 vs 8 data set using a) random ReLU features
and b) RFF.


Training samples (z, y) are used to estimate a decision boundary in Z-space. Two different methods
(LS and SVM classifiers) are used for estimating linear decision function f (z, w) = (wz) + b from
training data, in order to show double descent curves for two different loss functions, LS and SVM
loss. For SVM modeling, the regularization parameter C is set to 64 in all experiments.
Most empirical results in this paper were obtained for MNIST digits adapted for binary classification
(digit 5 vs 8), where digits are grey-scale images of size 28x28. The training set size is n = 800 and
test set size is 2,000. We have also used other data set for modeling and observed similar results.
See Appendix A for additional results.
Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show application of VC-bounds to modeling MNIST data. They show:

      – Empirical training and test error curves, as a function of N (the number of nonlinear fea-
        tures), along with VC-theoretical estimate of test error obtained via bounds (1) and (3).
        These curves show that analytic VC-bounds can explain (and predict) double descent;
      – The norm squared of weights of estimated linear models, as a function of the number of
        features N;
      – The estimated VC-dimension via bound (3), as a function of the number of features N;
      – For SVM, we also show the number of support vectors for trained SVM model.

Modeling results for random ReLU features and RFF are similar, so we only comment on results in
Figure 2(a):

      – For small N, VC-dimension grows linearly with N for SVM method. Empirical results show
        that first descent error curves can be explained by VC-bound (1), because the minimum of
        VC-bound closely corresponds to the minimum of test error. This can be clearly seen for
        LS classifier, but less obvious for SVM.
      – For large N, VC-dimension is controlled by the norm squared, according to bound (3).
        These results show that second descent can be explained by VC-bound (1), for both SVM
        and LS learning methods.

Whereas empirical results for both SVM and LS in Figure 2(a) are qualitatively similar, their double
descent curves show different values of interpolation threshold N* (where the training error reaches
zero). For SVM, the value N* ≈ 100 is achieved when the number of features equals the number of
support vectors. For LS classifier, the interpolation point N* ≈ 800 is achieved when the number of
features equals the number of training samples.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: Effect of noise on double descent for MNIST data, for SVM and LS classifiers using
random ReLU features.


The dependence of test error on the norm of weights in large networks has been known to practition-
ers, and some limited theoretical explanation is provided in (Belkin et al., 2019; 2018; Gunasekar
et al., 2017). For example, Belkin et al. (2019; 2018) suggest that minimum norm provides inductive
bias by favoring models with a higher degree of smoothness. However, these papers do not mention
VC-bounds that clearly relate the VC-dimension to the norm of weights, and explain generaliza-
tion performance for linear classifiers. Our results also show that the same VC-bounds apply with
different loss functions used for training, i.e., SVM and LS loss. For both loss functions, second
descent implements the same VC-theoretical structure where the elements of a structure are ordered
according to the norm squared of weights. For large N, the estimated model trained using SVM loss
approaches a standard kernel SVM solution, whereas a model trained using LS loss approaches a
Least-Squares SVM solution (Suykens & Vandewalle, 1999).
The dependence of interpolation threshold N* on training sample size for LS classifiers has also
been observed in the DL literature. However, in the absence of sound theoretical framework for
double descent, interpretation of this empirical dependency leads to convoluted explanations. For
example, Nakkiran et al. (2021) investigated the effect of varying the number of training samples
on test error, for a fixed-size DL network. In particular, they observed two double descent error
curves for the same network trained using smaller and larger size training data. Under this setting,
near interpolation threshold, the test error for a network trained with a larger data set is worse than
for the same network trained on a smaller data set. This phenomenon was called ‘sample-wise non-
monotonicity’, and a new theory was proposed for explaining regimes where ‘increasing the number
of training samples actually hurts test performance’. However, this phenomenon has a simple VC-
theoretical explanation, presented next. During second descent, the shape of the ‘norm squared’
closely follows the shape of test error, according to VC-bound (2), as evident in Figures 2a and 2b.
Since for LS classifiers the interpolation threshold is given by training size, there is a region near
interpolation threshold where VC-dimension for a smaller training size is smaller than for a larger
training size. So, in this region we can expect a smaller test error for smaller training size.
VC-theoretical framework can also help to understand the effect of statistical characteristics of train-
ing data on generalization curves. Next, we present empirical results demonstrating the effect on
noisy data on the shape of double descent curves, along with their VC-theoretical explanation. For
these experiments, we use a single-layer network trained using SVM and LS classifiers using ran-
dom ReLU features. We use digits data with randomly corrupted class labels. The training set size
is 800 (400 per class), and the test set size is 2,000. Figure 3 shows the effect of noise level on the
shape of double descent curves, for SVM and LS classifiers. Results for both SVM and LS models
show double descent curves, but their shape is different. For the SVM model estimated using ‘clean’
data (0% label noise), there is no visible first descent at all, but for noisy data we observe both first
and second descent. For the LS model, we clearly observe first and second descent for both clean


                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and noisy training data. For LS curves, the interpolation threshold (≈ training size 800) is the same
for different noise levels, but for SVM the value of interpolation threshold increases with noise level
in the data. This can be explained by noting that for SVM, the interpolation threshold is reached
when the training data becomes linearly separable (in nonlinear feature space, or Z-space in Figure
1). Therefore, for SVM the interpolation threshold is given by the number of support vectors needed
to separate training data. For noisy data, a SVM model requires a larger number of support vectors,
resulting in larger interpolation threshold.
The ability to generalize for noisy data can be explained by noting that during second descent VC-
bound (2) depends only on VC-dimension (the norm of weights). With increasing noise (in the data),
the norm of weights increases, resulting in degradation of test error and flattening of second descent
test error curve (as evident in Figure 3, for both SVM and LS).
Empirical results in Figure 3 also show that for noisy data, generalization performance during second
descent degrades relative to an optimal first descent model. This is contrary to the popular view that
DL networks usually provide superior generalization performance during second descent (Belkin
et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2021; Neyshabur et al., 2014; Nakkiran et al., 2021).
We suspect that superior performance during second descent, reported in the DL community, can
be explained by using large and ‘clean’ data sets (common in Big Data). For such training data sets
(of large size n), generalization performance during second descent is likely to be good, because the
VC-bound (2) on test error depends only on the ratio of VC-dimension to sample size (h/n).


3   M ODELING D OUBLE D ESCENT FOR M ULTILAYER N ETWORKS

Empirical results for a simplified network setting in Section 2 provide insights for generalization
performance of over-parameterized multilayer networks. Such general DL networks use SGD train-
ing that keeps the norm of weights small, so that the model complexity is determined by the norm
of weights, rather than the number of weights. However, direct application of analytic VC-bounds
to modeling double descent may be tricky, due to two challenging research issues:

      1. How to estimate VC-dimension for DL networks, where analytic estimates do not exist;
      2. Understanding design choices for setting multiple ‘tuning’ parameters, such as network
         width, number of training epochs, weight initialization, etc. All of these hyperparameters
         can be used to control the VC dimension of DL networks. Double descent curves show
         dependence of training and test error on a single complexity parameter, when all other
         tuning parameters are preset to reasonably ‘good’ values.

For these reasons, the application of analytic VC-bounds to general DL networks is difficult. How-
ever, it can still be done for restricted and well-defined network settings. In this section, we consider
a fully connected network with a single hidden layer, as in Figure 1, where the network weights in
both layers are estimated during training via SGD. In this case, z-features are adaptively estimated
from training data, in contrast to fixed random features used earlier in Section 2.
Let us consider two factors (hyperparameters) controlling the complexity of such networks trained
via SGD: the number of hidden units (N), and the number of training epochs. Empirical results
showing double descent curves as a function of these two factors have been extensively reported
in DL literature (Belkin et al., 2019; Nakkiran et al., 2021). However, our purpose here is not to
replicate such double descent curves, but to explain them using VC-bounds (1) and (3). In order
to achieve this, we specify a network settings where the VC-dimension can be approximately esti-
mated. Therefore, we only consider over-parameterized (wide) networks during second descent, i.e.,
when the number of hidden units N is large, or the number of training epochs is large. We hypoth-
esize that under such restricted settings, the VC-dimension of a neural network can be estimated as
the norm squared of weights of the output layer. This hypothesis is based on the recent understanding
that during second descent regime sufficiently wide single-layer networks (trained via SGD) closely
approximate a linear classifier shown in Figure 1. See Belkin (2021) for a mathematical explana-
tion of this phenomenon called ‘transition to linearity’. Similarly, Bietti & Bach (2021) showed
that wide fully-connected multilayer networks have essentially the same approximation properties
as their “shallow” two-layer counterparts, implementing standard kernel machines.


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4: VC-theoretical modeling of second descent in a fully connected network. a) Second
descent as a function of network width (N). b) Second descent as a function of the number of
epochs, for N = 10 and N = 100.


According to this interpretation, minimization of the norm of weights in the output layer is mainly
responsible for generalization, whereas all previous layers perform non-linear transformation of
input x, by encoding it as a large number of weak nonlinear features (∼ N nonlinear features in
Z-space). We argue that this assumption is plausible for data sets originating from well-separable
(low-noise) class distributions, such as MNIST digits – where good generalization can indeed be
achieved during second descent, by both linear and nonlinear networks (of large width). Therefore,
we restrict modeling of second descent for nonlinear networks using VC-bounds, presented in this
section, only for such separable distributions.
Our experiments show application of VC-bound (2) under such restricted settings, i.e., for over-
parameterized fully connected networks trained using SGD, using the norm of weights in the output
layer as an estimate of VC-dimension during second descent.
We present empirical results for MNIST digits data, under the following experimental setting:

      – 800 training and 2,000 test examples (of digits 5 and 8);
      – Fully connected network using ReLU activation function in hidden units (Paszke et al.,
        2019);
      – Training using SGD with learning rate 0.001 and momentum 0.95. The learning rate is
        reduced by 10% for every 500 epochs. Batch normalization is used during training.
      – Weights initialized, prior to training, using Xavier uniform distribution, following Glorot
        & Bengio (2010).

Our design choices for SGD implementation mainly follows earlier studies (Belkin et al., 2019;
Glorot & Bengio, 2010).
Figure 4(a) shows modeling results for second descent mode, as a function of the number of hidden
units N (the number of epochs is set to 6000 in all experiments). These results show empirical
training and test error curves, and the VC-bound on test error, that closely approximates empirical
test error. This figure also shows the VC-dimension, estimated as the norm squared of the output
layer weights. It is interesting to compare modeling results in Figure 4(a) (for nonlinear network)
and LS results shown in Figure 2(a) for the same data set, but using a linear network. First, we
can observe similarly decreasing norm squared of the output layer weights, in both figures. Second,
direct comparison of the norm squared of weights (of the output layer), for linear and nonlinear
models, for large networks, indicates their similar values. For network size N= 2,000, the norm
squared of the weights (and test error) equals 3.3 (3.7%) for a linear network and 2.3 (3.1%) for a
nonlinear network. Since the norm squared of weights was used as VC-dimension in bound (2), for
both linear and nonlinear networks, these comparisons support our hypothesis about using this norm
squared, as a proxy for VC-dimension during second descent.


                                                8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 4(b) shows modeling results for second descent, as a function of the number of epochs (for
networks with N = 10 and 100 hidden units). Note that VC-dimension can be reliably estimated only
in second descent mode, when training error is close to zero. This region, where training error is
under 1%, is indicated by dotted vertical line. In this region, increasing the number of epochs results
in a small increase in VC-dimension and a slight decrease of training error. This is a particular
form of memorization-complexity trade-off, implicit in VC-bound (1), when training error is close
to zero. For additional results on modeling double descent in multilayer networks, see Appendix B.
These results demonstrate application of VC-bounds for modeling second descent in multilayer
networks. In addition, we can see the effect of each complexity parameter (network size N and the
number of epochs) on VC-dimension. This can be used for ranking tuning parameters, according to
their ability to control VC-dimension of DL networks during second descent.



4   S UMMARY AND D ISCUSSION

This paper provides a VC-theoretical explanation of ‘double descent’ in multilayer networks. We
show that for simplified network settings, where analytic estimates of VC-dimension exist, VC-
generalization bounds can be applied directly to predict double descent phenomenon. VC-theoretical
framework is helpful for improved understanding of empirical results observed in DL, such as: mod-
eling of double descent, the effect of various heuristics on generalization, comparing generalization
during first and second descent, etc. According to VC-theoretical explanation, second descent oc-
curs when zero training error is achieved using an estimator having small norm of weights. This
phenomenon is general, and it does not depend on particular training algorithm or chosen model
parameterization. Therefore, double descent can be observed for other learning methods, such as
SVM estimators.
VC theoretical interpretation of double descent has several methodological implications. As ex-
plained in this paper, the first and second descent modes of learning implement two different types
of VC-theoretical ‘structures’, or complexity orderings, of possible models. Both types of structures
have been well-known, but are usually presented separately when analyzing different learning meth-
ods (Vapnik, 1998; 1999; Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007). Second descent mode of learning has been
studied in the past, long before DL, albeit under different terminology, such as margin maximiza-
tion in standard SVM, Least-Squares SVM classifiers (Suykens & Vandewalle, 1999), and Optimal
Linear Associative Memory (Kohonen, 1989). Recently, the similarity between second descent and
kernel learning has been rediscovered by several authors (Belkin et al., 2018; Belkin, 2021; Bietti &
Bach, 2021).
According to VC-methodology, we should analyze the first and second descent modes of learning
separately, as they implement two different types of SRM structures. Just showing test error curves
for these two structures on the same figure, as double descent, does not provide much technical
insight. An important open question is understanding under what conditions a model estimated
during first descent provides better generalization than a model estimated during second descent.
Current DL literature suggests that second descent provides better generalization performance, for
most ‘real-life’ data sets – but this statement requires better technical explanation.
According to VC-theoretical explanation, superior generalization performance during second de-
scent can be expected for large sample size, that are inherently separable, i.e. have small Bayes
optimal test error (say, under 5%). In this case, using a structure based on the norm of weights
results in a second descent mode, where training error is zero and VC-bound on test error is given
by (2). According to this expression (2), this bound is expected to be small, for small values of the
ratio of VC-dimension to sample size (h/n).
Finally, we point out that VC-theoretical explanation of double descent utilizes just a few well known
concepts, such as VC-dimension and Structural Risk Minimization. The same VC-theoretical con-
cepts and results explain generalization performance of other methods, such as parametric estima-
tors, SVM, signal denoising, etc (Cherkassky & Mulier, 2007). This is in contrast to multiple recent
theories for explanation of double descent, that introduce various new theoretical constructs and
associated technical jargon, aimed to explain this particular empirical phenomenon.


                                                  9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Ralph G. Andrzejak, Klaus Lehnertz, Florian Mormann, Christoph Ricke, Peter David, and Chris-
  tian E. Elger. Indications of nonlinear deterministic and finite-dimensional structures in time se-
  ries of brain electrical activity: Dependence on recording region and brain state. Physical Review
  E, 64:061907, 2001.
Peter Bartlett, Dylan J. Foster, and Matus Telgarsky. Spectrally-normalized margin bounds for neural
  networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 6241–6250, 2017.
Peter Bartlett, Andrea Montanari, and Alexander Rakhlin. Deep learning: a statistical viewpoint.
  Acta Numerica, 2021.
Mikhail Belkin. Fit without fear: Remarkable mathematical phenomena of deep learning through
 the prism of interpolation. Acta Numerica, 30:203–248, 2021.
Mikhail Belkin, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. To understand deep learning we need to under-
 stand kernel learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 541–549, 2018.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, Siyuan Ma, and Soumik Mandal. Reconciling modern machine-
 learning practice and the classical bias–variance trade-off. Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 116(32):15849–15854, 2019.
Mikhail Belkin, Daniel Hsu, and Ji Xu. Two models of double descent for weak features. SIAM
 Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 2(4), 2020.
Yoshua Bengio. Learning deep architectures for ai. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning,
  2(1):1–127, 2009.
Alberto Bietti and Francis Bach. Deep equals shallow for relu networks in kernel regimes. In
  Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Vladimir Cherkassky and Filip Mulier. Learning from Data. Second Edition, Wiley-Interscience,
  2007.
Laurent Dinh, Razvan Pascanu, Samy Bengio, and Yoshua Bengio. Sharp minima can generalize
  for deep nets. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1019–1028, 2017.
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural
  networks. In Proceedings of Machine Learning Reseach, pp. 249–256, 2010.
Suriya Gunasekar, Blake Woodworth, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, Behnam Neyshabur, and Nathan Sre-
  bro. Implicit regularization in matrix factorization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, pp. 6151–6159, 2017.
Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan J. Tibshirani. Surprises in high-
  dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08560v5, 2019.
Teuvo Kohonen. Self-Organization and Associative Memory. Third Edition, Springer Series in
  Information Sciences, 1989.
Vladimir Koltchinskii. Rademacher penalties and structural risk minimization. IEEE Transactions
  on Information Theory, 47(5):1902–1914, 2001.
Alex Krizhevsky and Geofrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Mas-
  ter’s thesis, University of Toronto, 2009.
Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to
  document recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):2278–2324, 1998.
Preetum Nakkiran, Gal Kaplun, Yamini Bansal, Tristan Yang, Boaz Barak, and Ilya Sutskever. Deep
  double descent: Where bigger models and more data hurt. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
  Theory and Experiment, 2021(12), 2021.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Brady Neal, Sarthak Mittal, Aristide Baratin, Vinayak Tantia, Matthew Scicluna, Simon Lacoste-
  Julien, and Loannis Mitliagkas. A modern take on the bias-variance tradeoff in neural networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.08591, 2018.
Yuval Netzer, Tao Wang, Adam Coates, Alessandro Bissacco, Bo Wu, and Andrew Y. Ng. Reading
  digits in natural images with unsupervised feature learning. NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning
  and Unsupervised Feature Learning, 2011.
Behnam Neyshabur, Ryota Tomioka, and Nathan Srebro. In search of the real inductive bias: On the
  role of implicit regularization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6614, 2014.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor
  Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Ed-
  ward Yang, Zach DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner,
  Lu Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith Chintala. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
  learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing systems, pp. 8026–8037, 2019.
Ali Rahimi and Ben Recht. Random features for large-scale kernel machines. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, pp. 1177–1184, 2008.
Bernhard Schölkopf and Alexander J. Smola. Learning with kernels: support vector machines,
  regularization, optimization, and beyond. MIT Press, 2002.
John Shawe-Taylor, Peter L. Bartlett, Robert C. Williamson, and Martin Anthony. A framework for
  structural risk minimisation. In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Conference on Computational
  Learning Theory, 1996.
Jure Sokolić, Raja Giryes, Guillermo Sapiro, and Miguel R. D. Rodrigues. Robust large margin
  deep neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 65(16):4265–4280, 2017.
Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov.
  Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 15(56):1929–1958, 2014.
Johan A. K. Suykens and Joos Vandewalle. Least squares support vector machine classifiers. Neural
  Processing Letters, 9(3):293–300, 1999.
Ambuj Tewari and Peter L. Bartlett. Learning theory. Academic Press Library in Signal Processing,
 2014.
Vladimir Vapnik. Statistical Learning Theory. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1998.
Vladimir Vapnik. The Nature of Statistical Learning Theory. Springer, 1999.
Vladimir Vapnik. Estimation of Dependencies Based on Empirical Data. Second Edition, Springer,
  2006.
Han Xiao, Kashif Rasul, and Roland Vollgraf. Fashion-mnist: a novel image dataset for benchmark-
  ing machine learning algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understanding
  deep learning requires rethinking generalization. Communications of the ACM, 64(3):107–115,
  2021.


A PPENDIX A: S ELECTION OF PARAMETERS IN VC-B OUNDS
This Appendix includes additional empirical results for modeling double descent in a single-layer
network shown in Figure 1 in the main paper. First set of results investigates the choice of theoretical
constants a1 and a2 in VC-bound (1) reproduced below:
                                                       r              !
                                             ε                 4Rtrn
                             Rtst ≤ Rtrn +        1+ 1+
                                             2                    ε


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Modeling double descent for MNIST data set (digit 5 vs 8) using values a1 = 1 and
a2 = 1, with a) original data set (no label noise) and b) 5% label noise added.


Figure 6: Modeling double descent for digits data with corrupted class labels, using values a1 = 3
and a2 = 1.

                                   a1       a2 n            η        4
                      where ε =        h ln        + 1 − ln    ,η = √
                                   n         h              4         n

VC-theory (Vapnik, 1998; 1999) specifies their range and provides the values corresponding to pes-
simistic assumptions (about unknown data distributions):

      – the range [0, 4] for a1 and [0,2] for a2 .
      – worst-case values a1 = 4 and a2 = 2.

These worst-case values result in upper bounds that are too crude for real-life data sets. It may be
worth noting here that VC-bounds (and most other analytic results in VC-theory) are regarded as
conceptual, and they have not been used for modeling real-life data sets. However, in this paper, we
apply VC-bounds for modeling double descent, so selecting ‘practical’ values of these constants be-
comes critical. The original reference on VC-theory (Vapnik, 2006) provides a technical discussion
on the problem of incorporating prior knowledge (about unknown distributions) into VC-bounds.
Whereas a-priori knowledge about particular form of distribution allows to obtain accurate results
(for that distribution), such results have limited practical value. Therefore, we can only provide
general guidelines for selecting proper values for values a1 and a2 , based on empirical results for
multiple data sets. Such guidelines, along with their empirical justification, are presented next.
The overall recommendation is that using values a1 = 3 and a2 = 1 results in practical VC-bounds
providing accurate and robust modeling of double descent for real-life data sets. For ‘clean’ data
sets from well-separable class distributions using values a1 = 1 and a2 = 1 results in more accurate
VC-bounds. Applying bounds with values a1 = 1 and a2 = 1 to model clean and noisy data sets
is illustrated in Figure 5(a), showing modeling results for digits data set used in Section 2 of the


                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Modeling double descent for digits data with pixels corrupted by Gaussian noise, using
values a1 = 3 and a2 = 1.


main paper. These results show that VC-bounds provide accurate estimates for clean data set, but
underestimate empirical curves for noisy data in Figure 5(b), for both first and especially second
descent. However, using suggested practical values a1 = 3 and a2 = 1 results in practical VC-
bounds that provide accurate modeling of double descent for this data, at various noise levels. See
empirical results in Figure 6.
Next, we show experimental results for the same digits data set, when images are corrupted by
random Gaussian noise. Here, the noise level is given by the standard deviation of the Gaussian
noise σ̂ = 0, 0.1, 0.2. Empirical results in Figure 7 show that VC-bounds (with values a1 = 3 and
a2 = 1) provide accurate modeling of double descent, at various noise levels. We conclude that
using values a1 = 3 and a2 = 1 provide robust VC-theoretical modeling of double descent for noisy
data.
In the following, we present the application of VC bounds on 4 different data sets adapted for binary
classification, namely CIFAR10 (cat vs automobile) (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009), SVHN (digit 5
vs 8) (Netzer et al., 2011), Fashion MNIST (dress vs coat) (Xiao et al., 2017), and epileptic seizure
(Andrzejak et al., 2001). For the image-based dataset, each sample is first transformed into grayscale
image, and then rescaled to [0, 1] interval via min-max scaling. For the epileptic seizure dataset,
the data set is normalized to zero mean and unit standard deviation. We follow the same training
procedures as the modeling of MNIST data set shown in section 2. All data sets has 800 training
samples and 2,000 test samples. Modeling results are obtained for a network with random ReLU
features, trained using both SVM and LS classifier, are shown in figures 8, 9, 10, 11.
The last set of results shows the effect of varying the number of training samples on test error, for
a fixed-size network, using MNIST data set. This setting was used in Nakkiran et al. (2021) for
demonstrating double descent. Results in Figure 12 show modeling double descent for digits data
set, using fixed-size network with N=500 and N=1500. These results are obtained for the network
with random ReLU features and are trained using a LS classifier with a1 = 3 and a2 = 1. They
show very accurate modeling of double descent using VC-bounds, under this setting.


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 8: Application of VC-bounds for Fashion MNIST coat vs dress data set using random ReLU
features.


Figure 9: Application of VC-bounds for CIFAR10 cat vs automobile data set using random ReLU
features.


                                             14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 10: Application of VC-bounds for SVHN digit 5 vs 8 data set using random ReLU features.


 Figure 11: Application of VC-bounds for epileptic seizure data set using random ReLU features.


                                              15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 12: Modeling double descent as a function of the number of training samples, for a fixed-size
network, using values a1 = 3 and a2 = 1.


A PPENDIX B: S ECOND D ESCENT M ODELING FOR T WO -L AYER F ULLY
C ONNECTED N ETWORK AND C ONVOLUTIONAL N ETWORK
In Section 3 of the main paper, we showcase the application of VC-bounds for a 1-layer fully con-
nected network. We considered over-parameterized networks during second descent (when training
error is close to zero), and showed that, in this region: (a) VC-bounds can be applied for modeling
second descent, and (b) the VC-dimension can be estimated as the norm squared of weights of the
output layer. Empirical results shown in the main paper confirmed the hypothesis that in a single
layer network, minimization of weights in the output layer effectively controls generalization. This
appendix extends application of VC-bounds to two-layer fully connected network and convolutional
LeNet-5 network (LeCun et al., 1998) for MNIST data set.
Consider a fully connected network with N1 hidden units in the first layer and N2 hidden units in the
second layer. We adopt the same experimental setting as in the main paper. The number of epochs
is set to 6000.
Figure 13 shows modeling results for a two-layer network, where N2 is fixed at 10 and N1 is varied.
Figure 14 shows modeling results for a two-layer network, where N1 fixed at 10 and N2 is varied.
Both Figures 13 and 14 show training and test errors similar to the results of a one-layer network
in Figure 5 in the main paper. In Figures 13(b) and 14(b), the region of second descent where the
training error is less than 1% is on the right side of the dotted vertical line.
Next, we present VC-theoretical modeling of second descent for a convolutional network. We use
the LeNet-5 architecture (LeCun et al., 1998), modified for a binary classification problem by setting
the number of output units to 1. See Figure 15 showing the schematic of the modified LeNet-5
model, where the number of hidden unit N in the last hidden layer is varied (denoted by a dark grey
color). Figure 16(a) shows the error curve and VC-bound, along with the estimated VC-dimension,
as a function of the number of hidden units N. Similar to multilayer network results, we observe
that VC-dimension (estimated as the norm of weights) decreases as the number of hidden units
N increases. Figure 16(b) shows the error curve and VC-bound, along with the norm squared of
weights, as a function of the number of epochs, for N = 10 and N = 100.
Results in Figures 13, 14, and 16 confirm that VC-bounds can accurately model empirical test er-
ror, further supporting our hypothesis that VC-dimension can be estimated as the norm squared of
weights of the output layer during the second descent.


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 13: VC-theoretical modeling of second descent in a two-layer fully connected network, with
the second layer width N2 fixed at 10. a) Second descent as a function of the first layer width N1 .
b) Second descent as a function of the number of epochs, for N1 = 10 and N1 = 100.


Figure 14: VC-theoretical modeling of second descent in a two-layer fully connected network, with
the first layer width N1 fixed at 10. a) Second descent as a function of the second layer width N2 .
b) Second descent as a function of the number of epochs, for N2 = 10 and N2 = 100.


                                                17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 15: Schematic of LeNet-5 architecture adapted for binary classification setting, where the
number of output units is set to 1. The size of the last hidden layer N is varied.


Figure 16: VC-theoretical modeling of second descent for LeNet-5. a) Second descent as a function
of the last layer width N. b) Second descent as a function of the number of epochs, for N = 10 and
N = 100.


                                               18
