Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E VALUATING V ISUAL C OUNTERFACTUAL E XPLAINERS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Explainability methods have been widely used to provide insight into the decisions
         made by statistical models, thus facilitating their adoption in various domains
         within the industry. Counterfactual explanation methods aim to improve our
         understanding of a model by perturbing samples in a way that would alter its
         response in an unexpected manner. This information is helpful for users and for
         machine learning practitioners to understand and improve their models. Given
         the value provided by counterfactual explanations, there is a growing interest in
         the research community to investigate and propose new methods. However, we
         identify two issues that could hinder the progress in this field. (1) Existing metrics
         do not accurately reflect the value of an explainability method for the users. (2)
         Comparisons between methods are usually performed with datasets like CelebA,
         where images are annotated with attributes that do not fully describe them and
         with subjective attributes such as “Attractive”. In this work, we address these
         problems by proposing an evaluation method with a principled metric to evaluate
         and compare different counterfactual explanation methods. The evaluation is based
         on a synthetic dataset where images are fully described by their annotated attributes.
         As a result, we are able to perform a fair comparison of multiple explainability
         methods in the recent literature, obtaining insights about their performance. We
         make the code and data public to the research community.


1    I NTRODUCTION

The popularity of deep learning methods is a testament to their effectiveness across a multitude of
tasks in different domains. This effectiveness has led to their widespread industrial adoption (e.g.,
self-driving cars, screening systems, healthcare, etc.), where the need to explain a model’s decision
becomes paramount. However, due to the high level of complexity of deep learning models, it is
difficult to understand their decision making process (Burkart & Huber, 2021). This ambiguity has
slowed down the adoption of these systems in critical domains. Hence, in order to ensure algorithmic
fairness in deep learning and to identify potential biases in training data and models, it is key to
explore the reasoning behind their decisions (Buhrmester et al., 2021).
In an attempt to convincingly tackle the why question, there has been a surge of work in the field
of explainability for machine learning models (Joshi et al., 2018; Mothilal et al., 2020; Rodríguez
et al., 2021). The goal of this field is to provide explanations for the decisions of a classifier, which
often come in the form of counterfactuals. These conterfactuals provide insight as to why the output
of the algorithms is not any different and how it could be changed (Goyal et al., 2019). Basically
a counterfactual explanation answers the question: “For situation X why was the outcome Y and
not Z”, describing what changes in a situation would have produced a different decision.
Ideally, counterfactual methods produce explanations that are interpretable by humans while reflecting
the factors that influence the decisions of a model (Mothilal et al., 2020). So given an input sample
and a model, a counterfactual explainer would perturb certain attributes of the sample, producing a
counterexample i.e., counterfactual, that shifts the model’s prediction, thus revealing which semantic
attributes the model is sensitive to. In this work, we focus on the image domain given the recent surge
of explainability methods for image classifiers (Joshi et al., 2018; Rodríguez et al., 2021; Singla et al.,
2019; Chang et al., 2018). A particular challenge of the image domain is that changes in the pixel
space are difficult to interpret and resemble adversarial attacks (Goodfellow et al., 2014b) (see Figure
4 for an example), so current explainers tend to search for counterfactuals in a latent space produced


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by, e.g., a variational autoencoder (VAE) (Kingma & Welling, 2013), or by conditioning on annotated
attributes (Denton et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2018; Singla et al., 2019; Rodríguez et al., 2021).
Although explanations produced in the latent space are easier to interpret than in the pixel space, they
depend on the chosen or learned decomposition of the input into attributes or latent factors. In the
case of VAEs, these factors could be misaligned with the real underlying generating process of the
images. Moreover, different methods in the literature rely on different autoencoding architectures or
generative models to infer semantic attributes from images, which make their counterfactual search
algorithms not comparable. In the case of annotations, since datasets do not provide access to the
whole data generating process, they tend to focus on arbitrary aspects of the input (such as facial
attributes for CelebA (Liu et al., 2015b)), ignoring other aspects that could influence a classifier’s
decision boundaries such as illumination, background color, shadows, etc. This raises the need for
evaluating explainers on a known set of attributes that represent the real generative factors of the
input. In this work, we propose to fill this gap by introducing a new explainability benchmark based
on a synthetic image dataset, where we model the whole data generating process and samples are
fully described by a controlled set of attributes.
An additional challenge when evaluating explainers is that there is no consensus on the metric that
should be used. While there has been some effort to provide a general metric to evaluate explain-
ers (Mothilal et al., 2020; Rodríguez et al., 2021), most of the proposed metrics could be easily gamed
to maximize the score of a given explainer without actually improving its quality for a user. For
example, since current metrics reward producing many explanations, the score can be increased by (i)
producing random samples that cannot be related to the ones being explained. This has motivated mea-
suring the proximity of explanations (Mothilal et al., 2020). (ii) Repeating the same explanation many
times. This motivates measuring diversity (Mothilal et al., 2020). However, we found that it is possi-
ble to maximize existing diversity measures by always performing the same perturbation to a sensitive
attribute while performing random perturbations to the rest of attributes that describe a sample. As a
result, although one counterfactual changing the sensitive attribute would suffice, an explainer could
obtain a higher score by producing more redundant explanations. We argue that instead of providing
many explanations, explainers should be designed to produce the minimal set of counterfactuals that
represent each of the factors that influence a model’s decision. (iii) Providing uninformative or trivial
explanations (Rodríguez et al., 2021). This has motivated us to compare the model’s predictions with
those expected from an “oracle classifier”. Model predictions that deviate from the expected value are
more informative than those that behave as expected (see A.2. In this work, we address these problems
by proposing a fair way to evaluate and compare different counterfactual explanation methods.
cierOur contributions can be summarized as follows: (i) we present a benchmark to evaluate counter-
factuals generated by any explainer in a fair way (Section 3); (ii) we offer insights on why existing
explainability methods have strong limitations such as an ill-defined oracle (Section 3.3); (iii) we
introduce a new set of metrics to evaluate the quality of counterfactuals (Section 3.4); and (iv) we
evaluate 6 explainers across different dataset configurations (Section 4).


2    R ELATED W ORK

Explainability methods. Since most successful machine learning models are uninterpretable (He
et al., 2016; Jégou et al., 2017; LeCun et al., 1989), modern explainability methods have emerged
to provide explanations for these types of models, which are known as post-hoc methods. An
important approach to post-hoc explanations is to establish feature importance for a given prediction.
These methods (Guidotti et al., 2018; Ribeiro et al., 2016; Shrikumar et al., 2017; Bach et al.,
2015) involve locally approximating the machine learning model being explained with a simpler
interpretable model. However, the usage of proxy models hinders the truthfulness of the explanations.
Another explainability technique is visualizing the factors that influenced a model’s decision through
heatmaps (Fong et al., 2019; Elliott et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022). Heatmaps are useful to understand
which objects present in the image have contributed to a classification. However, heatmaps do not
show how areas of the image should be changed and they cannot explain factors that are not spatially
localized (e.g., size, color, brightness, etc).
Explanation through examples or counterfactual explanations addresses these limitations by synthe-
sizing alternative inputs (counterfactuals) where a small set of attributes is changed resulting in a
different classification. These counterfactuals are usually created using generative models. A set of


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Comparison of explainers considered in this work. First column indicates whether counter-
factuals are found with gradient descent. Second column displays the domain in which we perform the
counterfactual search, with z referring to the attribute or latent space. Third column indicates whether
the explainer takes into account changes in pixel space during optimization (e.g., visual similarity
loss). Last column indicates if the explainer performs feature selection to generate counterfactuals.

               Method                                     Gradient based Domain Optimizes x-space Feature selection
               DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020)                    ✓            z            ✗                 ✗
               DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021)                   ✓            z           ✓                  ✗
               GS (Laugel et al., 2017)                         ✗           z            ✗                ✓
               StylEx (Lang et al., 2021)                       ✗           z            ✗                ✓
               Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020)        ✓            z            ✗                 ✗
               xGEM (Joshi et al., 2018)                       ✓            z           ✓                  ✗


methods condition the generative model on attributes annotated in the dataset by using a conditional
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) (Joshi et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2019; Sauer & Geiger, 2021;
Van Looveren et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2021). However, this approach restricts the explanations
to the provided attributes which do not reflect the entirety of the image properties, making the
applicability of these methods challenging where annotations are scarce. In order to generate counter-
factuals without recurring to annotated attributes, another set of methods uses VAEs or unconditional
GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014a) that do not depend on attributes during generation (Rodríguez et al.,
2021; Denton et al., 2019; Pawelczyk et al., 2020; Perez et al., 2018; Mothilal et al., 2020). See
Table 1 for a comparison of the methods considered in our work.
Explainability Benchmarks. DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021) and DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020) propose
metrics that allow researchers to evaluate the quality of an explanation. These metrics evaluate the
proximity of explanations to their original sample, and how diverse these are. Unfortunately, they are
easy to game. For example, an explainer could maximize diversity by always modifying the same
counterfactual attribute but randomly perturbing other non-counterfactual attributes to produce new
redundant explanations. We propose a more general, harder to game metric that allows us to evaluate a
set of explainers in order to identify their strengths and weaknesses through fair comparisons. Further,
the set of attributes of a dataset can influence the evaluation of the explainability methods. CelebA (Liu
et al., 2015a) is a common dataset used for generating counterfactual explanations (Rodríguez et al.,
2021; Denton et al., 2019), and it is labeled with a series of attributes, such as “Atractive", that fail to
fully describe the true underlying factors that generated the images (e.g, illumination, occlusions,
contrast, etc). Likewise, there is no guarantee that unsupervised disentanglement methods such as
VAEs identify the true factors of variations without making strong assumptions (Arjovsky et al.,
2019). We sidestep these problems by evaluating all explainers in a common latent space with known
attributes that fully describe the samples. Recently Pawelczyk et al. (2021) published a benchmark
(CARLA) with an extensive comparison of several counterfactual explanation methods across 3
different tabular datasets. Our work differs from CARLA in three important ways: (1) we propose a
principled metric to compare counterfactual explanation methods, (2) we introduce a new synthetic
benchmark that allows comparing multiple explainers in a fair manner in the same latent space. (3)
We focus on counterfactual visual explanations, which require access to a common latent space for
fair comparison since pixel-level counterfactuals are difficult to interpret (e.g., adversarial attacks).


3     P ROBLEM S ETUP

In the following lines we describe a principled framework to quantify the quality of counterfactual
explainers and show how it can be applied to compare multiple methods in the literature. In Section 3.1
we define the data generation process, in Section 3.2 we define the counterfactual generation process,
in Section 3.3 we define the concept of optimal classifier used to compare the predictions of a model,
and in Section 3.4 we define the metric used to evaluate counterfactual explanation methods. A
notation table can be found in Table 3.

3.1   DATA GENERATION

Many explainability methods in the literature are designed for the image domain (Rodríguez et al.,
2021; Joshi et al., 2018; Lang et al., 2021; Singla et al., 2019; Chang et al., 2018). In this area, most


                                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


datasets can be described with a data generating process where a set of latent variables (z) result in
an image (x) and a corresponding label (y), see Figure 1a. However, not all the latents that generate
the image have an impact on the label (zind ). For example, the image brightness does not affect the
presence of a dog. In addition, some latents can be correlated with the label (zcorr ). For instance,
whenever there is a dog there is usually a dog collar. Formally, we consider a data generating process
where a set of latent variables z ∈ Rd are sampled from a prior p(z), and a generator that produces
images p(x|z). Labels are generated using p(y|zcausal ), where zcausal is a subset of z containing
direct causal parents of y (Figure 1a). We also define zcorr as the set of attributes that are correlated to
y but not part of zcausal .1 Sometimes, these correlated attributes may have stronger predictive power,
but relying on them would lead to unreliable predictions. For instance using the sky background for
classifying airplanes. To generate datasets, we rely on a structural causal model (SCM) (Pearl, 2009),
corresponding to a sequence of stochastic equations producing random variables based on the causal
parents in the causal graph as described in Figure 1a.
In order to obtain a known mapping between z and x, we propose to leverage synbols (Lacoste et al.,
2020), a synthetic dataset generator with many controllable attributes (font, character, color, rotation,
size, etc). In addition, using a synthetic dataset allows us to control the effect of z on x and specify
the amount of change in x relative to the amount of change in z (and vice-versa). Using synbols, we
train an image generator x = g(z)2 , which is used to generate subsequent datasets. The generator g
is provided to the explainers to offer a differential mapping from z to x. We believe this is a strength
of our benchmark compared to using datasets of natural images.

3.2   C OUNTERFACTUAL GENERATION

Given an image x and a classifier fˆ(x), a counterfactual explanation method (explainer) produces x′ ,
a perturbed version of x that shows some insight about the sensitivity of fˆ to the semantic attributes
that describe x. The perturbation is commonly performed on a learned latent space z. In general,
explainers are tasked to learn an encoder and find a useful latent space, but this task is hard and
still under active research. In order to bring a better comparison between explainers, we provide
them access to the generating function g and z so that explanations are generated in the same latent
space. This gives us the opportunity to let explainers work directly in latent space by defining
ĥ(z) := fˆ(g(z)). In other words, we define an explainer as:

                                          {z′i }ni=1 = e(z, ĥ, g),                                     (1)

where z′i is the ith counterfactual explanation from z found by explainer e on the latent classifier ĥ.
Working in latent spaces greatly simplifies the task of an explainer, but we will see that there are still
a variety of challenges to be addressed. Namely, the notion of optimal classifier or stable classifier
may be ill defined or may not always exists.

3.3   O PTIMAL C LASSIFIER

Counterfactual explanation methods tend to produce trivial explanations by perturbing the attribute
being classified from the input (Rodríguez et al., 2021). A more useful explainer would change a
model’s predictions by perturbing non-causal attributes (such as the background of an image). To
distinguish between these two kinds of explanations, an “oracle” is required, whose predictions
are contrasted with those of the model. If an explanation changes both the oracle and the model’s
predictions, the explanation is deemed trivial and discarded. However, if the explanation only changes
one of the two, the explanation is non-trivial. In the absence of a human oracle who knows the
causal attribute being classified, the authors resort to an optimal predictor or ground truth classifier.
However, the concept of optimal predictor is commonly ill defined and application dependant, thus
we must proceed with care when assuming the existence of a ground truth classifier. To show that,
we next define the concepts of Bayes classifier, causal classifier, and finally the causal classifier with
non-reversible generator used in this work.
   1
     z ∈ zcorr could be correlated to y for two different reasons: i) y → z ii) a confounder α such that
y ← α → z. Note that α may be element of zcausal or outside of the scene, such as the photograph.
   2
     In this work, we consider deterministic generators. A more general formulation would be g(x|z)


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                         SCE
                                   y=0               Classiﬁer        y=0                                Classiﬁer
                                               r                               CF
                                    =0               Sample            =0
                                                                                     r                   Sample
 Zcausal   Zcorr       Zind

                                                                                         EF


                                                                 z2
                                                                                                   NCF


                              z2
                                         =1


                                                                          CF
   Y               X
                                                                                              EF
Oracle                                                                              z1
                                              z1
           (a)                            (b)                                       (c)

Figure 1: (a) Example of a causal graph satisfying the problem setup of section 3.1. (b) Successful
counterfactual explanation as defined in (Mothilal et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2018). That is, a successful
counterfactual changes (gray) the classifier prediction (red) for the sample (point). The dashed square
represents the maximum L1 norm of the perturbation performed by an explainer (c) Our definition of
successful counterfactual explanation (gray) considers any change where an oracle (green) behaves
differently from the classifier (red). EF: estimator flips, NCF: non-causal flips, CF: causal flips.


Causal classifier with reversible generator. The causal classifier makes predictions solely based on
the causal parents of y in the causal graph G. In latent space: hcausal (z) = arg maxy p(y|zcausal ).
When the generator x = g(z, ϵx ) is reversible, we obtain fcausal (x) = hcausal g −1 (x) . Interest-


ingly, this classifier is robust to changes of p(z) as long as p(y|zcausal ) and p(x|z) remain unchanged.
Causal classifier with non-reversible generator. It is worth noting that when the generator is
not reversible, a given x can lead to many z, which prevents fromP          directly recovering z from
x. A natural choice is to rely on the posterior distribution f (x) = z p(z|x)hcausal (z), where
p(z|x) ∝ p(z)p(x|z). However, this posterior now depends on p(z), making the new classifier no
longer independent to distribution shift when p(z) is changed to e.g. p′ (z). This leads to the following
negative result (see A.1 for the proof, along with an example):
Proposition 1. If there exists a pair z, z′ s.t. g(z) = g(z′ ) and hcausal (z) ̸= hcausal (z′ ), then for any
deterministic classifier fˆ(x), there is a prior p′ (z) s.t. the accuracy of fˆ is 0 with respect to hcausal .

3.4    E VALUATING C OUNTERFACTUAL E XPLANATIONS

The goal for counterfactual generation methods is to find all the attributes that make a classifier
behave differently from a causal classifier (see Figure 1c). Note that Mothilal et al. (2020) only
considered counterfactuals that change the predictions of a classifier (Figure 1b), and Rodríguez
et al. (2021) only considered the top region in Figure 1c. These definitions do not cover cases such
as when the oracle changes its prediction while the classifier’s stay the same. Following Mothilal
et al. (2020); Rodríguez et al. (2021); Joshi et al. (2018), we also measure the similarity between the
original example and the counterfactuals used to explain it. The reason is that counterfactuals should
be relatable to original samples so that a human can interpret what is the sensitive semantic attribute.
Next, we define the components of the proposed metric (Eq. 7).
Proximal change (Joshi et al., 2018; Mothilal et al., 2020). An explanationmust be relatable to the
original sample, thus it needs to be proximal. That is, the change z′ needs to stay within a certain
radius r from z. Using L1 norm, the set of proximal z′ is defined as follows:
                                         Pr (z) = {z′ | ∥z − z′ ∥1 ≤ r}                                        (2)

Estimator Flip (EF) (Joshi et al., 2018; Mothilal et al., 2020). This is defined as a proximal change
on z leading to a change in prediction of the estimator ĥ (see Figure 1b).
                                         n                     o
                               EF(z) = z′ ĥ(z′ ) ̸= ĥ(z) ∩ Pr .                                  (3)


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Non-Causal Flip (NCF). Counterfactuals obtained by estimator flips (EF) are common in the
literature as they do not require the knowledge of hcausal . However, if we have access to hcausal , we
can detect a new set of explanations: a proximal change in z′ that changes the prediction of ĥ but not
of hcausal :


                     NCF(z) = {z′ | EF(z) ∧ hcausal (z′ ) = hcausal (z)} ∩ Pr .                         (4)

Causal Flip (CF). Additionally, access to hcausal allows us to detect another new set of explanations:
a proximal change in z′ that changes the prediction of hcausal but not ĥ:

                        n                                                 o
                 CF(z) = z′ ĥ(z′ ) = ĥ(z) ∧ hcausal (z′ ) ̸= hcausal (z) ∩ Pr .                       (5)

Thus, we define the set of successful counterfactual explanation (SCE) as follows:
                                        SCE(z) = (NCF ∪ CF) .                                           (6)

In summary, having knowledge of the causal factors (access to hcausal ) allows us to evaluate counter-
factuals explanations in a new way as illustrated in the following example. Given a dog classifier
and an image of a dog, a counterfactual example that changes the background of the image in a
way that alters the classifier’s prediction (NCF) will almost certainly provide valuable insight about
the model’s behaviour. The same can be said about a counterfactual example that removes the dog
from the image without altering the classifier’s prediction (CF) (see Figure 1c). Note that these
counterfactuals cannot be detected without causal knowledge, which is only available if we have
access to the entire data generating process i.e., a synthetic dataset.
Orthogonal and complement subset. Note that both EF and SCE are possibly infinite sets and
cannot be easily interpreted by humans. We could return the explanation minimizing some notion of
distance on z or x, however a good explainer should return a useful and diverse set of explanations.
To this end, we propose a metric that only takes into account the subset of orthogonal and comple-
mentary explanations. Otherwise, it is trivial to report many explanations that are a modification
of an existing explanation without being useful. For instance, modifying the hair color to trigger a
change in gender classification is a good finding, but changing the hair color again, and removing
some clouds in the sky would not constitute a useful explanation. Hence, only admitting orthogonal
explanations enforces a useful diversity. However, we also admit complementary explanations. That
is, if darker hair triggers a change in gender classification and lighter hair also triggers a change, these
are two useful explanations. In short, given two explainers that find counterfactuals by perturbing
the most sensitive attribute, the orthogonality and complementary requirements ensure that the one
that provides a more diverse set of counterfactuals by also perturbing less sensitive attributes scores
higher. This is important because it rewards explainers that give a more complete description of the
model to the user. There may be use cases where only the most sensitive attribute matters. However,
everything else being equal, we argue that, in general, it is favorable to have access to a diversity of
explanations.
The explainer is responsible for returning explanations produced with orthogonal or complementary
perturbation vectors. To verify whether explanations are orthogonal or complementary we use a
greedy algorithm. Concretely, we sort the explanations by how proximal they are to the original
sample and add the first one to the set. Then we iterate through the rest and sequentially add every
subsequent explanation that is orthogonal or complementary to all the explanations currently in the
set (see Algorithm 1 for implementation). The resulting orthogonal and complement set is referred to
as SCE⊥ (z). We use the cardinality of this set to evaluate the performance of explainers:
                                           S# = |SCE⊥ (z)|.                                             (7)

We consider the proposed setup to be fairer than previous works, since: (1) all explainers are
compared in the same latent space, resulting in a fair evaluation, (2) uninformative explanations are
discarded leveraging knowledge of the causal factors, (3) it is designed to be more difficult to game
by repeating counterfactual explanations, and (4) it rewards explainers that return a more complete
set of explanations.


                                                     6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                             6 clusters and 0.5 correlation                   6 clusters and 0.95 correlation
                                                                             10 clusters and 0.5 correlation                  10 clusters and 0.95 correlation



                                                                     DiVE (Grad)                              DiCE (Grad)                            Latent-CF (Grad)
                                                                      character                                character                                 character

                                                            font                translation-y        font             translation-y           font              translation-y


                                                          color                    translation-x   color                    translation-x   color                 translation-x


                                                                  rotation      scale                      rotation   scale                         rotation   scale


                                                                        StylEx                                xGEM (Grad)                            Growing Spheres
                                                                      character                                character                                character

                                                            font                translation-y        font             translation-y           font              translation-y


                                                          color                    translation-x   color                    translation-x   color                 translation-x


                                                                  rotation      scale                      rotation   scale                         rotation   scale


Figure 2: Interpolations produced by our learned Figure 3: Average attribute perturbation for
generator (g(z)). Images are changed as the at- each method/scenario. Gradient based meth-
tribute’s value changes smoothly from one value ods perturb almost all attributes while gradient-
to another (left-right). From top to bottom: rota- agnostic methods perturb only one or two. DiVE
tion, scale, h-translation, v-translation, char, font. focuses almost solely on font.



4    E XPERIMENTS

In this section we give an overview of the different methods (see Table1) and datasets that are
comprised within our benchmark. Since we provide access to a common interpretable latent space,
we evaluate explainers that do not depend on a concrete latent decomposition. The code is written in
PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2017) and will be made public. Implementations details can be found in the
Appendix.
Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020): A simple method that performs a adversarial perturbations
in the latent space until a counterfactual with confidence higher than threshold tol is found.
DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020): A method that aims to produce a diverse set of counterfactual examples
directly from a series of attributes or latent space by proposing a series of perturbations that change
the predictions of a classifier. This is achieved by gradient-based optimization of multiple loss
functions with respect to the attributes or latents and the classifier:

             L = hinge_loss(ĥ(z′ ), y, margin) + λ1 dist(z, z′ ) + λ2 dpp_diversity(z′ ),                                                                                      (8)
                                  (A)                             (B)                                                 (C)


where optimizing (A) pushes the prediction of the classifier fˆ towards y up to some margin, (B)
ensures that counterfactuals (z′ ) are close to the original samples (z), and (C) maximizes the distance
between each pair of counterfactuals.
xGEM (Joshi et al., 2018): A method equivalent to DiCE without the diversity term (C).
DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021): A method similar to DiCE that leverages the Fisher Information (FI)
to find non-trivial counterfactuals, i.e. samples that change the classifier prediction without changing
the causal attribute zcausal , thus focusing on spurious correlations. This is done by masking out latent
dimensions with the highest FI while optimizing a cost equivalent to Eq. 8.
Growing Spheres (GS) (Laugel et al., 2017): A method that given a data point z identifies its closest
neighbour classified differently e referred to as enemy. This is done by finding the smallest l2 -ball
around z that contains an enemy. Once e is found the dimensions with small changes in e with
respect to z are discarded through a feature selection process, maximizing the sparsity of e − z.
StylEx (Lang et al., 2021)3 : They find a latent perturbation in a direction that maximizes the difference
in the output of the classifier for the original sample and its perturbed counterpart.
Informed Search (IS): An explainer that knows about the data generation process in Figure 1a. Thus,
IS generates explanations by perturbing the spuriously correlated attributes zcorr .

   3
     Since we already provide an interpretable set of latent attributes we evaluate only the Attribute finding
(AttFind) algorithm from the paper


                                                      7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 2: Score (Eq. 7) and percentage of trivial counterfactuals () obtained by each explainer for each
of the different datasets described in 4.1. Values represent an average score across batches for the
entire dataset for 3 different runs.

                      Correlation                                  0.50         0.95          0.50          0.95
          #Spurious   Explainer                                     S#           S#        Trivial (%)   Trivial (%)
                      IS (Oracle) 4                              2.40 ±0.3    2.67 ±0.02    0.00 ±0.00   0.00 ±0.00
                      DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020)               1.18 ±0.01   1.17 ±0.01    9.37 ±0.11   6.78 ±0.26
                      DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021)              1.02 ±0.00   1.00 ±0.01    2.51 ±0.09   1.68 ±0.02
                      GS (Laugel et al., 2017)                   1.01 ±0.00   1.01 ±0.00    4.49 ±0.40   2.34 ±0.15
              6
                      StylEx (Lang et al., 2021)                 1.04 ±0.00   1.17 ±0.00    2.41 ±0.00   1.58 ±0.00
                      Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020)   0.82 ±0.00   0.93 ±0.00    0.00 ±0.00   0.00 ±0.00
                      xGEM (Joshi et al., 2018)                  1.18 ±0.02   1.15 ±0.01   12.46 ±0.03   6.45 ±0.07
                      IS (Oracle) 4                              2.80 ±0.04   3.63 ±0.02    0.00 ±0.00   0.00 ±0.00
                      DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020)               1.13 ±0.01   1.19 ±0.01    8.62 ±0.46   6.70 ±0.08
                      DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021)              1.00 ±0.00   1.04 ±0.00    2.28 ±0.03   1.44 ±0.04
             10
                      GS (Laugel et al., 2017)                   1.01 ±0.00   1.00 ±0.01    4.91 ±0.25   1.95 ±0.08
                      StylEx (Lang et al., 2021)                 1.15 ±0.00   1.12 ±0.00    3.37 ±0.00   1.62 ±0.00
                      Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020)   0.81 ±0.00   0.81 ±0.00    0.00 ±0.00   0.00 ±0.00
                      xGEM (Joshi et al., 2018)                  1.15 ±0.00   1.16 ±0.00   10.17 ±0.28   6.38 ±0.11



4.1   DATASETS

We design a synthetic benchmark based on the synbols dataset (Lacoste et al., 2020). In this
benchmarks images are fully defined by 3 categorical attributes (48 fonts, 48 characters, 2 background
colors) and 4 continuous attributes (x-translation, y-translation, rotation, scale), see Figure 2.
An advantage of synbols is the large amount of values in its categorical attributes such as character
and font. This allows us to design different scenarios by introducing spurious correlations based on
subsets of these attributes. From now on, we assume zcausal = char ∈ [1..48] and ĥcausal = zcausal
mod 2. Then we leverage the font attribute to introduce spurious correlations (zcorr in Figure 1a).
Note that increasing the number of fonts in zcorr (the rest will be in zind ) increases the random chance
of finding a counterfactual by accidentally switching the font. Likewise, increasing the amount of
correlation between zcorr and y makes spurious correlations easier to find since the classifier latches
stronger on them. We hypothesize that stronger correlations will benefit gradient-based explainers,
which will find higher gradient curvature for highly correlated fonts. To explore how explainers
behave under different scenarios, we consider 6 and 10 spurious fonts with 50% and 95% correlation
with y, resulting in a total of 4 scenarios. Further, we introduce a 5% of noise the the zcausal attribute
(character) to encourage classifiers to also rely on the font.

4.2   R ESULTS

We evaluate the performance of six different methods with the metric defined in Eq. 7. Each method
is evaluated in several different datasets with varying levels of difficulty as described in 3.1 and 4.1.
Additional results can be found in section A.4.
It is hard to diversify. A good explainer should be able to predict the behavior of the model with
respect to changes in the different attributes that generate the data. In the case of a classifier, finding
the attributes that induce it to change its prediction in order to reveal if it is relying on attributes that
are independent from the class being predicted is a desirable goal. In the pursuit of this goal, an
explainer should ideally populate SCE(z) (see Eq. 6) with explanations altering each of the attributes
that are correlated with the data. However, as shown in Table 2 explainers fail to consistently find
more than one altering attribute.
Performance saturates with 6 fonts. We observe that methods do not significantly increase the
number of successful counterfactuals when adding 4 more spurious fonts (Table 2). This is, partially,
because methods tend to focus on changing the zcausal attribute character as seen in Figure 3, which
leads to trivial counterfactuals. When adding more fonts, the font identification task becomes more
difficult for the classifier, which makes it more sensitive to characters and exacerbates this problem.
For a more extensive ablation illustrating this phenomenon see Figure 5.
Gradients tend to perturb most of the attributes. Figure 3 offers insight into how each method
perturbs z and we can see that gradient-based methods tend to perturb almost all attributes equally,


                                                             8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


exploring the perturbation space in many directions. In the extreme, we found that Latent-CF slightly
modifies all the latent attributes, producing counterfactuals that resemble adversarial attacks. While
modifying all the attributes increases the chances of finding 1 good explanation on average, it also
prevents the explainer from finding multiple non-trivial diverse explanations. On the other hand,
methods that are gradient-agnostic focus on perturbing one or two attributes, resulting in a more
narrow search space. This increases the risk of methods focusing on zcausal (Figure 1a). This is
evidenced in Figure 3, where StylEx and GS considerably perturb the character attribute. Interestingly,
the perturbation pattern of DiVE shares some similarities with StylEx and GS due to gradient masking.
Explainers exploit bad classifiers. As seen in Table 2 explainers are not significantly affected
by the amount of spurious correlation zcorr introduced. This indicates that, in contrast with the
oracle (IS), methods produce explanations by changing the font attribute zcausal (as seen in Figure 3)
without changing the classifier’s prediction, thus creating a successful counterfactual (Eq. 5). Figure 6
shows some examples of methods achieving this by changing the accent mark, the umlauts and
the circumflex of vowel characters (e.g., ô → ö). These counterfactuals expose failure cases of
the classifier and are therefore useful, since they show that the classifier is unable to classify some
characters. See A.4 (On causal counterfactuals).
DiVE focuses on changing the font. As shown in Figure 3, DiVE perturbs almost exclusively the
zcorr attribute (font), specially for high correlation values, this indicates that the method successfully
distinguishes between zcausal and zcorr attributes. However, it is not able to consistently perturb the
font in the right way to produce a diverse set of counterfactuals as evidenced by its score (Table 2).
Non-triviality is not enough. Table 2 (right) shows the average percentage of trivial counterfactuals
found by each method. We observe that methods that tend to produce a higher number of successful
explanations (left) tend to also produce a larger number of trivial counterfactuals (right), which are
discarded in our metric.

5    D ISCUSSION
Benchmark In this work, we have introduced a more comprehensive definition of good counterfactual
(Section 3) that we instantiate as a metric (Section 3.4) as well as a fair evaluation setup (Section 3.1)
in the form of a benchmark. Previous evaluation setups use datasets like CelebA where the causal data
generation process is unknown and use metrics that are easy to game. In contrast, our evaluation setup
uses a more comprehensive and fair metric while providing control over the entire data generating
process and therefore knowledge of the causal factors. Even though knowledge of causal factors
is rare when working in real world scenarios, it is possible to adapt our metric to take only into
account an orthogonal and complement set of estimator flips EF (Eq. 3) which do not require causal
knowledge. However, any evaluation schema that does not include causal information would be
incomplete. Further, if an explainer fails to provide a set of useful and diverse explanations for
our synthetic dataset it is very unlikely that it is able to do so for real datasets. Nevertheless, we
recommend users to also evaluate explainers using real world data.
Oracle We argue that successful counterfactuals should be considered in the perspective of a human.
In the absence of a human, we must resort to an optimal classifier, whose task is to contrast the
predictions of the model with the optimal prediction and spot unexpected behaviors; acting as an
oracle. Without an oracle, it is not clear how we could assess whether a model is working as intended.
We show that the optimal classifier is commonly ill-defined in the image domain, because it is not
always possible to access an invertible image generator (Section 3.3). Therefore, it cannot be expected
that a classifier trained on pixel space achieves optimal performance.
Results Our experimental results indicate that the different counterfactual explainers in the literature
perform similarly and there has been little improvement in the recent years (Table 2). Although most
of them find a single explanation in average, we found that they do it in different ways (Figure 3).

6    C ONCLUSION
In this paper we present a benchmark that provides unified metrics for evaluating different counter-
factual explanation methods. The benchmark consists of synthetic images fully described by their
annotated attributes which are accessible to the explainers through a differentiable generator. We
hope this benchmark serves as an inspiration for developing future explainability methods.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7       R EPRODUCIBILITY
In an effort to ensure reproducibility we provide implementation details in A.3. The total run-time
for all experiments is ~37 hours on a single Titan-X GPU. The code4 is written in PyTorch (Paszke
et al., 2017) and is made public along with the datasets and pretrained weights for the models used in
this work. Detailed documentation will be released upon publication.

R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Sebastian Bach, Alexander Binder, Grégoire Montavon, Frederick Klauschen, Klaus-Robert Müller,
  and Wojciech Samek. On pixel-wise explanations for non-linear classifier decisions by layer-wise
  relevance propagation. PloS one, 10(7):e0130140, 2015.
Rachana Balasubramanian, Samuel Sharpe, Brian Barr, Jason Wittenbach, and C Bayan Bruss. Latent-
  cf: a simple baseline for reverse counterfactual explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09301,
  2020.
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale gan training for high fidelity natural
  image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096, 2018.
Vanessa Buhrmester, David Münch, and Michael Arens. Analysis of explainers of black box deep
  neural networks for computer vision: A survey. Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction, 3
  (4):966–989, 2021.
Nadia Burkart and Marco F Huber. A survey on the explainability of supervised machine learning.
 Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 70:245–317, 2021.
Chun-Hao Chang, Elliot Creager, Anna Goldenberg, and David Duvenaud. Explaining image
  classifiers by counterfactual generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.08024, 2018.
Emily Denton, Ben Hutchinson, Margaret Mitchell, and Timnit Gebru. Detecting bias with generative
  counterfactual face attribute augmentation. 2019.
Andrew Elliott, Stephen Law, and Chris Russell. Explaining classifiers using adversarial perturbations
  on the perceptual ball. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition, pp. 10693–10702, 2021.
Ruth Fong, Mandela Patrick, and Andrea Vedaldi. Understanding deep networks via extremal
  perturbations and smooth masks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision, pp. 2950–2958, 2019.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014a.
Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial
  examples. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6572, 2014b.
Yash Goyal, Ziyan Wu, Jan Ernst, Dhruv Batra, Devi Parikh, and Stefan Lee. Counterfactual visual
  explanations. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2376–2384. PMLR, 2019.
Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Dino Pedreschi, Franco Turini, and Fosca
  Giannotti. Local rule-based explanations of black box decision systems. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.10820, 2018.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
    4
        https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Bex-15A3


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Simon Jégou, Michal Drozdzal, David Vazquez, Adriana Romero, and Yoshua Bengio. The one
  hundred layers tiramisu: Fully convolutional densenets for semantic segmentation. In Proceedings
  of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops, pp. 11–19, 2017.

Shalmali Joshi, Oluwasanmi Koyejo, Been Kim, and Joydeep Ghosh. xgems: Generating examplars
  to explain black-box models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08867, 2018.

Ilyes Khemakhem, Diederik Kingma, Ricardo Monti, and Aapo Hyvarinen. Variational autoencoders
   and nonlinear ica: A unifying framework. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
   and Statistics, pp. 2207–2217. PMLR, 2020.

Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.            Auto-encoding variational bayes.       arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.

Sébastien Lachapelle, Pau Rodriguez, Yash Sharma, Katie E Everett, Rémi Le Priol, Alexandre
  Lacoste, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Disentanglement via mechanism sparsity regularization: A
  new principle for nonlinear ica. In Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, pp. 428–484.
  PMLR, 2022.

Alexandre Lacoste, Pau Rodríguez, Frédéric Branchaud-Charron, Parmida Atighehchian, Massimo
  Caccia, Issam Laradji, Alexandre Drouin, Matt Craddock, Laurent Charlin, and David Vázquez.
  Synbols: Probing learning algorithms with synthetic datasets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.06415,
  2020.

Oran Lang, Yossi Gandelsman, Michal Yarom, Yoav Wald, Gal Elidan, Avinatan Hassidim, William T
  Freeman, Phillip Isola, Amir Globerson, Michal Irani, et al. Explaining in style: Training a gan to
  explain a classifier in stylespace. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision, pp. 693–702, 2021.

Thibault Laugel, Marie-Jeanne Lesot, Christophe Marsala, Xavier Renard, and Marcin Detyniecki.
  Inverse classification for comparison-based interpretability in machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1712.08443, 2017.

Yann LeCun, Bernhard Boser, John S Denker, Donnie Henderson, Richard E Howard, Wayne
  Hubbard, and Lawrence D Jackel. Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition.
  Neural computation, 1(4):541–551, 1989.

Shusen Liu, Bhavya Kailkhura, Donald Loveland, and Yong Han. Generative counterfactual introspec-
  tion for explainable deep learning. In 2019 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information
  Processing (GlobalSIP), pp. 1–5. IEEE, 2019.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015a.

Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang. Deep learning face attributes in the wild. In
  Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), December 2015b.

Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, Gunnar Raetsch, Sylvain Gelly, Bernhard Schölkopf,
  and Olivier Bachem. Challenging common assumptions in the unsupervised learning of disentan-
  gled representations. In international conference on machine learning, pp. 4114–4124. PMLR,
  2019.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:1608.03983, 2016.

Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.       Decoupled weight decay regularization.       arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1711.05101, 2017.

Ramaravind K Mothilal, Amit Sharma, and Chenhao Tan. Explaining machine learning classifiers
  through diverse counterfactual explanations. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness,
  Accountability, and Transparency, pp. 607–617, 2020.


                                                 11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Soumith Chintala, Gregory Chanan, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito,
  Zeming Lin, Alban Desmaison, Luca Antiga, and Adam Lerer. Automatic differentiation in
  pytorch. 2017.

Martin Pawelczyk, Klaus Broelemann, and Gjergji Kasneci. Learning model-agnostic counterfactual
 explanations for tabular data. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp. 3126–3132, 2020.

Martin Pawelczyk, Sascha Bielawski, Johannes van den Heuvel, Tobias Richter, and Gjergji Kas-
 neci. Carla: A python library to benchmark algorithmic recourse and counterfactual explanation
 algorithms, 2021.

Judea Pearl. Causality. Cambridge university press, 2009.

Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm De Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual
  reasoning with a general conditioning layer. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 32, 2018.

Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. " why should i trust you?" explaining the
 predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference
 on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1135–1144, 2016.

Pau Rodríguez, Massimo Caccia, Alexandre Lacoste, Lee Zamparo, Issam Laradji, Laurent Charlin,
  and David Vazquez. Beyond trivial counterfactual explanations with diverse valuable explanations.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1056–
  1065, October 2021.

Axel Sauer and Andreas Geiger.               Counterfactual generative networks.            arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2101.06046, 2021.

Avanti Shrikumar, Peyton Greenside, and Anshul Kundaje. Learning important features through
  propagating activation differences. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 3145–
  3153. PMLR, 2017.

Sumedha Singla, Brian Pollack, Junxiang Chen, and Kayhan Batmanghelich. Explanation by
  progressive exaggeration. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.00483, 2019.

Arnaud Van Looveren, Janis Klaise, Giovanni Vacanti, and Oliver Cobb. Conditional generative
  models for counterfactual explanations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.10123, 2021.

Fan Yang, Ninghao Liu, Mengnan Du, and Xia Hu. Generative counterfactuals for neural networks
  via attribute-informed perturbation. ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 23(1):59–68, 2021.

Yilun Zhou, Serena Booth, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Julie Shah. Do feature attribution methods
  correctly attribute features? In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
  volume 36, pp. 9623–9633, 2022.


A     A PPENDIX

A.1    P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Proposition 1. If there exists a pair z, z′ s.t. g(z) = g(z′ ) and hcausal (z) ̸= hcausal (z′ ), then for any
deterministic classifier fˆ(x), there is a prior p′ (z) s.t. the accuracy of fˆ is 0 with respect to hcausal .

                   n                             o
Proof. Let S = z̃ fˆ(g(z̃)) ̸= hcausal (z̃) and show that |S| =        ̸ 0. Since g(z) = g(z′ ), we have
that fˆ(g(z)) = fˆ(g(z′ )). Also, since hcausal (z) ̸= hcausal (z′ ), we have either fˆ(g(z)) ̸= hcausal (z)
or fˆ(g(z′ )) ̸= hcausal (z′ ). Finally, any prior p′ (z) with no mass outside of S satisfies the proof.


                                                     12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


As an example, let’s consider a cube classifier from 2d projections of cubes. We can train a classifier
to predict the correct class from the 3 visible faces. However, since the back of the cube is not visible
there exists datasets such that the back of the cube is distorted in a way that makes it not a cube.
The point being made here is that even though hcausal exists, fcausal does not always exists. Further
assumptions needs to be made on which priors p(z) are valid for robustness to distribution shift, e.g.,
as humans, we make a symmetry assumption for classifying cubes. Perhaps future line of research in
explainability should seek to find what assumptions are made by classifiers. In the rest of this work,
we will make the assumption that if g(z) = g(z′ ), then hcausal (z) = hcausal (z′ ) for all pairs z, z′ 5
The proof is simple but it contrasts with the known result that hcausal is robust to any distribution
shift over p(z).

A.2     I NFORMATION OF THE E XPLANATIONS

In our work, we aim to improve the amount of information provided by explanation sets. In terms of
information theory, unexpected events tend to be more informative. In this sense, repeating the same
explanation multiple times provides little information and increasing diversity increases the amount
of information. In addition, the amount of information of an event is usually measured with respect
to some underlying probability distribution. If we know that a classifier is trained to detect a certain
object, we expect the classifier to learn the conditional probability distribution (label given input) of
the training set. Thus, deviations from this distribution are unexpected and informative. However,
we do not know the real label for new samples and thus, we need to resort to some form of oracle
or ground truth classifier in order to compare it with the model being explained. This ground truth
classifier must have access to the real data generating process in order to infer the correct class from
images, and the data generating process of image-label distributions is typically a causal process
governed by the laws of physics. That is why we refer to this classifier as “causal classifier”.

A.3     I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS

In this section we will describe the training setting for the encoder q(z|x) the generator g(z) and the
classifier to be explained fˆ(x), along with the settings for each of the explainers considered in this
work.

A.3.1    T RAINING DETAILS
Encoder The encoder is based on BigGAN’s (Brock et al., 2018; Rodríguez et al., 2021) discriminator
architecture with a classifier on top and it is trained on Synbols (Lacoste et al., 2020) dataset. Given
an image x we task the encoder with predicting the attributes that describe it. It is trained for 100
epochs with a batch size of 64. We use AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a learning rate of
0.001 and a weight decay of 0.0001 with a cosine annealing learning rate scheduler(Loshchilov &
Hutter, 2016). Since Synbols contains discrete and continuous attributes, we optimize them separately
minimizing:
                                          Ldiscrete + Lcontinuous                                     (9)
where Ldiscrete is the average cross entropy loss for each categorical attribute and Lcontinuous is the L1
distance between the original continuous attributes and the ones predicted.

Generator Similar to the encoder, the generator is also based on a BigGAN (Brock et al., 2018)
architecture and trained with the same hyper-parameters and learning rate scheduler. Given a set
of attributes z and the image x that they describe, we train the generator to reconstruct x from z.
However, in order to provide a high-dimensional input to the generator instead of directly using the 7
Synbols attributes leveraged in our benchmark z ∈ R7 (Section 4.1), we use embedding layers to
project each categorical attribute (character and font) into a 3-dimensional space. The embeddings
are concatenated with the 5 continuous6 Synbols attributes obtaining z ∈ R11 . We train the generator
minimizing the following criteria:
   5
     This assumption could be relaxed by saying that the probability of this assertion being violated is unlikely
under a predefined set of valid distribution shifts.
   6
     We treat the background color as a continuous attribute


                                                      13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           Table 3: Notation Table.

               Notation          Description
                   x             An input image
                   y             The label of the input image
                   z             A set of latent variables
                zcausal          A subset of z containing the causal parents
                   z′            A counterfactual explanation for z
                 fˆ(x)           The classifier to be explained
                 ĥ(z)           The latent classifier to be explained
               hcausal (z)       The latent classifier to that is robust under change of p(z)
                 p(z)            Prior distribution over z
                 g(z)            Deterministic image generator
                g(x|z)           Stochastic image generator
                q(z|x)           An encoder
               e(z, ĥ, g)       A function that generates explanations



                       Lrec = α × ∥ x − x′ ∥1 + (1 − α) × ∥ q(x) − q(x′ ) ∥1                        (10)
                             ′
where α = 0.2, x and x are the original and reconstructed image respectively and q(x) are the
learned encoder features for image x. Lastly, to reduce the amount of noise in the generated images
we use a discriminator network D trained alongside the generator to distinguish between x and x′ .
Specifically the generator is trained every 3rd iteration. So, the criteria for the generator to optimize
becomes:

                                          Lrec + log(1 − D(x′ )) ∗ λ                                (11)
where λ = 0.01 and D(x′ ) is the discriminator’s estimate of the probability that the reconstructed
image x′ is real.
Classifier The classifiers we set to explain are ResNet-18 (He et al., 2016) architectures trained on
the different benchmarks described in Section 4.1. All the classifiers are trained for 10 epochs with a
batch size of 256. We use AdamW with a learning rate of 0.01 and a weight decay of 0.0001 with a
cosine annealing learning rate scheduler.

A.3.2    E XPLAINER EVALUATION
In this section we will detail the hyper-parameters chosen for each of the methods analyzed in this
work as well as some details regarding the benchmark. Given the varied nature of the explainers
and their hyper-parameters we will refer to the works where the explainers are introduced when
describing the effect the hyper-parameters have on each method. All of the hyper-parameters where
chosen through random search.
Common setup Across our experiments there are a few settings that are common for all methods.
To save time, instead of producing counterfactuals for the entire validation dataset we select a
balanced subset with a total of 800 correctly and incorrectly classified samples with different levels
of confidence. We do this by selecting the 100 samples closest to the required level of confidence
fˆ(x) ∈ (±0.1, ±0.4, ±0.6, ±0.9).
The explainers are required to produce 10 counterfactuals per sample, if a method is origi-
nally conceived to produce only one, we follow (Mothilal et al., 2020) to create 10 samples
close to the original sample in z space and task the method with producing an explanation
for each of them. The attributes in z are standardized using the mean and standard deviation
of the attributes in the training set. To prevent explainers from generating counterfactuals
that the generator g(z) cannot interpret we clip every coordinate in z to the maximum and mini-
mum values for each attribute found in the training set. We set the batch size to 12 across experiments.



                                                      14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Generating an orthogonal set of counterfactuals
def orthogonal_set(z:np.ndarray, e_sc: np.ndarray, tau=0.15: float) -> np.ndarray: # d X n,d X 0 -> n,d
    """
    Receives the latents of an original sample (z), and a set of successful counterfactuals
    (e_sc from Eq. 6) and returns an orthogonal set of counterfactuals (Eq. 7).
    Two samples z1 and z2 are orthogonal whenever abs(cos(z1, z2)) < tau.
    Two samples z1 and z2 are complementary whenever cos(z1, z2) + 1 < tau
    """
    z = z[None, :] # d -> 1,d
    delta_sc = e_sc - z # compute perturbation vector
    delta_sc_norm = np.linalg.norm(delta_sc, 1, axis=1) # compute norm of perturbations
    indices = delta_sc_norm.argsort()
    delta_orth = delta_sc[None, indices[0]] # initialize set of orthogonal perturbations
    for i in indices[1:]:
        sim = cos(delta_sc[i], delta_orth) # calculate cosine similarity wrt all ellements in a set
        cond_orth = (np.abs(sim) < tau).all() # orthogonality condition
        cond_comp = (sim + 1 < tau).any() # complementary condition
        if cond_orth or cond_comp: # if condition satisfied, add to set
            delta_orth = np.concatenate([delta_orth, delta_sc[None, i]], axis=0)
    return z + delta_orth # return set of orthogonal counterfactuals


Since the categorical attributes in z space (font and character) are produced by embedding layers and
projected into a 3-dimensional space each (Section A.3.1), they must be treated differently from the
continuous attributes. When measuring if an explanation z′ is proximal to the original sample z we
establish three different radius r values (see Eq. 2), one for the font, one for the character and one for
the continuous attributes. For the character and font attributes we set r to be the maximum pairwise
distance between the embedding representations of each attribute and for continuous attributes we
set r = 1. Making this distinction allows the explainer to change from any given font/character to
another while preventing it from modifying every attribute at once. When verifying if counterfactuals
fulfill our orthogonality condition we look at perturbations between continuous attributes (z′cont ).
However, for embedded attributes (font and character) we transform their embedded representation in
z space into:

                            z′cat = Softmax(∥ c′ − wi ∥2 / −t), ∀i ∈ [1..48]                              (12)

where c′ is the representation of the categorical attribute character/font for a given counterfactual z′ ,
w are the weights of the embedding layer used to map the 48 characters/fonts to their 3 dimensional
representation c′ and t is a temperature factor set to 0.33. We choose the softmax function so that any
small change in c′ that maps to a different categorical attribute can be orthogonal. In order to turn z′cat
into a perturbation vector we cancel the perturbation on the original attributes coordinate by setting:

                                           z′cat = z′cat × (1 − 1c )                                      (13)

where 1 is a vector of 1s and 1c is a one-hot representation of the categorical attributes for the original
sample. Thus given a sample z we verify that two counterfactual explanations z′ and z′′ are orthogonal
by measuring cosine similarity: cos(z′cat , z′′cat ) for categorical attributes and cos(z′cont − z, z′′cont − z)
for continuous attributes.
Growing Spheres (GS) (Laugel et al., 2017) For this method we found the best configuration was
setting the initial radius η to 10 and the number of candidates n to 50. For a detailed description of
the role of these hyper-parameters see (Laugel et al., 2017).
StylEx (Lang et al., 2021) For this method we found the best configuration was setting threshold t to
0.3 using the “Independent” selection strategy and the amount of shift applied to each coordinate to
0.8. This last parameter is not mentioned in the Stylex (Lang et al., 2021) paper, but it can found as a
parameter under the name shift_size in the implementation they provide. For a detailed description of
the role of these hyper-parameters see (Lang et al., 2021).
DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020) For this method the best results were obtained by setting to learning
rate to 0.1, the reconstruction weight of the loss function λ1 to 1 and the diversity weight of the loss
function λ2 to 1. For a detailed description of the role of these hyper-parameters see (Mothilal et al.,
2020). We set the maximum number of iterations to 50 in case the algorithm does not converge.


                                                      15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                 Original      Latent Space     Pixel Space


Figure 4: Comparison of perturbations performed in latent and pixel space. Note how the perturbations
performed in latent space convey meaningful information (e.g., changes in the font or character),
while the ones performed in pixel space resemble adversarial attacks and do not provide any valuable
insights into the classifier’s reasoning.


DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021) For this method we found the best configuration was setting the
learning rate to 0.1, the weight of the proximity loss term to 0.0001, the factor that controls the
sparsity of the latent space γ to 0.1 and the weight of the diversity loss to 0.001. For a detailed
description of the role of these hyper-parameters see (Rodríguez et al., 2021). We set the maximum
number of iterations to 50.
xGEM (Joshi et al., 2018) This method shares some parameters with DiVE. We found the best
configuration for this explainer was setting the learning rate to 0.1 and the weight of the proximity
loss term to 0.001. We set the maximum number of iterations to 50.
Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020) For this method we set the learning rate to 0.1, the
probability of target counterfactual class p to 0.1 and the tolerance tol to 0.5. For a detailed description
of the role of these hyper-parameters see (Balasubramanian et al., 2020). We set the maximum number
of iterations to 50 in case the algorithm does not converge.

A.4         A DDITIONAL RESULTS

In this section we present some qualitative results in the form of counterfactuals generated by
each method, along with extra quantitative results shown in Table 4. We also provide an example
illustrating why explanations found in pixel space are uninterpretable (Figure 4).
Quality over quantity As seen in Table 4 some explainers obtain a high percentage of successful
counterfactuals SCE, sometimes even higher than the oracle (xGEM, DiVE). However, this is not


Table 4: From left to right: We report the percentage of estimator flips EF (Eq. 3) (Joshi et al., 2018;
Mothilal et al., 2020), percentage of successful counterfactuals SCE (Eq. 6) and what percentage of
those are Causal Flips and Non-Causal Flips (see Section 3.4 and Eq. 6). Values represent an average
score across batches for the entire dataset for 3 different runs.
            Correlation                                   0.50              0.95         0.50             0.95        0.50          0.95          0.50          0.95
#Spurious   Explainer                                             EF (%)                        SCE (%)              Causal Flip Rate (%)      Non-Causal Flip Rate (%)
            IS (Oracle)                                40.55 ±0.16    76.97 ±0.24     67.5 ±4.40    62.25 ±4.45    0.00 ±0.00     0.00 ±0.00    100 ±0.00     100 ±0.00
            DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020)               32.90 ±0.05    31.96 ±0.11    55.42 ±2.60    56.67 ±2.88    26.46 ±1.56   29.22 ±1.20   73.54 ±1.56   70.78 ±1.20
            DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021)              25.02 ±0.38    36.58 ±0.12     67.5 ±1.25    60.83 ±2.60    6.55 ±0.28     3.44 ±0.15   93.45 ±0.28   96.56 ±0.15
            GS (Laugel et al., 2017)                   36.14 ±1.22    34.94 ±0.49    31.67 ±7.10    31.67 ±15.63   0.00 ±0.00     0.00 ±0.00    100 ±0.00     100 ±0.00
   6
            Stylex (Lang et al., 2021)                 23.66 ±0.00    24.84 ±0.00    23.07 ±0.00    25.80 ±0.00    17.02 ±0.00   21.40 ±0.00   82.98 ±0.00   78.60 ±0.00
            Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020)   20.98 ±0.00    24.18 ±0.00    20.96 ±0.00    24.18 ±0.00    0.00 ±0.00     0.00 ±0.00    100 ±0.00     100 ±0.00
            xGEM (Joshi et al., 2018)                  70.61 ±0.28    75.98 ±0.25    76.67 ±9.21    78.33 ±1.90    4.18 ±0.69     2.96 ±0.22   95.82 ±0.00   97.04 ±0.00
            IS (Oracle)                                35.33 ±0.16    71.19 ±0.08   54.50 ±2.43      51.25 ±1.25    0.00±0.00     0.00 ±0.00    100 ±0.00     100 ±0.00
            DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020)               31.77 ±0.45    33.25 ±0.23   45.00 ±4.33      39.17 ±0.72   26.16 ±3.43   27.65 ±0.79   73.84 ±3.43   72.35 ±0.79
            DiVE (Rodríguez et al., 2021)              22.39 ±0.31     31.8 ±0.25   60.00 ±1.25      54.58 ±0.72   6.83 ±0.57     2.25 ±0.01   93.17 ±0.57   97.75 ±0.01
   10
            GS (Laugel et al., 2017)                   37.38 ±0.38    36.38 ±0.54   44.58 ±12.52     40.42 ±5.90   0.00 ±0.00     0.00 ±0.00    100 ±0.00     100 ±0.00
            Stylex (Lang et al., 2021)                 24.20 ±0.00    23.04 ±0.00   23.65 ±0.00      23.77 ±0.00   21.60 ±0.00   20.35 ±0.00   78.40 ±0.00   79.65 ±0.00
            Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020)   22.00 ±0.00    23.33 ±0.00   21.98 ±0.00      23.24 ±0.00   0.00 ±0.00     0.00 ±0.00    100 ±0.00     100 ±0.00
            xGEM (Joshi et al., 2018)                  66.45 ±0.63    74.95 ±0.30   61.67 ±5.20      62.92 ±5.90   4.51 ±0.35     2.15 ±0.22   95.49 ±0.00   97.85 ±0.27


                                                                                    16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


reflected in their score S# (Table 2), which is considerably lower than the oracle’s. This is because
even though the explainers can find a high number of counterfactuals they are discarded by our
metric since they are not orthogonal or complementary and thus redundant. Further, note that the
score measured using estimator flips EF (Eq. 3) (Joshi et al., 2018; Mothilal et al., 2020) is not
correlated with our score S# (Table 2). For example, xGEM obtains a higher score than the oracle
(IS) despite the latter returning a more complete set of explanations. This shows how previously
proposed metrics (Joshi et al., 2018; Mothilal et al., 2020) can be gamed by explainers by generating
many redundant explanations that fail to fully the describe the model’s behaviour. Figure 5, also
supports this finding, showing how the performance of the oracle (IS) is the only one affected by the
amount of correlated attributes and their level of correlation (see Section 4.1).
On causal counterfactuals As seen in Table 4, some methods produce a high amount of causal
change counterfactuals i.e., they change zcausal and create a counterfactual that does not change the
classifier’s prediction whilst changing the oracle’s prediction, exposing failure cases in the classifier.
We find that DiCE (Mothilal et al., 2020) and StylEx (Lang et al., 2021) produce a high amount of
these counterfactuals, while GS (Laugel et al., 2017) and Latent-CF (Balasubramanian et al., 2020)
always change the classifiers prediction and thus produce none. The oracle (IS) is not designed to
perturb zcausal in any way so it cannot produce any causal counterfactuals. Figure 6 shows two
ways in which explainers achieve these counterfactuals. We can see that explainers that generate a
high amount of causal counterfactuals (DiCE, StylEx) can be very “creative”, when modifying the
character. Note that besides confusing the classifier by modifying the character’s diacritic, explainers
can create new characters entirely by merging two letters together or even adding an accent mark to a
consonant. Note that this behaviour is unavoidable in the absence of an optimal classifier.
Additional insights As seen in Table 2 explainers are unable to generate a diverse set of counterfactual
explanations. However, Table 4 highlights some differences between methods when it comes to other
metrics. If the objective is to maximize the number of estimator flips EF or the number of successful
counterfactuals SCE we recommend using xGEM. If the objective is to maximize the number of
causal flips we recommend using StylEx or DiCE. Note that explainers generate a high amount of
redundant counterfactuals, and choosing them based on how they maximize these individual metrics
is of little use.

A.5                   L IMITATIONS

As discussed in Section 3.3, the core limitation of explaining image classifiers via latent perturbations
is the lack of accurate reversible generators. If the generator is not reversible, a given x can lead
to many z, which prevents the direct recovery of z from x. It might be a good idea to bypass the


                      explainer                                                       explainer
                          IS                                                    3.5          IS
                          dice                                                               dice
                3.0       dive                                                               dive
                          gs                                                                 gs
                          lcf                                                   3.0          lcf
                          stylex                                                             stylex
                          xgem                                                               xgem
                2.5

                                                                                2.5
  Cardinality


                                                                  Cardinality


                2.0
                                                                                2.0


                1.5
                                                                                1.5


                1.0                                                             1.0


                      4            6                8   10                            0.10            0.25    0.50         0.70   0.95
                                       # Spurious                                                            Correlation



Figure 5: Sensitivity of every explainer to varying amount of correlation levels (left) and number of
spuriously correlated attributes (right) (see Section 4.1) measured with our score (Eq. 7). Note how
the performance of the explainers, excluding the oracle (IS), does not scale and is not sensitive to the
level of correlation and the amount of correlated variables. This supports our findings that explainers
are unable to provide a diverse set of explanations and focus on changing the causal attribute zcausal .


                                                             17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: Some of the Causal Flip counterfactuals (see Section 3.4 and Eq. 6) obtained by each
method separated into two different subcategories.



pixel space completely and work directly on z, this however, would produce explanations outside the
image domain and therefore, uninterpretable by humans, which is ultimately not very useful. It could
be argued that the generator used in this work could be modified to yield better image reconstructions
given any z, however this will always be hindered by the aforementioned limitation. More generally,
most methods rely on some some sort of latent decomposition in order to search for counterfactuals in
a latent space. However, it is still not clear how the true latent variables of the data generating process
are not identifiable (Locatello et al., 2019). In this work we circumvent this problem by using a
synthetic dataset. On the other hand, Khemakhem et al. (2020) showed that, with further assumptions,
it is possible to identify the latent variables (Khemakhem et al., 2020). Moreover, in a temporal setup,
it is possible to identify which of these latent variables are the causal ones (Lachapelle et al., 2022).
Finally, in a multi-task setup where distribution shift occurs, it is possible to identify which variables
are robust to distributions shift and hence, likely to be the causal ones. In summary, although it would
be possible to approximate the true latent factors in some cases, it would require making additional
assumptions about the data.
We make an effort to establish a fair, principled metric that is useful. However, this metric does not
depict all the properties of an explainer such as fragility or speed. It is possible, albeit unlikely, that
our definition of useful/informative explanation might not always align with that of the user. Lastly,
the generator we use in this work can generate images with certain implicit biases. However, please
note that our benchmark is a tool to evaluate properties of explainers that are impossible to evaluate
without a synthetic setup.


A.6    E THICAL C ONCERNS

Research in explainable AI is crucial for safe deployment of machine learning solutions in real life.
In this work, we have shown that the lack of a principled evaluation of such systems has slowed-down
advancements in the field. These findings should not discourage future research in explainable AI, on
the contrary, we hope that our work unblocks the current state of the art and spurs further progress.
On the other hand, the research described in this paper does not (i) directly facilitate injury to living
beings, (ii) raise safety, privacy or security concerns, (iii) raise human rights concerns, (iv) have a


                                                   18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


detriment effect on people’s livelihood or economic security, (v) develop or extend harmful forms of
surveillance, (vi) severely damage the environment, or (vii) deceive people in ways that cause harm.
Lastly, our research does not use human-derived data, or has involved extensive annotation by human
research participants. The synthetic dataset used in this paper has not been deprecated for technical,
legal, or ethical reasons.


                                                 19
