Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E NTITY D IVIDER WITH L ANGUAGE G ROUNDING IN
M ULTI - AGENT R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         We investigate the use of natural language to drive the generalization of policies
         in multi-agent settings. Unlike single-agent settings, the generalization of policies
         should also consider the influence of other agents. Besides, with the increas-
         ing number of entities in multi-agent settings, more agent-entity interactions are
         needed for language grounding, and the enormous search space could impede the
         learning process. Moreover, given a simple general instruction, e.g., beating all
         enemies, agents are required to decompose it into multiple subgoals and figure
         out the right one to focus on. Inspired by previous work, we try to address these
         issues at the entity level and propose a novel framework for language grounding
         in multi-agent reinforcement learning, entity divider (EnDi). EnDi enables agents
         to independently learn subgoal division at the entity level and act in the environ-
         ment based on the associated entities. The subgoal division is regularized by agent
         modeling to avoid subgoal conflicts and promote coordinated strategies. Empir-
         ically, EnDi demonstrates the strong generalization ability to unseen games with
         new dynamics and expresses the superiority over existing methods.



1    I NTRODUCTION

The generalization of reinforcement learning (RL) agents to new environments is challenging, even
to environments slightly different from those seen during training (Finn et al., 2017). Recently,
language grounding has been proven to be an effective way to grant RL agents the generalization
ability (Zhong et al., 2019; Hanjie et al., 2021). By relating the dynamics of the environment with
the text manual specifying the environment dynamics at the entity level, the language-based agent
can adapt to new settings with unseen entities or dynamics. In addition, language-based RL provides
a framework for enabling agents to reach user-specified goal states described by natural language
(Küttler et al., 2020; Tellex et al., 2020; Branavan et al., 2012). Language description can express
abstract goals as sets of constraints on the states and drive generalization.
However, in multi-agent settings, things could be different. First, the policies of others also affect the
dynamics of the environment, while text manual does not provide such information. Therefore, the
generalization of policies should also consider the influence of others. Second, with the increasing
number of entities in multi-agent settings, so is the number of agent-entity interactions needed for
language grounding. The enormous search space could impede the learning process. Third, some-
times it is unrealistic to give detailed instructions to tell exactly what to do for each agent. On the
contrary, a simple goal instruction, e.g., beating all enemies or collecting all the treasuries, is more
convenient and effective. Therefore, learning subgoal division and cultivating coordinated strategies
based on one single general instruction is required.
The key to generalization in previous works (Zhong et al., 2019; Hanjie et al., 2021) is grounding
language to dynamics at the entity level. By doing so, agents can reason over the dynamic rules
of all the entities in the environment. Since the dynamic of the entity is the basic component of
the dynamics of the environment, such language grounding is invariant to a new distribution of
dynamics or tasks, making the generalization more reliable. Inspired by this, in multi-agent settings,
the influence of policies of others should also be reflected at the entity level for better generalization.
In addition, after jointly grounding the text manual and the language-based goal (goal instruction) to
environment entities, each entity has been associated with explicit dynamic rules and relationships


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


with the goal state. Thus, the entities with language grounding can also be utilized to form better
strategies.
We present two goal-based multi-agent environments based on two previous single-agent settings,
i.e., MESSENGER (Hanjie et al., 2021) and RTFM (Zhong et al., 2019), which require generaliza-
tion to new dynamics (i.e., how entities behave), entity references, and partially observable envi-
ronments. Agents are given a document that specifies environment dynamics and a language-based
goal. Note that one goal may contain multiple subgoals. In more detail, in multi-agent messenger,
agents are required to bring all the messages to the targets, while in multi-agent RTFM, the general
goal is to eliminate all monsters in a given team. Thus, one single agent may struggle or be unable
to finish it. In particular, after identifying relevant information in the language descriptions, agents
need to decompose the general goal into many subgoals and figure out the optimal subgoal divi-
sion strategy. Note that we focus on interactive environments that are easily converted to symbolic
representations, instead of raw visual observations, for efficiency, interpretability, and emphasis on
abstractions over perception.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for language grounding in multi-agent reinforcement
learning (MARL), entity divider (EnDi), to enable agents independently learn subgoal division
strategies at the entity level. Specifically, each EnDi agent first generates a language-based rep-
resentation for the environment and decomposes the goal instruction into two subgoals: self and
others. Note that the subgoal can be described at the entity level since language descriptions have
given the explicit relationship between the goal and all entities. Then, the EnDi agent acts in the
environment based on the associated entities of the self subgoal. To consider the influence of others,
the EnDi agent has two policy heads. One is to interact with the environment, and another is for
agent modeling. The EnDi agent is jointly trained end-to-end using reinforcement learning and su-
pervised learning for two policy heads, respectively. The gradient signal of the supervised learning
from the agent modeling is used to regularize the subgoal division of others.
Our framework is the first attempt to address the challenges of grounding language for generalization
to unseen dynamics in multi-agent settings. EnDi can be instantiated on many existing language
grounding modules and is currently built and evaluated in two multi-agent environments mentioned
above. Empirically, we demonstrate that EnDi outperforms existing language-based methods in all
tasks by a large margin. Importantly, EnDi also expresses the best generalization ability on unseen
games, i.e., zero-shot transfer. By ablation studies, we verify the effectiveness of each component,
and EnDi indeed can obtain coordinated subgoal division strategies by agent modeling. We also
argue that many language grounding problems can be addressed at the entity level.


2   R ELATED W ORK

Language grounded policy-learning. Language grounding refers to learning the meaning of nat-
ural language units, e.g., utterances, phrases, or words, by leveraging the non-linguistic context. In
many previous works (Wang et al., 2019; Blukis et al., 2019; Janner et al., 2018; Küttler et al., 2020;
Tellex et al., 2020; Branavan et al., 2012), the text conveys the goal or instruction to the agent, and
the agent produces behaviors in response after the language grounding. Thus, it encourages a strong
connection between the given instruction and the policy.
More recently, many works have extensively explored the generalization from many different per-
spectives. Hill et al. (2020a; 2019; 2020b) investigated the generalization regarding novel entity
combinations, from synthetic template commands to natural instructions given by humans and the
number of objects. Choi et al. (2021) proposed a language-guided policy learning algorithm, en-
abling learning new tasks quickly with language corrections. In addition, Co-Reyes et al. (2018)
proposed to guide policies by language to generalize on new tasks by meta learning. Huang et al.
(2022) utilized the generalization of large language models to achieve zero-shot planners.
However, all these works may not generalize to a new distribution of dynamics or tasks since they
encourage a strong connection between the given instruction and the policy, not the dynamics of the
environment.
Language grounding to dynamics of environments. A different line of research has focused
on utilizing manuals as auxiliary information to aid generalization. These text manuals provide


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


descriptions of the entities in the environment and their dynamics, e.g., how they interact with other
entities. Agents can figure out the dynamics of the environment based on the manual.
Narasimhan et al. (2018) explored transfer methods by simply concatenating the text description of
an entity and the entity itself to facilitate policy generalization across tasks. RTFM (Zhong et al.,
2019) builds the codependent representations of text manual and observation of the environment,
denoted as txt2π, based on bidirectional feature-wise linear modulation (FiLM2 ). A key challenge
in RTFM is multi-modal multi-step reasoning with texts associated with multiple entities. EMMA
(Hanjie et al., 2021) uses an entity-conditioned attention module that allows for selective focus over
relevant descriptions in the text manual for each entity in the environment called MESSENGER.
A key challenge in MESSENGER is the adversarial train-evaluation split without prior entity-text
grounding. Recently, SILG (Zhong et al., 2021) unifies a collection of diverse grounded language
learning environments under a common interface, including RTFM and MESSENGER. All these
works have demonstrated the generalization of policies to a new environment with unseen entities
and text descriptions.
Compared with the previous works, our work moves one step forward, investigating language
grounding at the entity level in multi-agent settings.
Subgoal Assignment. In the goal-based multi-agent setting, in order to complete the goal more
efficiently, agents need to coordinate with each other, e.g., making a reasonable subgoal division.
There are many language-free MARL models (Wang et al., 2020; 2019; Jeon et al., 2022; Tang et al.,
2018; Yang et al., 2019) focusing on task allocation or behavioral diversity, which exhibit a similar
effect as subgoal assignment.
However, without the help of inherited generalization of natural language, it is unlikely for the
agent to perform well in environments unseen during training, which is supported by many previous
works (Zhong et al., 2019; Hanjie et al., 2021). In addition, it is hard to depict the goal state
sometimes without natural language (Liu et al., 2022), which makes the subgoal assignment even
more challenging.

3   P RELIMINARIES

Our objective is to ground language to environment dynamics and entities for generalization to
unseen multi-agent environments. Note that an entity is an object represented as a symbol in the
observation, and dynamics refer to how entities behave in the environment.
POSG. We model the multi-agent decision-making problem as a partially observable stochastic
game (POSG). For n agents, at each timestep t, agent i obtains its own partial observation oi,t
from the global state st , takes action ai,t following its policy πθ (ai,t |oi,t ), and receives a reward
ri,t (st , at ) where at denotes the joint action of all agents. Then the environment transitions to the
next state st+1 given the current state and joint action according to transition probability function
                                                                          PT
T (st+1 |st , at ). Agent i aims to maximize the expected return Ri = t=1 γ t−1 ri,t , where γ is the
discount factor and T is the episode time horizon.

                                 grandmasters
                                    kanata                      Wiki                                                                        Manual
                                                                 mysterious, soldiers beat cold.
               gleaming                              poison      arcane, gleaming beat fire.
                 spear       alpha                   ghost                                                                                  the essential goal is
                                                                 fanatical, shimmering beat lightning.                                      held by the sphere.
                                                                 blessed, grandmasters beat poison.
                 fire                           shimmering       ghost, imp are order of the forest.                                        the deadly enemy is
               zombie                              sword         jaguar, wolf are rebel enclave.                                            carried by the mage.
                                                                 bat, zombie are star alliance.
                                                                                                                                            the blade possesses
                             beta                lightning                                                                                  the secret directive.
                                                    imp         Task
                                                                 defeat the order of the forest.


              Agent       Item        Target       Distractor     Wall         Path 1          Path 2
                                                                                                           Agent   Goal   Message   Enemy    Path 1      Path 2
                                     Monster       Monster


Figure 1: Illustrations of two modified multi-agent environments, i.e., multi-agent RTFM (left) and
multi-agent MESSENGER (right).
Multi-Agent RTFM is extended from Zhong et al. (2019), where for each task all agents are given
the same text information based on collected human-written language templates, including a docu-
ment of environment dynamics and an underspecified goal. Figure 1 illustrates an instance of the


                                                                                                       3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                                         Oi
                                                          Oi                      self
                                                                                X goal


                                                                     Ground 1


                                                                                                                                                      Ground 2



                                                                                                                                                                            FC Layer
                                                                                                                                                                   self
                                                                                                                                                                 X policy              πself
                                                           li                                                                                                                                      ai


                                                                                                         Gumbel–Softmax
                    Observation: Oi                      g, z                                                                            g, z


                                                                                           Conv Nets
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RL

                                                                 Concatenate C                                                   mi
                                             li
                                                                                                                                                                                                 sup

                                                          Oi                                                                             g, z


                                                                     Ground 1


                                                                                                                                                      Ground 2



                                                                                                                                                                            FC Layer
                                                  l −i    l −i                                                                                                                                     a−i
                                                                                                                                                                   others
                                                                                                                                                                 X policy              πothers
                                                                                                                                1 − mi
                                                                                  others
              z1: The red monsters are enemies.          g, z                   X goal
              z2: The white boys are moving.
                                                                                                                                         Oi
              Goal: The goal is to win the war.                                  Self           Others'                                            Back                      Element-Wise
                                                                                Agent
                                                                                                                              Forward           Propagation                  Multiplication
                                                                                                       Agent
          Text Manual and Language Goal: g , z

Figure 2: Overview architecture of EnDi. Language grounding is first used to obtain language-
based representation Xgoal . Then, subgoal division module generates a binary entity mask m to
address important entities. The mask is applied directly to the observation and new language-based
representation Xpolicy for decision-making is obtained. EnDi has two policy heads. One is to
interact with the environment, and another is for agent modeling. The gradients from supervised
learning and reinforcement learning jointly influence the formation of entity masks.
game. Concretely, the dynamics consist of monsters (e.g., wolf, goblin), teams (e.g., order of the for-
est), element types (e.g., fire, poison), item modifiers (e.g., fanatical, arcane), and items (e.g., sword,
hammer). When the agents encounter a weapon/monster, they can pick up the weapon/engage in
combat with the monster. Moreover, a monster moves towards the nearest observable agent with
60% probability, otherwise moves randomly. The general goal is to eliminate all monsters in a given
team with the appropriate weapons. The game environment is rendered as a matrix of texts where
each grid describes the entity occupying the grid.
Multi-Agent MESSENGER is built on Hanjie et al. (2021). For each task, all agents are provided
with the same text manual. The manual contains descriptions of the entities, the dynamics, and the
goal, obtained through crowdsourced human writers. In addition, each entity can take one of three
roles: an enemy, a message, or a target. There are three possible movement types for each entity,
i.e., stationary, chasing, or fleeing. Agents are required to bring all the messages to the targets while
avoiding enemies. If agents touch an enemy in the game or reach the target without first obtaining
the message, they lose the game. Unlike RTFM, the game environment is rendered as a matrix of
symbols without any prior mapping between the entity symbols and their descriptions.
In both multi-agent RTFM and multi-agent MESSENGER, each agent i has an observation oit at
each moment. By taking action ait , each agent can get a reward rti . The specific action space and
reward rules are shown in Appendix A. Note that we choose these two environments because the
effect of language grounding is well suited on them in single-agent scenarios. Also, the difference
in manuals and rules of these two environments can help us explore the generalization ability of our
EnDi method in the face of different language texts.

4     M ETHODOLOGY
In goal-based MARL, it is important for agents to coordinate with each other. Otherwise, subgoal
conflicts (multiple agents focusing on the same subgoal) can impede the completion of the general
goal. To this end, we introduce EnDi for language grounding in MARL to enable agents indepen-
dently learn the subgoal division at the entity level for better generalization. For each task, agents
are given a text manual z ∈ Z describing the environment dynamics and a language-based goal
g ∈ G as language knowledge. Apart from this, at each timestep t, each agent i obtains a h × w
grid observation oi,t and outputs a distribution over the action π(ai,t |oi,t , z, g). Note that we omit
the subscript t in the following for convenience. Note that parameters of each module are not shared
among agents.

4.1   OVERALL F RAMEWORK

Language Grounding Module. Given a series of language knowledge, the agent first grounds the
language to the observation of the environment, adopting the existing language grounding module


                                                                                                                          4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


to generate a language-based representation X = Ground(o, z, g) ∈ Rh×w×d, . It captures the
relationship between the goal, the manual, and observation. Thus, agents are likely to understand
the environment dynamics instead of memorizing any particular information, which is verified by
previous works (Zhong et al., 2019; Hanjie et al., 2021). This type of representation is then used to
generate the subgoal division and policy.
Note that EnDi is compatible with any language grounding module. In practice, we build our frame-
work on the backbone of txt2π (Zhong et al., 2019) and EMMA (Huang et al., 2022) and adopt
their grounding modules, i.e., FiLM2 and multi-modal attention, respectively.
Subgoal Division Module. Since the language-based goal is highly relevant to the entities in the
environment after grounding, the subgoal division should also be done at the entity level. To inde-
pendently learn the good subgoal division, the goal is decomposed by each agent into two subgoals,
the self subgoal it will focus on and the others subgoal which is exploited to avoid subgoal conflicts.
                                                                                                 self
Taking agent i to illustrate, it first generates two representations, i.e., Xgoal                       =
                               others
Ground1([oi , li ], z, g) and Xgoal = Ground1([oi , l−i ], z, g), where li is the positional feature
of agent i which is the Manhattan distance to all the grids and l−i is the joint positional feature of all
agents except i. When grounding the general goal to entities e ∈ E, different agents have different
perspectives of how to achieve the goal, thus positional features are used to capture such differences.
The two representations are then concatenated together and passed to a 2D convolution to extract a
mixture feature map. With the mixture feature map, we utilize a Gumbel-Softmax (Jang et al., 2016)
layer to output a subgoal division distribution over all the entities ρe (oi , l, z, g), determining what
entities should be addressed.
To guarantee the uniform entities coverage of subgoal division module, we match the subgoal dis-
tribution ρe with a target distribution p⋆e as a regularization term and aim to minimize DKL (ρe ||p⋆e ).
As there is not any prior information for the subgoal division, we assume the target distribution has
the mean of |e|/n with a relatively low variance in the meantime, where n is the number of agents.
Intuitively, we are willing to observe that all agents make contributions to the goal. Any distribution
with different mean or high variance might violate this motivation.
Policy Module. Agents try to understand the dynamics and the general goal through interactions
with the entities. It means that, as the number of entities increases in MARL, the grounding proce-
dure could be complex since more interactions are required during training.
Normally, unlike the general goal, agents only need to interact with parts of the relevant entities to
complete the subgoal. Intuitively, if agents can ignore trivial entities, the grounding procedure can
be simplified and accelerated at its source, and agents can make decisions without distractions.
To this end, we sample a binary entity mask mi based on the subgoal division distribution. The mask
is applied to the observation directly and indicates the necessity of considering each entity when
                                                                 self
making decisions. Still, two representations are obtained as Xpolicy   = Ground2(oi ⊙ mi , z, g)
       others
and Xpolicy = Ground2(oi ⊙ (1 − mi ), z, g), where ⊙ is the element-wise multiplication. There
are two different policy heads in EnDi, πself and πothers . The former one is to output actions for
                                               self                                  others
interacting with the environment and takes Xpolicy   as input. On the other side, Xpolicy   is passed
into another head for agent modeling, which will be elaborated on later. Note that πself is trained
using reinforcement learning, and more training details can be found in Appendix B. In addition,
Gumbel-softmax enables the gradients to flow through the binary entity mask to the subgoal division
module.



4.2   AGENT M ODELING

However, if EnDi does not consider the influence of others, the subgoal division module is prone to
converge to a sub-optimum. In other words, agents may focus on individual interests rather than the
common interest. Moreover, we want to capture the influence of others at the entity level for better
coordination.
To this end, we let each agent reason about others’ intentions by agent modeling. Specifically, EnDi
                                      others
has a policy head πothers based on Xpolicy   to predict the joint actions of others a−i at each timestep


                                                    5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and update the policy parameter in a supervised manner,
                             L(oi , z, g) = −y log(πothers (a−i |oi , z, g))⊤ ,                              (1)
where y is the concatenation of actual actions (one-hot vector) of others. By agent modeling, each
agent can infer the entities that others plan to interact with since only accurate 1 − mi can guarantee
the low supervised loss. In other words, it would force the agent to avoid subgoal conflicts at the
entity level.

5     E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate EnDi in multi-agent MESSENGER and multi-agent RTFM environments, which we
have extended from two previous single-agent environments, see Section 3. For a fair comparison,
we build EnDi based on EMMA and txt2π, which are the models in MESSENGER and RTFM,
respectively. More details about the environments can be found in Appendix A.

5.1   C URRICULUM L EARNING

Language-based tasks are much more complex compared with language-free tasks since agents must
go through a long process of exploration to learn to maximize the expected return and ground lan-
guage in the meanwhile. To solve multi-agent MESSENGER and RTFM tasks (movable entities,
complex game rules, multiple task goals), we design curricula to help policy learning. Note that
millions of training steps are required for each training stage. It again demonstrates the complexity
of such language-based environments, even dealing with grid worlds.
In multi-agent MESSENGER, we have designed Stages 1, 2, and 3, following settings of MES-
SENGER (Hanjie et al., 2021).
       • Stage 1 (S1): There are five entities (enemy, message1, message2, goal1, goal2) that are initialized
         randomly in five possible locations. Agents always begin in the center of the grid. They start without
         messages with a probability 0.8 and begin with messages otherwise. On S1, agents are required to
         obtain different messages (start without messages)/goals (start with messages) to win. If all agents
         interact with the correct entities within a given number of steps, a reward of +1 will be provided, and
         −1 otherwise.
       • Stage 2 (S2): The five entities are initialized randomly in five possible locations. The difference with
         S1 is that the entities on S2 are mobile. In other words, they can change position randomly at every
         timestep.
       • Stage 3 (S3): The five entities are initialized randomly in five possible locations. All agents begin
         without the message, and the rule requires them to interact with the messages first and then with the
         goals. Within a given number of steps, each agent interacting successfully with the messages will be
         provided a reward of 0.2, and all agents interacting successfully with the goals will obtain a reward
         of +1, otherwise −1.

In multi-agent RTFM, there are five stages for training. Note that Stage 2 to Stage 5 follow settings
of RTFM (Zhong et al., 2019), while we empirically found Stage 1 is beneficial for later training
process in multi-agent setting. During every episode, we subsample a set of groups, monsters,
modifiers, and elements to use. We randomly generate group assignments of which monsters belong
to which team and which modifier is effective against which element. Note that each assignment
represents a different dynamic.
       • Stage 1 (S1): There are only four entities in the environment, i.e., two correct items and two monsters.
         Note that there are one-to-one group assignments, stationary monsters, and no templated language
         descriptions. Agents need to pick up the correct items and use them to beat all the monsters to win
         within a given number of steps.
       • Stage 2 (S2): We add two distractor entities (sampled from the group that is irrelevant to the goal).
         One is a distractor weapon that cannot be used to beat the monsters. Another is a distractor monster,
         with which agents will lose when engaging.
       • Stage 3 (S3): All monsters, including the distractor monsters, move towards the agents with 60%
         probability, otherwise move randomly.
       • Stage 4 (S4): We allow many-to-one group assignments to make disambiguation more difficult. Note
         that the difference between many-to-one and one-to-one groups is that the manual would also describe
         the entities that are not presented in the game.
       • Stage 5 (S5): The manual would use templated language descriptions.

                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: The final mean win rate (± stddev.) over five random seeds. All methods adopt the same
curriculum training strategy for a fair comparison. Note that multi-agent RTFM has five training
stages, while multi-agent MESSENGER only needs three stages. txt2π, EMMA, and SILG are the
single-agent baselines of previous works. Removing the supervised loss from the total loss, denoted
as EnDi-sup, and removing the regularization term, denoted as EnDi-reg. EnDi(num) and EnDi(dis)
are our methods with different form of regularization terms.
                        Model          S1            S2            S3            S4            S5
                        txt2π      0.99 ± 0.01   0.11 ± 0.06   0.05 ± 0.05   0.05 ± 0.03   0.02 ± 0.01
                        SILG       0.99 ± 0.01   0.05 ± 0.01   0.04 ± 0.01   0.04 ± 0.00   0.04 ± 0.01
        multi-agent    EnDi-sup    0.99 ± 0.01   0.53 ± 0.08   0.36 ± 0.03   0.41 ± 0.12   0.41 ± 0.13
         RTFM          EnDi-reg    1.00 ± 0.00   0.61 ± 0.15   0.39 ± 0.01   0.39 ± 0.03   0.39 ± 0.03
                      EnDi(num)    1.00 ± 0.00   0.62 ± 0.07   0.52 ± 0.05   0.54 ± 0.03   0.56 ± 0.01
                      EnDi(dis)    1.00 ± 0.00   0.76 ± 0.14   0.59 ± 0.04   0.61 ± 0.04   0.63 ± 0.03
                        EMMA       0.57 ± 0.03   0.04 ± 0.02   0.02 ± 0.01       —             —
                         SILG      0.99 ± 0.01   0.32 ± 0.04   0.05 ± 0.02       —             —
       multi-agent     EnDi-sup    0.99 ± 0.01   0.52 ± 0.05   0.21 ± 0.03       —             —
      MESSENGER        EnDi-reg    0.67 ± 0.03   0.07 ± 0.02   0.02 ± 0.01       —             —
                      EnDi(num)    0.99 ± 0.01   0.75 ± 0.04   0.19 ± 0.02       —             —
                       EnDi(dis)   0.99 ± 0.01   0.81 ± 0.03   0.25 ± 0.03       —             —


5.2   R ESULTS

In the experiments, we compare EnDi with the following methods: 1) txt2π (Zhong et al., 2019)
which builds the codependent representations of text manual and observation of the environment
based on bidirectional feature-wise linear modulation (FiLM2 ) in RTFM. 2) EMMA (Hanjie et al.,
2021) which uses an entity-conditioned attention module that allows for selective focus over relevant
descriptions in the text manual for each entity in MESSENGER. 3) SILG (Zhong et al., 2021) that
provides the first shared model architecture for several symbolic interactive environments, including
RTFM and MESSENGER. For all methods, we train an independent model for each agent separately.
Performance. Table 1 shows the win rates in both multi-agent RTFM and multi-agent MESSEN-
GER environments. In each environment, there are two agents. In the multi-agent RTFM envi-
ronment, we use EnDi with txt2π as the backbone to compare with both txt2π and SILG base-
lines. It is worth noting that as discussed in Section 4.1, to guarantee the uniform entities cov-
erage of subgoal division module, we match the subgoal distribution ρe with a target distribution
p⋆e as a regularization term. Specifically, we design two patterns for the regularization term, 1)
EnDi(num) which minimizes ||ei | − |e−i |/(n − 1)| where |ei | is the entity number of the entity
mask
P for agent P i, and 2) EnDi(dis) which minimizes the distance to reach the divided entities, i.e.,
   k={i,−i}   e∈ek (|xe − xk | + |xe − yk |) where (x, y) denotes the coordinate of entity/agent in
the mask. In multi-agent RTFM, all models are able to succeed in the simplest S1, achieving a 99%
to 100% win rate. When gradually transferring to S2–S5, both EnDi(dis) and EnDi(num) consis-
tently show significantly better win rates than baselines.
We also conduct similar experiments in multi-agent MESSENGER, where we use EnDi that builds
on EMMA to compare with both EMMA and SILG baselines. EnDi and SILG both succeed in S1
while EMMA obtains a win rate of 57%. Then, EMMA is only able to achieve a 4% win rate in
S2, while EnDi can obtain a win rate at most 81%, much better than SILG and EMMA. In S3, the
environment is dynamically changing and the tasks are complex, making it extremely difficult to
win. Even in the single-agent version, the best result is only a 22% win rate (Hanjie et al., 2021).
In the multi-agent version, the complex agent-entity interactions make S3 even more difficult. All
models exhibit limited win rates due to the complexity of the environment and tasks, but EnDi(num)
and EnDi(dis) still show a substantial win rate lead over baselines.
The consistent results in both environments highlight the importance and rationality of EnDi’s design
of subgoal division, demonstrating its effective performance in multi-agent settings. In addition, the
poor performance of single-agent methods indicates that without coordination behaviors at the entity
level, they cannot handle more challenging multi-agent settings.
Policy Analysis. To verify the effect of EnDi on the subgoal division, we visualize the learned
policies using EnDi. Figure 3 shows key snapshots from the learned policies on randomly sampled
multi-agent RTFM and multi-agent MESSENGER tasks.


                                                     7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Wiki                                     Task             Agent 1                   Agent 1                 Agent 1                                      Agent 1
            mysterious, soldiers beat cold.         defeat the
            arcane, gleaming beat fire.             order of
            fanatical, shimmering beat lightning. the forest.
            blessed, grandmasters beat poison.
            ghost, imp are order of the forest.
            jaguar, wolf are rebel enclave.
            bat, zombie are star alliance.

             Grandmasters        Shimmering       Gleaming
                Kanata             Sword           Spear
              Poison Ghost       Lightning Imp    Fire Zombie

               Agent             Mask of Agent1    Mask of Agent2      Agent 2             1      Agent 2          3   Agent 2                        5        Agent 2              7
                                                                                                                                                                         Agent 2
           Manual                                                                                                                Agent 2
                                                                                 Agent 2                 Agent 2
           the essential goal is held by the sphere.

           the deadly enemy is carried by the mage.

           the blade possesses the secret directive.


            Agent         Goal        Message      Enemy
                                                                                                                                                  Agent 1                      Agent 1
                  Mask of Agent1              Mask of Agent2
                                                                    Agent 1                1 Agent 1               3                                   6                           11

Figure 3: Illustration of learned subgoal division in multi-agent RTFM (upper panel) and multi-
agent MESSENGER (lower panel). The dash circle shows the chosen subgoal for each agent.
The upper panel in Figure 3 shows an episode from a multi-agent RTFM task. In this task, EnDi can
reasonably factor teamwork into the proper subgoal division and complete the task quickly rather
than simply finishing the subgoal nearby. In frames 1–3, although Agent1 has a closer weapon in
the upper left corner, it ignores this weapon and chooses another weapon at the top of the map.
This decision helps Agent2 to differentiate from Agent1 in its subgoal division, and also avoids the
distractor monster on the left side of the map. In frames 3–5, it can be seen that after Agent2 gets
the weapon, it chooses to go down to the target monster, leaving the upper target monster to Agent1
and thus forming a coordinated strategy between the two agents.
The lower panel in Figure 3 shows an episode from multi-agent MESSENGER. We can observe
similar subgoal division strategies as multi-agent RTFM. In more detail, the message at the upper
left is closer to Agent1 than the lower left one in frame 1. However, to avoid subgoal conflicts,
Agent1 chooses another subgoal, which is the message at the lower left. For the rest frames, two
agents go to complete their chosen subgoals so the general goal can be finished more efficiently.
Ablations. Compared to txt2π or EMMA, EnDi has two additional modules: the subgoal divi-
sion module and the agent modeling module. To investigate the effectiveness of each module, we
compare EnDi(dis) with two ablation baselines. We remove the supervised loss from the total loss,
denoted as EnDi-sup, and remove the regularization term, denoted as EnDi-reg. The results are
shown in Table 1. Note that the model degrades to txt2π or EMMA if we remove both modules.
As shown in Table 1, EnDi(dis) achieves a higher win rate than EnDi-sup and EnDi-reg in both
environments. These results verify the importance of considering the influence of others and regu-
larizing the subgoal division distribution. In more detail, we found that no subgoal division strategy
can be learned in EnDi-reg, where the entity mask converges to a poor sub-optimum, i.e., covering
almost all the entities. As for EnDi-sup, we observed that conflicts of the chosen subgoals between
agents happen more often than the model with agent modeling.
                                                                                                                                            1.0
Extension. EnDi can also adapt to environments with more                                                                                               EnDi(dis)
                                                                                                                                                       txt2pi
than two agents. Specifically, the joint positional feature of all                                                                          0.8
other agents is the Manhattan distance of all the grids to their
                                                                                                                                            0.6
closest agents. For agent modeling, we have multiple policy
                                                                                                                                 win rate


heads for all other agents.                                                                                                                 0.4


To verify this, we consider three-agent RTFM and set the num-          0.2

ber of items and monsters to three. Figure 4 shows the learning        0.0
                                                                           0.0 0.2 0.4      0.6 0.8 1.0
curves of EnDi(dis) and txt2π. The result is presented in terms                        step         1e7
of the mean and standard deviation of five runs with different Figure 4: Learning curve of in
random seeds. Although the S1 of multi-agent RTFM is easy terms of the win rate in S1 of three-
for all the baselines, EnDi(dis) can still get a higher win rate. agent RTFM.
This demonstrates that EnDi(dis) can adapt to more complex
settings, i.e., more agents. More thorough investigation is left as future work.

5.3   G ENERALIZATION

As mentioned before, the biggest advantage of language-based MARL is that natural language drives
the generalization of policies. To investigate the generalization ability of EnDi, we zero-shot transfer
the model learned from the training tasks to new tasks. Note that we follow the evaluation rules in
RTFM (Zhong et al., 2019) and MESSENGER (Hanjie et al., 2021).


                                                                                                         8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To assess the importance of language, EMMA (Hanjie et al., 2021) has done the ablation studies
by replacing the language descriptions with an auxiliary vector (Game ID) where each dimension
corresponds to a role. The results show the Game ID fails in the complex environment. We also
test the generalization of language-free method, QMIX (Rashid et al., 2018). At the simplest S1
in multi-agent RTFM, the mean win rates of QMIX are only 64% and 41% in the training set and
unseen tasks, respectively, much worse than EnDi. These results distinguish EnDi from language-
free methods.
Multi-Agent RTFM. Importantly, no assignments of monster-team-modifier-element are shared
between training and evaluation set (denoted as Eval). Thus, even with the same words, the new
assignments still lead to new dynamics. However, we also design another evaluation set with the
totally novel monsters and modifiers, denoted as Eval(new). Moreover, since we train our model in
the 8 × 8 grid world, we also test the generalization to a bigger 10 × 10 grid world in the original
evaluation set, denoted as Eval(10×10). Note that all results are obtained by models from S5.

Table 2: The mean win rates (± stddev.) over five seeds on evaluation in multi-agent RTFM. Note
that the result of each seed is obtained by running 1k episodes.

                                S5-Train           S5-Eval        S5-Eval(new)    S5-Eval(10×10)
                EnDi-sup      0.38 ± 0.11       0.39 ± 0.10       0.36 ± 0.10        0.44 ± 0.11
                EnDi-reg      0.39 ± 0.02       0.38 ± 0.02       0.35 ± 0.02        0.41 ± 0.00
                EnDi(dis)     0.59 ± 0.01       0.61 ± 0.01       0.56 ± 0.00        0.62 ± 0.02

Table 2 shows that EnDi(dis) and its variants have demonstrated an extremely promising generaliza-
tion ability to new dynamics unseen during training or a different size of grid world. This benefits
from grounding language to the dynamics. In addition, we notice that EnDi-reg performs slightly
worse in Eval(new) compared with others. We speculate the language grounding process may be
slightly hard in EnDi-reg since the entity mask of EnDi-reg covers more entities than others.
Multi-Agent MESSENGER. For evaluation, we still keep the same entity types, but we make new
assignments of word combinations for message, goal, and enemy to ensure that these combinations
are unseen during training. We also use completely new description sentences in the text manuals.
The results are shown in Table 3. EnDi(dis) shows the promising generalization ability in multi-
agent MESSENGER. EnDi(dis) can maintain 79% and 52% win rates on S1 and S2 respectively,
playing with completely unseen entity combinations and text manuals. Due to the difficulty of the
S3, all models underperform but EnDi(dis) still maintains the best generalization performance. In
addition, the problem of EnDi-reg to handle language grounding is more magnified in multi-agent
MESSENGER, yielding a lower win rate in both training and evaluation. This result demonstrates
the importance of focusing on relevant entities when making decisions.

Table 3: The mean win rates (± stddev.) over five seeds on evaluation in multi-agent MESSENGER.
Note that the result of each seed is obtained by running 1k episodes.
                        S1-Train      S1-Eval         S2-Train       S2-Eval      S3-Train      S3-Eval
           EnDi-sup    0.99 ± 0.01   0.68 ± 0.07    0.52 ± 0.05    0.36 ± 0.06   0.21 ± 0.03   0.08 ± 0.03
           EnDi-reg    0.67 ± 0.03   0.39 ± 0.04    0.07 ± 0.02    0.04 ± 0.01   0.02 ± 0.01   0.01 ± 0.01
           EnDi(dis)   0.99 ± 0.01   0.79 ± 0.05    0.81 ± 0.03    0.52 ± 0.02   0.25 ± 0.03   0.11 ± 0.02


6   C ONCLUSION
We attempt to address the challenges of grounding language for generalization to unseen dynamics
in multi-agent settings. To this end, we have proposed a novel language-based framework, EnDi,
that enables agents independently learn subgoal division strategies at the entity level. Empirically,
EnDi outperforms existing language-based methods in all tasks by a large margin and demonstrates
a promising generalization ability. Moreover, we conclude that many language grounding problems
can be addressed at the entity level.


                                                          9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Valts Blukis, Yannick Terme, Eyvind Niklasson, Ross A Knepper, and Yoav Artzi. Learning to map
  natural language instructions to physical quadcopter control using simulated flight. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.09664, 2019.

SRK Branavan, David Silver, and Regina Barzilay. Learning to win by reading manuals in a monte-
  carlo framework. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 43:661–704, 2012.

Jongwook Choi, Archit Sharma, Honglak Lee, Sergey Levine, and Shixiang Shane Gu. Variational
  empowerment as representation learning for goal-based reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2106.01404, 2021.

John D Co-Reyes, Abhishek Gupta, Suvansh Sanjeev, Nick Altieri, Jacob Andreas, John DeNero,
  Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Guiding policies with language via meta-learning. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1811.07882, 2018.

Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam
  Doron, Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with im-
  portance weighted actor-learner architectures. In International conference on machine learning,
  pp. 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.

Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation
  of deep networks. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 1126–1135. PMLR, 2017.

Austin W Hanjie, Victor Y Zhong, and Karthik Narasimhan. Grounding language to entities and
  dynamics for generalization in reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 4051–4062. PMLR, 2021.

Felix Hill, Andrew Lampinen, Rosalia Schneider, Stephen Clark, Matthew Botvinick, James L Mc-
  Clelland, and Adam Santoro. Environmental drivers of systematicity and generalization in a
  situated agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00571, 2019.

Felix Hill, Sona Mokra, Nathaniel Wong, and Tim Harley. Human instruction-following with deep
  reinforcement learning via transfer-learning from text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09382, 2020a.

Felix Hill, Olivier Tieleman, Tamara Von Glehn, Nathaniel Wong, Hamza Merzic, and Stephen
  Clark. Grounded language learning fast and slow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.01719, 2020b.

Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as
 zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2201.07207, 2022.

Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.

Michael Janner, Karthik Narasimhan, and Regina Barzilay. Representation learning for grounded
 spatial reasoning. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 6:49–61, 2018.

Jeewon Jeon, Woojun Kim, Whiyoung Jung, and Youngchul Sung. Maser: Multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning with subgoals generated from experience replay buffer. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 10041–10052. PMLR, 2022.

Heinrich Küttler, Nantas Nardelli, Alexander Miller, Roberta Raileanu, Marco Selvatici, Edward
  Grefenstette, and Tim Rocktäschel. The nethack learning environment. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33:7671–7684, 2020.

Minghuan Liu, Menghui Zhu, and Weinan Zhang. Goal-conditioned reinforcement learning: Prob-
 lems and solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08299, 2022.

Karthik Narasimhan, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. Grounding language for transfer in
  deep reinforcement learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 63:849–874, 2018.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tabish Rashid, Mikayel Samvelyan, Christian Schroeder, Gregory Farquhar, Jakob Foerster, and
  Shimon Whiteson. Qmix: Monotonic value function factorisation for deep multi-agent reinforce-
  ment learning. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4295–4304. PMLR, 2018.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Hongyao Tang, Jianye Hao, Tangjie Lv, Yingfeng Chen, Zongzhang Zhang, Hangtian Jia, Chunxu
  Ren, Yan Zheng, Zhaopeng Meng, Changjie Fan, et al. Hierarchical deep multiagent reinforce-
  ment learning with temporal abstraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.09332, 2018.
Stefanie Tellex, Nakul Gopalan, Hadas Kress-Gazit, and Cynthia Matuszek. Robots that use lan-
  guage. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 3(1), 2020.
Tonghan Wang, Heng Dong, Victor Lesser, and Chongjie Zhang. Roma: Multi-agent reinforcement
  learning with emergent roles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.08039, 2020.
Xin Wang, Qiuyuan Huang, Asli Celikyilmaz, Jianfeng Gao, Dinghan Shen, Yuan-Fang Wang,
  William Yang Wang, and Lei Zhang. Reinforced cross-modal matching and self-supervised im-
  itation learning for vision-language navigation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
  Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6629–6638, 2019.
Jiachen Yang, Igor Borovikov, and Hongyuan Zha. Hierarchical cooperative multi-agent reinforce-
   ment learning with skill discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.03558, 2019.
Victor Zhong, Tim Rocktäschel, and Edward Grefenstette. Rtfm: generalising to novel environment
  dynamics via reading. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.08210, 2019.
Victor Zhong, Austin W Hanjie, Sida Wang, Karthik Narasimhan, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Silg: The
  multi-domain symbolic interactive language grounding benchmark. Advances in Neural Informa-
  tion Processing Systems, 34:21505–21519, 2021.


                                              11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     E NVIRONMENT D ETAILS
A.1   M ULTI -AGENT RTFM

In multi-agent RTFM, the agents are given a document of environment dynamics, observations of the
environment, and an underspecified goal instruction. Concretely, we design a set of dynamics that
consists of monsters e.g., wolf or goblin, teams, e.g., Order of the Forest, element types, e.g., fire or
poison, item modifiers, e.g., fanatical or arcane, and items, e.g., sword or hammer. When the player
is in the same grid with a monster or weapon, the player picks up the item or engages in combat
with the monster. The player can possess one item at a time, and drops existing weapons if they pick
up a new weapon. A monster moves towards the nearest observable agent with 60% probability,
otherwise moves randomly. The dynamics, the agents’ inventories, and the underspecified goal are
rendered as text. The game world is rendered as a matrix of texts in which each grid describes the
entity occupying the grid. We use human-written templates for stating which monsters belong to
which team, which modifiers are effective against which element, and which team the agent should
defeat.
For each episode, multi-agent RTFM subsamples a set of groups, monsters, modifiers, and elements
to use. Multi-agent RTFM randomly generates group assignments of which monsters belong to
which team and which modifier is effective against which element. A document that consists of
randomly ordered statements corresponding to this group assignment is presented to the agents.
Multi-agent RTFM samples one element, one team, and a monster from that team, e.g., “fire goblin”
from “Order of the forest”, to be the target monster. Additionally, we sample one modifier that
beats the element and an item to be the item that defeats the target monster, e.g., “fanatical sword”.
Similarly, we sample an element, a team, and a monster from a different team to be the distractor
monster, e.g., poison bat, as well as an item that defeats the distractor monster, e.g., arcane hammer.
In the multi-agent setting, we set the number of correct items and the number of target monsters to
be the same as the number of agents. The number of the distractor item and the distractor monster
is set to one. Under this setting, to achieve the goal more efficiently, the agents need to coordinate
with each other. One agent can solve the game alone, but need more steps.
Game Rules. Once agents kill all the correct monsters, they win the game. Any agent who kills a
correct monster can get a reward +1.
If any agent engages with the distractor monster, they lose the game and whoever engages gets
a reward −1. Moreover, if they exceed the steps given by the game or they kill the distractor
monster with the distractor item, they still lose the game. For each step, all agents get a penalty of
−0.02. Note that the reward is not shared across all agents and this is different with multi-agent
MESSENGER.
In order to win the game, each agent needs to do the following things:

       • Identify the target team from the goal.
       • Identify the monsters that belong to that team.
       • Identify which monster is in the world.
       • Identify the modifiers that are effective against this element.
       • Find which modifier is present and the item with the modifier.
       • Figure out what item should be picked up among all the correct items in order to avoid
         miscoordination.
       • Pick up the correct item.
       • Figure out what monsters should be engaged among all the correct items in order to avoid
         miscoordination.
       • Engage the correct monster in combat.

Entities and Modifiers. Below is a list of entities and modifiers contained in multi-agent RTFM:

       • Monsters: wolf, jaguar, panther, goblin, bat, imp, shaman, ghost, zombie.
       • Weapons: sword, axe, morningstar, polearm, knife, katana, cutlass, spear


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Elements: cold, fire, lightning, poison.
       • Modifiers: Grandmaster, blessed, shimmering, gleaming, fanatical, mysterious, soldier,
         arcane.
       • Teams: star alliance, order of the forest, rebel enclave.

For the Eval-new set, we have a new list of entities and modifiers:

       • Monsters: tiger, bear, puma, elf, vampire, gremlin, witch, specter, robot.
       • Weapons: sabre, tomahawk, sunglow.
       • Modifiers: superstars, sacred, glittering, shiny, obsessive, bizarre, secret, esoteric.

Language Templates. Multi-agent RTFM collects human-written language templates for the goal
and the dynamics (Zhong et al., 2019). The goal statements in multi-agent RTFM describe which
team the agent should defeat. Multi-agent RTFM collects 12 language templates for goal state-
ments. The document of environment dynamics consists of two types of statements. The first type
describes which monsters are assigned to which team. The second type describes which modifiers,
which describe items, are effective against which element types, which are associated with monsters.
Multi-agent RTFM collects 10 language templates for each type of statement. The entire document
is composed of statements, which are randomly shuffled. Multi-agent RTFM randomly samples a
template for each statement, which multi-agent RTFM fills with the monsters and team for the first
type and modifiers and elements for the second type.

A.2   M ULTI -AGENT MESSENGER

Multi-Agent MESSENGER is built on Hanjie et al. (2021). In order to transform single-agent MES-
SENGER into multi-agent MESSENGER, we keep the same entity, role, and adjective as used in
single-agent MESSENGER, and increase only the number of entities. For each task, all agents are
provided with the same text manual. The manual contains descriptions of the entities, the dynamics,
and the goal, obtained through crowdsourced human writers. Crucially, while prior work assumes a
ground truth mapping (e.g., the word ‘queen’ in the manual refers to the entity name ‘queen’ in the
observation), multi-agent MESSENGER does not contain priors that map between text and state ob-
servations. To succeed in multi-agent MESSENGER, an agent must relate entities and dynamics of
the environment to their references in the natural language manual using only scalar reward signals
from the environment. The overall game mechanics of multi-agent MESSENGER involve obtaining
a message and delivering it to a goal.
In multi-agent MESSENGER, each entity can take one of three roles: an enemy, a message, or a
target. There are three possible movement types for each entity, i.e., stationary, chasing, or fleeing.
Agents are required to bring all the messages to the targets while avoiding enemies. If agents touch
an enemy in the game or reach the target without first obtaining the message, they lose the game.
There are twelve different entities. Each set of entity-role assignments is initialized on a 10 × 10
grid. The agent can navigate via up, down, left, right, and stay actions and interacts with another
entity when both occupy the same grid. The same set of entities with the same movements may
be assigned different roles in different games. Thus, two games may have identical observations
but differ in the reward function (which is not available to the agents) and the text manual (which
is available). Thus, the agents must learn to extract information from the text manual to succeed
consistently.
Game Rules. In order to win the game, each agent needs to do the following things,

       • Identify the entities that hold the message.
       • Map descriptions to the correct symbols in the observation.
       • Observe the movement patterns of entities to disambiguate which of the two entities holds
         the message.
       • Pick up the messages from the entities that hold them.
       • Follow a similar procedure to the third step to disambiguate which mages are the goals and
         which are the enemies.


                                                    13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Bring the messages to the goals.

In different stages, the reward functions also have the following differences:

       • S1 & S2: If all the agents interact with the correct entities (i.e., agents started with message
         obtain a goal and agents started without message obtain a message) within a given number
         of steps, a reward of 1.0 will be provided, and −1.0 otherwise.
       • S3: The agents are required to get the messages first and then the goals so that it can be
         considered a win. Within a given number of steps, each agent interacting successfully with
         the messages will be provided a reward of 0.2, and all the agents interacting successfully
         with the goals will receive a reward of 1.0, otherwise −1.0.

Entities. Below is a list of entities contained in multi-agent MESSENGER:

       • Enemy: enemy, opponent, adversary (Adjectives: dangerous, deadly, lethal).
       • Message: message, memo, report. (Adjectives: restricted, classified, secret)
       • Goal: goal, target, aim. (Adjectives: crucial, vital, essential)

Language Templates. We use the same corpus of text manual as in the original EMMA paper
(Hanjie et al., 2021), i.e., 82 templates with 2214 possible descriptions after filling in the blanks. We
have three blanks per template, one each for the entity, role, and adjective. For each role, we have
three role words and three adjectives that are synonymous. Each entity is also described in three
synonymous ways. Thus, every entity-role assignment can be described in 27 different ways on the
same template. The raw templates are filtered for duplicates, converted to lowercase, and corrected
for typos to prevent confusion in specific tasks.

B     I MPLEMENTATION AND T RAINING D ETAILS

First, for both environments, we train 5 runs with different random seeds for each baseline to report
the mean and standard deviation. For generalization, we zero-shot transfer each of the 5 runs to the
new task and once again report the mean and standard deviation.

B.1   M ULTI -AGENT RTFM

We train using an implementation of IMPALA (Espeholt et al., 2018). In particular, we use 10 actors
and a batch size of 20. When unrolling actors, we use a maximum unroll length of 80 steps. Each
episode lasts for a maximum of 1000 steps. We optimize using RMSProp with a learning rate of
0.005, which is annealed linearly for 100 million steps. We set α = 0.99 and ϵ = 0.01.
During training, we apply a small negative reward for each time step of −0.02 and a discount factor
of 0.99 to facilitate convergence. We additionally include an entropy regularization to encourage
exploration. RTFM sets in the entropy loss with a weight of 0.005 and the baseline loss with a
weight of 0.5. The baseline loss is computed as the root mean square of the advantages (Espeholt
et al., 2018).
For S1, we train the model for 1.5 × 107 steps. For the rest stages, i.e., S2–S5, we train the model
for 5 × 107 steps.

B.2   M ULTI -AGENT MESSENGER

The models are end-to-end differentiable and we train them using proximal policy optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) with γ = 0.99, ϵ = 0.01 and the Adam optimizer with learning rate
α = 5 × 105 . On S1, S2, and S3, we limit each episode to 4, 32, and 64 steps respectively. We
train models for up to 12 hours on S1, 72 hours on S2, and 144 hours on S3. We use the validation
games to save the model parameters with the highest validation win rate during training and use
these parameters to evaluate the models on the test games.
For S1, we train the models for 3 × 107 steps. For S2 and S3, we train the model for 5 × 107 steps.


                                                   14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     M ODEL D ESIGN

We have two versions of EnDi. One takes the txt2π as backbone. Another takes EMMA as back-
bone.

C.1   txt2π VERSION

                                          1

                            Linear
        Text
                            Linear
       Features
                            Linear                    ReLU
                                                                                    Output
                            Conv                      ReLU
        Visual                                                     MaxPool          Summary
                            Conv
       Features
                            Conv

                                         1
Figure 5: Architecture of FiLM . FiLM2 builds codependent representations of text and visual
                                 2

inputs by modulating each kind of input using representations of input in another modality.

For the language grounding module, we utilize FiLM2 to capture the relationship between language
knowledge and environment observations. The architecture of FiLM2 is shown in Figure 5. Not
that each FiLM2 layer uses 3 × 3 convolutions and padding and stride sizes of 1. In more detail,
                                                     self       others
the grounding module that is used to generate Xgoal       and Xgoal    is shared and consists of two
       2
FiLM layers with channel of 16 and 4. The convolution layer that processes the concatenation of
  self       others
Xgoal  and Xgoal    uses kernel of 3 × 3 and outputs 2 dimension features. Moreover, the grounding
                                   self       others
module that is used to generate Xpolicy and Xpolicy  are shared and consists of one FiLM2 layer with
channel of 16, 32, 64, 64, and 64, with residual connections from the 3rd layer to the 5th layer. The
two representations need to get a polling operation over spatial dimension before going through the
corresponding policy head (one fully-connected layer).
For other text pre-processing modules, we strictly follow the RTFM setting (Zhong et al., 2019). The
Bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) that processes the inventory and the goal has a hidden dimension of
size 10. The BiLSTM that processes the document has a hidden dimension of size 100. Note that
we use a word embedding dimension of 30.
For more details about the txt2π, please refer to the paper (Zhong et al., 2019).

C.2   EMMA VERSION

We follow the EMMA settings to both capture the relationship between the language knowledge and
the environment observations, and pre-process the language manual in the MESSENGER environ-
ment. The architecture of EMMA is shown in Figure 6. The EMMA model consists of 3 components
including Text Encoder, Entity Representation Generator and Action Module. In Text Encoder, the
input consists of a h × w grid observation with a set of entity descriptions. EMMA encodes each
description using a BERT-base model whose parameters are fixed throughout training. Then the
key and value vectors are obtained from the encoder. In Entity Representation Generator, EMMA
embeds each entity’s symbol into a query vector to attend to the descriptions with their respective
key and value vectors. For each entity e in the observation, EMMA places its representation xe into a
tensor X ∈ Rh×w×d at the same coordinates as the entity position in the observation to maintain full
spatial information. The representation for the agent is simply a learned embedding of dimension


                                                 15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


d. In Action Module, to provide temporal information that assists with grounding movement dy-
namics, EMMA concatenates the outputs of the representation generator from the three most recent
observations to obtain a tensor X ′ ∈ Rh×w×3d . To get a distribution over the actions, EMMA runs
a 2D convolution on X ′ over the h, w dimensions. The flattened feature maps are passed through a
fully-connected FFN terminating in a softmax over the possible actions.
For more details about EMMA, please refer to the paper (Hanjie et al., 2021).


                                                                 token
                                                                                                                key vector
                                                   Encode
           Text Features                                         token

                                                                                                                value vector

                                                                 token

                                                   Embed
        Visual Features                                             Attention


                                                                  Conv + FFN                                     ReLU          Output

                                                      Figure 6: Architecture of EMMA.


D    A DDITIONAL R ESULTS


                    1.0                                                                  1.0
                               EnDi(dis)                                                            EnDi(dis)
                               EnDi(num)                                                            EnDi(num)
                    0.8        EnDi-sup                                                  0.8        EnDi-sup
                               EnDi-reg                                                             EnDi-reg
                               RTFM                                                                 RTFM
                    0.6        SILG                                                      0.6        SILG
         win rate


                                                                              win rate


                    0.4                                                                  0.4

                    0.2                                                                  0.2

                    0.0                                                                  0.0
                           0       1          2        3     4      5                           0       1         2        3   4    5
                                               step                1e7                                              step           1e7
                                        (a) Stage 2                                                          (b) Stage 3

                     1.0                                                                  1.0
                               EnDi(dis)                                                            EnDi(dis)
                               EnDi(num)                                                            EnDi(num)
                     0.8       EnDi-sup                                                   0.8       EnDi-sup
                               EnDi-reg                                                             EnDi-reg
                               RTFM                                                                 RTFM
                     0.6       SILG                                                       0.6       SILG
          win rate


                                                                               win rate


                     0.4                                                                  0.4

                     0.2                                                                  0.2

                     0.0                                                                  0.0
                           0        1          2         3   4      5                           0        1        2        3   4     5
                                                  step             1e7                                              step            1e7
                                           (c) Stage 4                                                       (d) Stage 5
  Figure 7: Learning curves in terms of the win rate of EnDi and baselines in multi-agent RTFM.

In this section, we provide the learning curve of EnDi and baselines. All results are presented in
terms of the mean and standard deviation of five runs with different random seeds.


                                                                         16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           1.0                                                                1.0                                                           0.30
                                                                                        EnDi+dis                                                       EnDi+dis
                                                                                        EnDi+num                                                       EnDi+num
           0.8                                                                0.8       EnDi-sup                                            0.25       EnDi-sup
                                                                                        EnDi-reg                                                       EnDi-reg
                                                                                        EMMA                                                0.20       EMMA
           0.6                                                                0.6       SILG                                                           SILG
win rate


                                                                   win rate


                                                                                                                                 win rate
                                                                                                                                            0.15
           0.4                                     EnDi+dis                   0.4
                                                   EnDi+num                                                                                 0.10
                                                   EnDi-sup
           0.2                                     EnDi-reg                   0.2                                                           0.05
                                                   EMMA
                                                   SILG
           0.0                                                                0.0                                                           0.00
                 0.0    0.5     1.0     1.5 2.0   2.5   3.0                         0       1       2            3   4      5                      0       1       2            3   4    5
                                      frames            1e7                                             frames             1e7                                         frames           1e7
                              (a) Stage 1                                                       (b) Stage 2                                                    (c) Stage 3
Figure 8: Learning curves in terms of the win rate of EnDi and baselines in multi-agent MESSEN-
GER.

Figure 7 shows the results in multi-agent RTFM from Stage 2 to Stage 5. Note that Stage 1 is
omitted since all baselines achieve nearly 100% win rate. Figure 8 shows the results in multi-agent
MESSENGER from Stage 1 to Stage 3. The results again demonstrate the superiority of our method
over baselines.



E                 R ESULTS WITHOUT VALIDATION

Table 4: The mean win rates (± stddev.) of EnDi(dis) without validation over five seeds on training
in multi-agent MESSENGER. Note that the result of each seed is obtained by running 1k episodes.

                                                  EnDi(dis) - train                          w/ validation               w/o validation
                                                              S1                                0.99 ± 0.01               0.99 ± 0.01
                                                              S2                                0.81 ± 0.03               0.76 ± 0.02
                                                              S3                                0.25 ± 0.03               0.20 ± 0.04


Table 5: The mean win rates (± stddev.) of EnDi(dis) without validation over five seeds on eval-
uation in multi-agent MESSENGER. Note that the result of each seed is obtained by running 1k
episodes.

                                                  EnDi(dis) - test                          w/ validation                w/o validation
                                                              S1                             0.79 ± 0.05                  0.77 ± 0.02
                                                              S2                             0.52 ± 0.02                  0.48 ± 0.03
                                                              S3                             0.11 ± 0.02                  0.09 ± 0.02

In order to make a fair comparison, we followed the original EMMA setting in the paper and added
the validation procedure. But to verify the performance of EnDi more strictly, we conduct additional
ablation experiments without the validation procedure. As shown in Table 4 and 5, the performance
of EnDi is only weakly affected by the removal of validation and still outperforms the baselines.
Therefore, validation does not affect the conclusions in the experimental results of the paper.



F                 E RROR A NALYSIS


F.1                    E RROR CASE IN M ULTI - AGENT RTFM

Case 1 (Figure 9, upper panel): the entity division is reasonable in Multi-agent RTFM: Fire Imp (tar-
get monster), Shimmering Sword (good weapon) and Poison Zombie (distractor monster) belongs
to the entity division of agent 1, while Fanatical Kanata (good weapon), Lightning Ghost (target


                                                                                                    17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Wiki                                       Task              Agent 1                        Agent 1                    Agent 1
   grandmasters, blessed beat cold.           slay the star

   shimmering, gleaming beat fire.            alliance.

   fanatical, mysterious beat lightning.
   soldiers, arcane beat poison.
   bat, jaguar are order of forest.
   zombie, wolf are rebel enclave.
   ghost, imp are star alliance.

       Fanatical          Shimmering          Blessed
        Kanata              Sword              Spear
       Lightning                               Poison
                             Fire Imp
         Ghost                                 Zombie
      Agent                Mask of Agent1    Mask of Agent2       Agent 2             1          Agent 2             2       Agent 2           3

   Wiki                                       Task              Agent 1                        Agent 1                    Agent 1
   mysterious, arcane beat cold.              rebel
   grandmasters, fanatical beat fire.         enclave
   blessed, gleaming beat lightning.          must be
   shimmering, soldiers beat poison.          defeated
   zombie, jaguar are order of forest.
   imp, ghost are rebel enclave.
   wolf, bat are star alliance.

        Arcane            Grandmasters       Gleaming
        Kanata               Sword            Spear
                                              Lightning
      Fire Ghost            Cold Imp
                                               Zombie
      Agent                Mask of Agent1    Mask of Agent2
                                                                  Agent 2             1          Agent 2             2       Agent 2           3


                                                      Figure 9: Error cases of EnDi in Multi-agent RTFM.


monster) and Blessed Spear (bad weapon) belongs to the entity division of agent 2. Each agent’s
subgoal includes a good weapon and a target monster. However, agent 2 picks up the bad weapon
(Blessed Spear), resulting in it being killed by the monster (Lighting Ghost) that chased it on the
way to the good weapon(Fanatical Kanata), although Lighting Ghost is the target monster.
Case 2 (Figure 9, lower panel): the entity division is also rational: Cold Imp (target monster),
Arcane Kanata (good weapon), Lightning Zombie (distractor monster) and Gleaming Spear(bad
weapon) belongs to the entity division of agent 1, while Fire Ghost(target monster) and Grandmas-
ters Sword (good weapon) belongs to the entity division of agent 2. Agent 2 choose to pick up the
good weapon (Grandmasters Sword), but at that point it’s beat by the distractor monster (Lightning
Zombie) that came after it.
All in all, we can blame the error case to that agents recognize the wrong entities. In other words,
the language grounding procedure may suffer from the multi-agent settings.


F.2      E RROR CASE IN M ULTI - AGENT MESSENGER


  Manual                                                                    Agent 2                        Agent 2                  Agent 2
  the bird is an important target.

  a princess is the deadly enemy.

  the airplane holds the secret message.


   Agent           Goal        Message       Enemy

         Mask of Agent1                 Mask of Agent2
                                                              Agent 1                 1 Agent 1                      3 Agent 1                 5

  Manual                                                                                                                                  Agent 2
                                                                             Agent 2                         Agent 2
  the essential goal is held by the blade.

  the deadly enemy is the robot.

  the secret is in the mage's hand.


                                                                                           Agent 1                       Agent 1
   Agent           Goal        Message       Enemy

         Mask of Agent1                 Mask of Agent2
                                                              Agent 1
                                                                                      1                              3                         5


                                            Figure 10: Error cases of EnDi in Multi-agent MESSENGER.


                                                                                          18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In frame 1 of Case 1 (Figure 10, upper panel), the entity divider reasonably assigns the entities to
both agents. But in frame 3, the enemy is close to both agents but the entity divider can only assign
the enemy to agent 1, resulting in agent 2 not paying good attention to the enemy and being killed
by the enemy in frame 5. In the future, we consider to solve this problem by adding some sharing
elements to the entity divider.
Another unexpected situation is shown in Case 2 (Figure 10, lower panel), where both agents are far
away from the message on the right side in frame 1, and the entity divider can only assign it to one
agent. But in frame 3, due to the movements of the message and the goal, the entity divider chooses
to reassign the message, causing agent 1 to change its direction from downward to upward after
frame 3. Although the agents finally complete the task, the invalid movement in the first few frames
makes the agents less efficient. We will consider a more reasonable assignment way to improve the
entity divider.


                                                 19
