Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D IFFUSION M ODELS FOR C AUSAL D ISCOVERY
VIA T OPOLOGICAL O RDERING

 Pedro Sanchez1∗, Xiao Liu1 , Alison Q O’Neil2,1 , Sotirios A. Tsaftaris1,3
 1
   The University of Edinburgh
 2
   Canon Medical Research Europe
 3
   The Alan Turing Institute



                                             A BSTRACT
            Discovering causal relations from observational data becomes possible with addi-
            tional assumptions such as considering the functional relations to be constrained
            as nonlinear with additive noise (ANM). Even with strong assumptions, causal
            discovery involves an expensive search problem over the space of directed acyclic
            graphs (DAGs). Topological ordering approaches reduce the optimisation space
            of causal discovery by searching over a permutation rather than graph space. For
            ANMs, the Hessian of the data log-likelihood can be used for finding leaf nodes
            in a causal graph, allowing its topological ordering. However, existing compu-
            tational methods for obtaining the Hessian still do not scale as the number of
            variables and the number of samples are increased. Therefore, inspired by re-
            cent innovations in diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs), we propose DiffAN 1 , a
            topological ordering algorithm that leverages DPMs for learning a Hessian func-
            tion. We introduce theory for updating the learned Hessian without re-training the
            neural network, and we show that computing with a subset of samples gives an ac-
            curate approximation of the ordering, which allows scaling to datasets with more
            samples and variables. We show empirically that our method scales exceptionally
            well to datasets with up to 500 nodes and up to 105 samples while still performing
            on par over small datasets with state-of-the-art causal discovery methods.


1       I NTRODUCTION
Understanding the causal structure of a
problem is important for areas such as
economics, biology (Sachs et al., 2005)
and healthcare (Sanchez et al., 2022), es-
pecially when reasoning about the ef-
fect of interventions. When interven-
tional data from randomised trials are
not available, causal discovery meth-
ods (Glymour et al., 2019) may be em-
ployed to discover the causal structure
of a problem solely from observational   Figure 1: Plot showing run time in seconds for differ-
data. Causal structure is typically mod- ent sample sizes, for discovery of causal graphs with
elled as a directed acyclic graph (DAG)  500 nodes. Most causal discovery methods have pro-
G in which each node is associated with  hibitive run time and memory cost for datasets with many
a random variable and each edge repre-   samples; the previous state-of-the-art SCORE algorithm
sents a causal mechanism i.e. how one    (Rolland et al., 2022) which is included in this graph can-
variable influences another.             not be computed beyond 2000 samples in a machine with
                                         64GB of RAM. By contrast, our method DiffAN has a
However, learning such a model from reasonable run time even for numbers of samples two or-
data is NP-hard (Chickering, 1996). Tra- ders of magnitude larger than capable by most existing
ditional methods search the DAG space methods.
    ∗
        pedro.sanchez@ed.ac.uk
    1
        Implementation is available at https://github.com/vios-s/DiffAN .


                                                    1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by testing for conditional independence between variables (Spirtes et al., 1993) or by optimising
some goodness of fit measure (Chickering, 2002). Unfortunately, solving the search problem with a
greedy combinatorial optimisation method can be expensive and does not scale to high-dimensional
problems.
In line with previous work (Teyssier & Koller, 2005; Park & Klabjan, 2017; Bühlmann et al., 2014;
Solus et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Rolland et al., 2022), we can speed up the combinatorial search
problem over the space of DAGs by rephrasing it as a topological ordering task, ordering from leaf
nodes to root nodes. The search space over DAGs with d nodes and (d2 − d)/2 possible edges is
much larger than the space of permutations over d variables. Once a topological ordering of the
nodes is found, the potential causal relations between later (cause) and earlier (effect) nodes can be
pruned with a feature selection algorithm (e.g. Bühlmann et al. (2014)) to yield a graph which is
naturally directed and acyclic without further optimisation.
Recently, Rolland et al. (2022) proposed the SCORE algorithm for topological ordering.
SCORE uses the Hessian of the data log-likelihood, ∇2x log p(x).By verifying which elements of
∇2x log p(x)’s diagonal are constant across all data points, leaf nodes can be iteratively identified
and removed. Rolland et al. (2022) estimate the Hessian point-wise with a second-order Stein gra-
dient estimator (Li & Turner, 2018) over a radial basis function (RBF) kernel. However, point-wise
estimation with kernels scales poorly to datasets with large number of samples n because it requires
inverting a n × n kernel matrix.
Here, we enable scalable causal discovery by utilising neural networks (NNs) trained with denois-
ing diffusion instead of Rolland et al.’s kernel-based estimation. We use the ordering procedure,
based on Rolland et al. (2022), which requires re-computing the score’s Jacobian at each iteration.
Training NNs at each iteration would not be feasible. Therefore, we derive a theoretical analysis that
allows updating the learned score without re-training. In addition, the NN is trained over the entire
dataset (n samples) but only a subsample is used for finding leaf nodes. Thus, once the score model
is learned, we can use it to order the graph with constant complexity on n, enabling causal discovery
for large datasets in high-dimensional settings. Interestingly, our algorithm does not require archi-
tectural constraints on the neural network, as in previous causal discovery methods based on neural
networks (Lachapelle et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2019; Ng et al., 2022). Our training
procedure does not learn the causal mechanism directly, but the score of the data distribution.
Contributions. In summary, we propose DiffAN, an identifiable algorithm leveraging a diffusion
probabilistic model for topological ordering that enables causal discovery assuming an additive noise
model: (i) To the best of our knowledge, we present the first causal discovery algorithm based on
denoising diffusion training which allows scaling to datasets with up to 500 variables and 105 sam-
ples. The score estimated with the diffusion model is used to find and remove leaf nodes iteratively;
(ii) We estimate the second-order derivatives (score’s Jacobian or Hessian) of a data distribution us-
ing neural networks with diffusion training via backpropagation; (iii) The proposed deciduous score
(Section 3) allows efficient causal discovery without re-training the score model at each iteration.
When a leaf node is removed, the score of the new distribution can be estimated from the original
score (before leaf removal) and its Jacobian.


2     P RELIMINARIES

2.1   P ROBLEM D EFINITION

We consider the problem of discovering the causal structure between d variables, given a probability
distribution p(x) from which a d-dimensional random vector x = (x1 , . . . , xd ) can be sampled.
We assume that the true causal structure is described by a DAG G containing d nodes. Each node
represents a random variable xi and edges represent the presence of causal relations between them.
In other words, we can say that G defines a structural causal model (SCM) consisting of a collection
of assignments xi := fi (P a(xi ), ϵi ), where P a(xi ) are the parents of xi in G, and ϵi is a noise term
independent of xi , also called exogenous noise. ϵi are i.i.d. from a smooth distribution pϵ . The SCM
                                         Qd
entails a unique distribution p(x) = i=1 p(xi | P a(xi )) over the variables x (Peters et al., 2017).
The observational input data are X ∈ Rn×d , where n is number of samples. The target output is an
adjacency matrix A ∈ Rd×d .

                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The topological ordering (also called causal ordering or causal list) of a DAG G is defined as a
non-unique permutation π of d nodes such that a given node always appears first in the list than its
descendants. Formally, πi < πj ⇐⇒ j ∈ DeG (xi ) where DeG (xi ) are the descendants of the ith
node in G (Appendix B in Peters et al. (2017)).

2.2        N ONLINEAR A DDITIVE N OISE M ODELS

Learning a unique A from X with observational data requires additional assumptions. A common
class of methods called additive noise models (ANM) (Shimizu et al., 2006; Hoyer et al., 2008;
Peters et al., 2014; Bühlmann et al., 2014) explores asymmetries in the data by imposing functional
assumptions on the data generation process. In most cases, they assume that assignments take the
form xi := fi (P a(xi )) + ϵi with ϵi ∼ pϵ . Here we focus on the case described by Peters et al.
(2014) where fi is nonlinear. We use the notation fi for fi (P a(xi )) because the arguments of fi
will always be P a(xi ) throughout this paper. We highlight that fi does not depend on i.
Identifiability. We assume that the SCM follows an additive noise model (ANM) which is known
to be identifiable from observational data (Hoyer et al., 2008; Peters et al., 2014). We also assume
causal sufficiency, i.e. there are no hidden variables that are a common cause of at least two observed
variables. In addition, corollary 33 from Peters et al. (2014) states that the true topological ordering
of the DAG, as in our setting, is identifiable from a p(x) generated by an ANM without requiring
causal minimality assumptions.
Finding Leaves with the Score. Rolland et al. (2022) propose that the score of an ANM with
distribution p(x) can be used to find leaves1 . Before presenting how to find the leaves, we derive,
following Lemma 2 in Rolland et al. (2022), an analytical expression for the score which can be
written as
                                    d
                                    Y
  ∇xj log p(x) = ∇xj log                  p(xi | P a(xi ))
                                    i=1
                              d
                              X
                     = ∇ xj         log p(xi | P a(xi ))
                              i=1
                                                                                                                   (1)
                              d
                              X
                                           ϵ
                     = ∇ xj         log p (xi − fi )                                        ▷ Using ϵi = xi − fi
                              i=1
                                ϵ
                         ∂ log p (xj − fj )            X        ∂fi ∂ log pϵ (xi − fi )
                     =                      −                                           .
                                ∂xj                             ∂xj        ∂x
                                                    i∈Ch(xj )

Where Ch(xj ) denotes the children of xj . We now proceed, based on Rolland et al. (2022), to
derive a condition which can be used to find leaf nodes.
Lemma 1. Given a nonlinear ANM with a noise distribution pϵ and a leaf node j; assume that
∂ 2 log pϵ
   ∂x2     = a, where a is a constant, then
                                                VarX [Hj,j (log p(x))] = 0.                                        (2)

See proof in Appendix A.1.
Remark. Lemma 1 enables finding leaf nodes based on the diagonal of the log-likelihood’s Hessian.

Rolland et al. (2022), using a similar conclusion, propose a topological ordering algorithm that
iteratively finds and removes leaf nodes from the dataset. At each iteration Rolland et al. (2022)
re-compute the Hessian with a kernel-based estimation method. In this paper, we develop a more
efficient algorithm for learning the Hessian at high-dimensions and for a large number of samples.
Note that Rolland et al. (2022) prove that Equation 2 can identify leaves in nonlinear ANMs with
Gaussian noise. We derive a formulation which, instead, requires the second-order derivative of
                                                                2
                                                                  log pϵ
the noise distribution to be constant. Indeed, the condition ∂ ∂x   2    = a is true for pϵ following a
Gaussian distribution which is consistent with Rolland et al. (2022), but could potentially be true for
other distributions as well.
      1
          We refer to nodes without children in a DAG G as leaves.


                                                                3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.3        D IFFUSION M ODELS A PPROXIMATE THE S CORE

The process of learning to denoise (Vincent, 2011) can approximate that of matching the score
(Hyvärinen, 2005). A diffusion process gradually adds noise to a data distribution over time. Dif-
fusion probabilistic models (DPMs) Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015); Ho et al. (2020); Song et al.
(2021) learn to reverse the diffusion process, starting with noise and recovering the data distri-
bution. The diffusion process gradually adds Gaussian noise, with a time-dependent variance
αt , to a sample x0 ∼ pdata (x) from the data distribution. Thus, the noisy variable xt , with
t ∈ [0, T ], is learned to correspond to  versions of x0 perturbed by Gaussian noise following
                      √                                    Qt
p (xt | x0 ) = N xt ; αt x0 , (1 − αt ) I , where αt := j=0 (1 − βj ), βj is the variance sched-
uled between [βmin , βmax ] and I is the identity matrix. DPMs (Ho et al., 2020) are learned with a
weighted sum of denoising score matching objectives at different perturbation scales with
                                                  h                       i
                                                                        2
                            θ∗ = arg min Ex0 ,t,ϵ λ(t) ∥ϵθ (xt , t) − ϵ∥2 ,                     (3)
                                           θ
                   √          √
where xt = αt x0 + 1 − αt ϵ, with x0 ∼ p(x) being a sample from the data distribution, t ∼
U (0, T ) and ϵ ∼ N (0, I) is the noise. λ(t) is a loss weighting term following Ho et al. (2020).
Remark. Throughout this paper, we leverage the fact that the trained model ϵθ approximates the
score ∇xj log p(x) of the data (Song & Ermon, 2019).

3         T HE D ECIDUOUS S CORE
Discovering the complete topological ordering with the distribution’s Hessian (Rolland et al., 2022)
is done by finding the leaf node (Equation 2), appending the leaf node xl to the ordering list π and
removing the data column corresponding to xl from X before the next iteration d − 1 times. Rolland
et al. (2022) estimate the score’s Jacobian (Hessian) at each iteration.
Instead, we explore an alternative approach that does not require estimation of a new score after
each leaf removal. In particular, we describe how to adjust the score of a distribution after each leaf
removal, terming this a “deciduous score”1 . We obtain an analytical expression for the deciduous
score and derive a way of computing it, based on the original score before leaf removal. In this sec-
tion, we only consider that p(x) follows a distribution described by an ANM, we pose no additional
assumptions over the noise distribution.
                                                                           Qd
Definition 1. Considering a DAG G which entails a distribution p(x) = i=1 p(xi | P a(xi )). Let
p(x−l ) = p(xl p(x)
               |P a(xl )) be p(x) without the random variable corresponding to the leaf node xl . The
deciduous score ∇ log p(x−l ) ∈ Rd−1 is the score of the distribution p(x−l ).
Lemma 2. Given a ANM which entails a distribution p(x), we can use Equation 1 to find an an-
alytical expression for an additive residue ∆l between the distribution’s score ∇ log p(x) and its
deciduous score ∇ log p(x−l ) such that
                                        ∆l = ∇ log p(x) − ∇ log p(x−l ).                           (4)
In particular, ∆l is a vector {δj | ∀j ∈ [1, . . . , d] \l} where the residue w.r.t. a node xj can be
denoted as
                                      δj = ∇xj log p(x) − ∇xj log p(x−l )
                                            ∂fi ∂ log pϵ (xi − fi )                                (5)
                                         =−                         .
                                            ∂xj         ∂x
If xj ∈
      / P a(xl ), δj = 0.

Proof. Observing Equation 1, the score ∇xj log p(x) only depends on the following random vari-
ables (i) P a(xj ), (ii) Ch(xj ), and (iii) P a(Ch(xj )). We consider xl to be a leaf node, therefore
∇xj log p(x) only depends on xl if xj ∈ P a(xl ). If xj ∈ P a(xl ), the only term depending on
∇xj log p(x) dependent on xl is one of the terms inside the summation.
      1
          An analogy to deciduous trees which seasonally shed leaves during autumn.


                                                         4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Topological ordering with diffusion models by iteratively finding leaf nodes. At each
iteration, one leaf node is found using Equation 9. In the subsequent iteration, the previous leaves
are removed, reducing the search space. After topological ordering (as illustrated on the right side),
the presence of edges (causal mechanisms) between variables can be inferred such that parents of
each variable are selected from the preceding variables in the ordered list. Spurious edges can be
pruned with feature selection as a post-processing step (Bühlmann et al., 2014; Lachapelle et al.,
2020; Rolland et al., 2022).


However, we wish to estimate the deciduous score ∇ log p(x−l ) without direct access to the function
fl , to its derivative, nor to the distribution pϵ . Therefore, we now derive an expression for ∆l using
solely the score and the Hessian of log p(x).
Theorem 1. Consider an ANM of distribution p(x) with score ∇ log p(x) and the score’s Jaco-
bian H(log p(x)). The additive residue ∆l necessary for computing the deciduous score (as in
Proposition 2) can be estimated with

                                                          ∇xl log p(x)
                                  ∆l = Hl (log p(x)) ·                    .                               (6)
                                                          Hl,l (log p(x))
See proof in Appendix A.2.

4     C AUSAL D ISCOVERY WITH D IFFUSION M ODELS
DPMs approximate the score of the data distribution (Song & Ermon, 2019). In this section, we
explore how to use DPMs to perform leaf discovery and compute the deciduous score, based on
Theorem 1, for iteratively finding and removing leaf nodes without re-training the score.

4.1   A PPROXIMATING THE S CORE ’ S JACOBIAN VIA D IFFUSION T RAINING

The score’s Jacobian can be approximated by learning the score ϵθ with denoising diffusion training
of neural networks and back-propagating (Rumelhart et al., 1986)1 from the output to the input
variables. It can be written, for an input data point x ∈ Rd , as
                                      Hi,j log p(x) ≈ ∇i,j ϵθ (x, t),                                     (7)
where ∇i,j ϵθ (x, t) means the ith output of ϵθ is backpropagated to the jth input. The diagonal of
the Hessian in Equation 7 can, then, be used for finding leaf nodes as in Equation 2.
In a two variable setting, it is sufficient for causal discovery to (i) train a diffusion model (Equation
3); (ii) approximate the score’s Jacobian via backpropagation (Equation 7); (iii) compute variance of
    1
      The Jacobian of a neural network can be efficiently computed with auto-differentiation libraries such as
functorch (Horace He, 2021).


                                                      5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


the diagonal across all data points; (iv) identify the variable with lowest variance as effect (Equation
2). We illustrate in Appendix C the Hessian of a two variable SCM computed with a diffusion
model.

4.2   T OPOLOGICAL O RDERING

When a DAG contains more than two nodes, the process of finding leaf nodes (i.e. the topological
order) needs to be done iteratively as illustrated in Figure 2. The naive (greedy) approach would
be to remove the leaf node from the dataset, recompute the score, and compute the variance of the
new distribution’s Hessian to identify the next leaf node (Rolland et al., 2022). Since we employ
diffusion models to estimate the score, this equates to re-training the model each time after a leaf is
removed.
We hence propose a method to compute the deciduous score ∇ log p(x−l ) using Theorem 1 to
remove leaves from the initial score without re-training the neural network. In particular, assuming
that a leaf xl is found, the residue ∆l can be approximated1 with

                                                                 ϵθ (x, t)l
                                   ∆l (x, t) ≈ ∇l ϵθ (x, t) ·                                               (8)
                                                                ∇l,l ϵθ (x, t)

where ϵθ (x, t)l is output corresponding to the leaf node. Note that the term ∇l ϵθ (x, t) is a vector
of size d and the other term is a scalar. During topological ordering, we compute ∆π , which is the
summation of ∆l over all leaves already discovered and appended to π. Naturally, we only compute
∆l w.r.t. nodes xj ∈ / π because xj ∈ π have already been ordered and are not taken into account
anymore.
In practice, we observe that training ϵθ on X but using a subsample B ∈ Rk×d of size k randomly
sampled from X increases speed without compromising performance (see Section 4.3). In addition,
analysing Equation 5, the absolute value of the residue δl decreases if the values of xl are set to
zero once the leaf node is discovered. Therefore, we apply a mask Mπ ∈ {0, 1}k×d over leaves
discovered in the previous iterations and compute only the Jacobian of the outputs corresponding to
x−l . Mπ is updated after each iteration based on the ordered nodes π. We then find a leaf node
according to
                            leaf = arg min VarB [∇x (score(Mπ ⊙ B, t))] ,                                   (9)
                                      xi ∈x

where ϵθ is a DPM trained with Equation 3. See Appendix E.3 for the choice of t. This topological
ordering procedure is formally described in Algorithm 1, score(−π) means that we only consider
the outputs for nodes xj ∈
                         /π


Algorithm 1: Topological Ordering with DiffAN
Input: X ∈ Rn×d , trained diffusion model ϵθ , ordering batch size k
π = [], ∆π = 0k×d , Mπ = 1k×d , score = ϵθ
while ∥π∥ =
          ̸ d do
        k
   B←X                            // Randomly sample a batch of k elements
   B ← B ◦ Mπ                                                // Mask removed leaves
   ∆π = Get∆π (score, B)                              // Sum of Equation 8 over π
   score = score(−π) + ∆π                            // Update score with residue
   leaf = GetLeaf(score, B)                                           // Equation 9
   π = [leaf, π]                                  // Append leaf to ordered list
   M:,leaf = 0                                    // Set discovered leaf to zero
end
Output: Topological order π


    1
      The diffusion model itself is an approximation of the score, therefore its gradients are approximations of
the score derivatives.


                                                       6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


4.3        C OMPUTATIONAL C OMPLEXITY AND P RACTICAL C ONSIDERATIONS

We now study the complexity of topological ordering with DiffAN w.r.t. the number of samples n
and number of variables d in a dataset. In addition, we discuss what are the complexities of a greedy
version as well as approximation which only utilises masking.
Complexity on n. Our method separates learning the score ϵθ from computing the variance of the
Hessian’s diagonal across data points, in contrast to Rolland et al. (2022). We use all n samples in
X for learning the score function with diffusion training (Equation 3). It does not involve expensive
constrained optimisation techniques1 and we train the model for a fixed number of epochs (which
is linear with n) or until reaching the early stopping criteria. We use a MLP that grows in width
with d but it does not significantly affect complexity. Therefore, we consider training to be O(n).
Moreover, Algorithm 1 is computed over a batch B with size k < n instead of the entire dataset
X, as described in Equation 9. Note that the number of samples k in B can be arbitrarily small
and constant for different datasets. In Section 5.2, we verify that the accuracy of causal discovery
initially improves as k is increased but eventually tapers off.
Complexity on d. Once ϵθ is trained, a topological ordering can be obtained by running ∇x ϵθ (x, t)
d times. Moreover, computing the Jacobian of the score requires back-propagating the gradients
d − i times, where i is the number of nodes already ordered in a given iteration. Finally, computing
the deciduous score’s residue (Equation 8) means computing gradient of the i nodes. Resulting in a
complexity of O(d · (d − i) · i) with i varying from 0 to d which can be described by O(d3 ). The
final topological ordering complexity is therefore O(n + d3 ).
DiffAN Masking. We verify empirically that the masking procedure described in Section 4.2 can
significantly reduce the deciduous score’s residue absolute value while maintaining causal discov-
ery capabilities. In DiffAN Masking, we do not re-train the ϵθ nor compute the deciduous score.
This ordering algorithm is an approximation but has shown to work well in practice while showing
remarkable scalability. DiffAN Masking has O(n + d2 ) ordering complexity.


5         E XPERIMENTS

In our experiments, we train a NN with a DPM objective to perform topological ordering and follow
this with a pruning post-processing step (Bühlmann et al., 2014). The performance is evaluated on
synthetic and real data and compared to state-of-the-art causal discovery methods from observational
data which are either ordering-based or gradient-based methods, NN architecture. We use a 4-
layer multilayer perceptron (MLP) with LeakyReLU and layer normalisation. Metrics. We use the
structural Hamming distance (SHD), Structural Intervention Distance (SID) (Peters & Bühlmann,
2015), Order Divergence (Rolland et al., 2022) and run time in seconds. See Appendix D.3 for
details of each metric. Baselines. We use CAM (Bühlmann et al., 2014), GranDAG (Lachapelle
et al., 2020) and SCORE (Rolland et al., 2022). We apply the pruning procedure of Bühlmann et al.
(2014) to all methods. See detailed results in the Appendix D. Experiments with real data from
Sachs (Sachs et al., 2005) and SynTReN (Van den Bulcke et al., 2006) datasets are in the Appendix
E.1.

5.1        S YNTHETIC DATA

In this experiment, we consider causal relationships with fi being a function sampled from a Gaus-
sian Process (GP) with radial basis function kernel of bandwidth one. We generate data from additive
noise models which follow a Gaussian, Exponential or Laplace distributions with noise scales in the
intervals {[0.4, 0.8], [0.8, 1.2], [1, 1]}, which are known to be identifiable (Peters et al., 2014). The
causal graph is generated using the Erdös-Rényi (ER) (Erdős et al., 1960) and Scale Free (SF) (Bol-
lobás et al., 2003) models. For a fixed number of nodes d, we vary the sparsity of the sampled
graph by setting the average number of edges to be either d or 5d. We use the notation [d][graph
type][sparsity] for indicating experiments over different synthetic datasets. We show that DiffAN
performs on par with baselines while being extremely fast, see Figure 3. We also explore the role
of overfitting in Appendix E.2, the difference between DiffAN with masking only and the greedy
      1
          Such as the Augmented Lagrangian method (Zheng et al., 2018; Lachapelle et al., 2020).


                                                         7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      100
               method
       80         GranDAG
                  CAM                                           400
       60         SCORE


                                                      runtime
SHD

       40         DiffAN
                                                                200
       20
        0                                                         0

               R1        F1       R5       F5                            R1      F1      R5      F5
            20E       20S      20E      20S                           20E     20S     20E     20S
                        Experiment                                             Experiment
Figure 3: SHD (left) and run time in seconds (right) for experiments of synthetic data graphs for
graphs with 20 nodes. The variation in the violinplots come from 3 different seeds over dataset
generated from 3 different noise type and 3 different noise scales. Therefore, we run a total of 27
experiments for each method and synthetic datasets type


version in Appendix E.4, how we choose t during ordering in Appendix E.3 and we give results
stratified by experiment in Appendix E.5.

5.2    S CALING UP WITH D IFF AN M ASKING

We now verify how DiffAN scales to bigger datasets, in terms of the number of samples n. Here, we
use DiffAN masking because computing the residue with DiffAN would be too expensive for very
big d. We evaluate only the topological ordering, ignoring the final pruning step. Therefore, the
performance will be measured solely with the Order Divergence metric.
Scaling to large datasets. We evaluate how DiffAN compares to SCORE (Rolland et al., 2022), the
previous state-of-the-art, in terms of run time (in seconds) and and the performance (order diver-
gence) over datasets with d = 500 and different sample sizes n ∈ 102 , . . . , 105 , the error bars are
results across 6 dataset (different samples of ER and SF graphs). As illustrated in Figure 1, DiffAN
is the more tractable option as the size of the dataset increases. SCORE relies on inverting a very
large n × n matrix which is expensive in memory and computing for large n. Running SCORE
for d = 500 and n > 2000 is intractable in a machine with 64Gb of RAM. Figure 4 (left) shows
that, since DiffAN can learn from bigger datasets and therefore achieve better results as sample size
increases.
Ordering batch size. An important aspect of our method, discussed in Section 4.3, that allows
scalability in terms of n is the separation between learning the score function ϵθ and computing
the Hessian variance across a batch of size k, with k < n. Therefore, we show empirically, as
illustrated in Figure 4 (right), that decreasing k does not strongly impact performance for datasets
with d ∈ 10, 20, 50.

6     R ELATED W ORKS
Ordering-based Causal Discovery. The observation that a causal DAG can be partially represented
with a topological ordering goes back to Verma & Pearl (1990). Searching the topological ordering
space instead of searching over the space of DAGs has been done with greedy Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) (Friedman & Koller, 2003), greedy hill-climbing search (Teyssier & Koller, 2005),
arc search (Park & Klabjan, 2017), restricted maximum likelihood estimators (Bühlmann et al.,
2014), sparsest permutation (Raskutti & Uhler, 2018; Lam et al., 2022; Solus et al., 2021), and
reinforcement learning (Wang et al., 2021). In linear additive models, Ghoshal & Honorio (2018);
Chen et al. (2019) propose an approach, under some assumptions on the noise variances, to discover
the causal graph by sequentially identifying leaves based on an estimation of the precision matrix.
Hessian of the Log-likelihood. Estimating H(log p(x)) is the most expensive task of the ordering
algorithm. Our baseline (Rolland et al., 2022) propose an extension of Li & Turner (2018) which


                                                  8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                    1400                           method


                                                                         Order Divergence
 Order Divergence                                      DiffANM
                                                                                            40   d
                                                       SCORE
                    1200                                                                             10
                                                                                                     20
                                                                                            20       50
                    1000


                     800                                                                     0
                                2        3         4             5                                    2                     3
                           10       10        10            10                                   10                    10
                                     Sample Size                                                          Ordering Batch Size

Figure 4: Accuracy of DiffAN as the dataset size is scaled up for datasets with 500 variables and
increasing numbers of data samples n (left) and as the batch size for computing the Hessian variance
is changed (right). We show 95% confidence intervals over 6 datasets which have different graph
structures sampled different graph types (ER/SF).



utilises the Stein’s identity over a RBF kernel (Schölkopf & Smola, 2002). Rolland et al.’s method
cannot obtain gradient estimates at positions out of the training samples. Therefore, evaluating the
Hessian over a subsample of the training dataset is not possible. Other promising kernel-based
approaches rely on spectral decomposition (Shi et al., 2018) solve this issue and can be promising
future directions. Most importantly, computing the kernel matrix is expensive for memory and
computation on n. There are, however, methods (Achlioptas et al., 2001; Halko et al., 2011; Si
et al., 2017) that help scaling kernel techniques, which were not considered in the present work.
Other approaches are also possible with deep likelihood methods such as normalizing flows (Durkan
et al., 2019; Dinh et al., 2017) and further compute the Hessian via backpropagation. This would
require two backpropagation passes giving O(d2 ) complexity and be less scalable than denoising
diffusion. Indeed, preliminary experiments proved impractical in our high-dimensional settings.
We use DPMs because they can efficiently approximate the Hessian with a single backpropagation
pass and while allowing Hessian evaluation on a subsample of the training dataset. It has been shown
(Song & Ermon, 2019) that denoising diffusion can better capture the score than simple denoising
(Vincent, 2011) because noise at multiple scales explore regions of low data density.



7                   C ONCLUSION

We have presented a scalable method using DPMs for causal discovery. Since DPMs approximate
the score of the data distribution, they can be used to efficiently compute the log-likelihood’s Hessian
by backpropagating each element of the output with respect to each element of the input. The decid-
uous score allows adjusting the score to remove the contribution of the leaf most recently removed,
avoiding re-training the NN. Our empirical results show that neural networks can be efficiently used
for topological ordering in high-dimensional graphs (up to 500 nodes) and with large datasets (up to
105 samples).
Our deciduous score can be used with other Hessian estimation techniques as long as obtaining
the score and its full Jacobian is possible from a trained model, e.g. sliced score matching (Song
et al., 2020) and approximate backpropagation (Kingma & Cun, 2010). Updating the score is more
practical than re-training in most settings with neural networks. Therefore, our theoretical result
enables the community to efficiently apply new score estimation methods to topological ordering.
Moreover, DPMs have been previously used generative diffusion models in the context of causal es-
timation (Sanchez & Tsaftaris, 2022). In this work, we have not explored the generative aspect such
as Geffner et al. (2022) does with normalising flows. Finally, another promising direction involves
constraining the NN architecture as in Lachapelle et al. (2020) with constrained optimisation losses
(Zheng et al., 2018).


                                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


8   ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the University of Edinburgh, the Royal Academy of Engineering and
Canon Medical Research Europe via P. Sanchez’s PhD studentship. S.A. Tsaftaris acknowledges
the support of Canon Medical and the Royal Academy of Engineering and the Research Chairs and
Senior Research Fellowships scheme (grant RCSRF1819\825).

R EFERENCES
Dimitris Achlioptas, Frank Mcsherry, and Bernhard Schölkopf.       Sampling Tech-
  niques for Kernel Methods.       In T Dietterich, S Becker, and Z Ghahramani
  (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 14. MIT Press,
  2001.          URL    https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2001/file/
  07cb5f86508f146774a2fac4373a8e50-Paper.pdf.
Béla Bollobás, Christian Borgs, Jennifer Chayes, and Oliver Riordan. Directed Scale-Free Graphs.
   In Proceedings of the Fourteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA
   ’03, pp. 132–139, USA, 2003. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Peter Bühlmann, Jonas Peters, and Jan Ernest. CAM: Causal Additive Models, High-dimensional
  Order Search And Penalized Regression. The Annals of Statistics, 42(6):2526–2556, 2014.
Wenyu Chen, Mathias Drton, and Y Samuel Wang. On causal discovery with an equal-variance
 assumption. Biometrika, 106(4):973–980, 12 2019.
David Maxwell Chickering. Learning Bayesian Networks is NP-Complete. In Doug Fisher and
  Hans-J. Lenz (eds.), Learning from Data: Artificial Intelligence and Statistics V, pp. 121–130.
  Springer New York, New York, NY, 1996.
David Maxwell Chickering. Optimal structure identification with greedy search. Journal of machine
  learning research, 3(Nov):507–554, 2002.
Laurent Dinh, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samy Bengio. Density estimation using Real NVP. In-
  ternational Conference on Learning Representations, 12 2017.
Conor Durkan, Artur Bekasov, Iain Murray, and George Papamakarios. Neural Spline Flows. In
  Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.
Paul Erdős, Alfréd Rényi, and others. On the evolution of random graphs. Publ. Math. Inst. Hung.
  Acad. Sci, 5(1):17–60, 1960.
Nir Friedman and Daphne Koller. Being Bayesian About Network Structure. A Bayesian Approach
  to Structure Discovery in Bayesian Networks. Machine Learning, 50(1):95–125, 2003.
Tomas Geffner, Javier Antoran, Adam Foster, Wenbo Gong, Chao Ma, Emre Kiciman, Amit Sharma,
  Angus Lamb, Martin Kukla, Nick Pawlowski, Miltiadis Allamanis, and Cheng Zhang. Deep End-
  to-end Causal Inference. 2022.
Asish Ghoshal and Jean Honorio. Learning linear structural equation models in polynomial time and
  sample complexity. In Amos Storkey and Fernando Perez-Cruz (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-
  First International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 84 of Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research, pp. 1466–1475. PMLR, 8 2018.
Clark Glymour, Kun Zhang, and Peter Spirtes. Review of Causal Discovery Methods Based on
  Graphical Models. Frontiers in Genetics, 10(JUN):524, 12 2019.
N Halko, P G Martinsson, and J A Tropp. Finding Structure with Randomness: Probabilistic Al-
  gorithms for Constructing Approximate Matrix Decompositions. SIAM Review, 53(2):217–288,
  2011. doi: 10.1137/090771806. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/090771806.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models. In Advances
  on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.


                                                10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Richard Zou Horace He. functorch: JAX-like composable function transforms for PyTorch.
  https://github.com/pytorch/functorch, 2021.
Patrik Hoyer, Dominik Janzing, Joris M Mooij, Jonas Peters, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Nonlinear
  causal discovery with additive noise models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 21. Curran Associates, Inc., 2008.
Aapo Hyvärinen. Estimation of Non-Normalized Statistical Models by Score Matching. Journal of
  Machine Learning Research, 6:695–709, 2005.
Durk P Kingma and Yann Cun. Regularized estimation of image statistics by Score Matching.
  In J Lafferty, C Williams, J Shawe-Taylor, R Zemel, and A Culotta (eds.), Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 23. Curran Associates, Inc., 2010.
Sébastien Lachapelle, Philippe Brouillard, Tristan Deleu, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Gradient-
   Based Neural DAG Learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Wai-Yin Lam, Bryan Andrews, and Joseph Ramsey. Greedy Relaxations of the Sparsest Permutation
 Algorithm. In The 38th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
Yingzhen Li and Richard E Turner. Gradient Estimators for Implicit Models. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Ignavier Ng, Shengyu Zhu, Zhuangyan Fang, Haoyang Li, Zhitang Chen, and Jun Wang. Masked
  Gradient-Based Causal Structure Learning. In Proceedings of the SIAM International Conference
  on Data Mining (SDM), pp. 424–432. 2022.
Young Woong Park and Diego Klabjan. Bayesian Network Learning via Topological Order. Journal
  of Machine Learning Research, 18(99):1–32, 2017.
Jonas Peters and Peter Bühlmann. Structural intervention distance for evaluating causal graphs.
  Neural Computation, 27(3):771–799, 2015.
Jonas Peters, Joris M Mooij, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Causal Discovery with
  Continuous Additive Noise Models. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15(58):2009–2053,
  2014.
Jonas Peters, Dominik Janzing, and Bernhard Schölkopf. Elements of causal inference. MIT Press,
  2017.
Garvesh Raskutti and Caroline Uhler. Learning directed acyclic graph models based on sparsest
  permutations. Stat, 7(1):e183, 1 2018.
Paul Rolland, Volkan Cevher, Matthäus Kleindessner, Chris Russell, Dominik Janzing, Bernhard
  Schölkopf, and Francesco Locatello. Score Matching Enables Causal Discovery of Nonlinear
  Additive Noise Models. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learn-
  ing, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 18741–18753, 2022.
David E Rumelhart, Geoffrey E Hinton, and Ronald J Williams. Learning representations by back-
  propagating errors. Nature, 323(6088):533–536, 1986.
Karen Sachs, Omar Perez, Dana Pe’er, Douglas A Lauffenburger, and Garry P Nolan. Causal
  Protein-Signaling Networks Derived from Multiparameter Single-Cell Data. Science, 308(5721):
  523–529, 2005.
Pedro Sanchez and Sotirios A Tsaftaris. Diffusion Causal Models for Counterfactual Estimation. In
  Proceedings of the First Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning, volume 177 of Proceed-
  ings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 647–668. PMLR, 8 2022.
Pedro Sanchez, Jeremy P Voisey, Tian Xia, Hannah I Watson, Alison Q O’Neil, and Sotirios A
  Tsaftaris. Causal machine learning for healthcare and precision medicine. Royal Society Open
  Science, 9(8), 8 2022.
Bernhard Schölkopf and Alexander Smola. Learning with kernels. Optimization, and Beyond. MIT
  press, 1(2), 2002.


                                               11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Jiaxin Shi, Shengyang Sun, and Jun Zhu. A Spectral Approach to Gradient Estimation for Implicit
   Distributions. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International
   Conference on Machine Learning, volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
   4644–4653. PMLR, 11 2018. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/shi18a.
   html.
Shohei Shimizu, Patrik O Hoyer, Aapo Hyvrinen, and Antti Kerminen. A Linear Non-Gaussian
  Acyclic Model for Causal Discovery. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 7(72):2003–2030,
  2006.
Si Si, Cho-Jui Hsieh, and Inderjit S Dhillon. Memory Efficient Kernel Approximation. Journal of
   Machine Learning Research, 18(20):1–32, 2017. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/
   15-025.html.
Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric A Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli. Deep Unsuper-
  vised Learning using Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics. Proc. of 32nd International Conference
  on Machine Learning, 3:2246–2255, 12 2015.
L Solus, Y Wang, and C Uhler. Consistency guarantees for greedy permutation-based causal infer-
  ence algorithms. Biometrika, 108(4):795–814, 8 2021.
Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribu-
  tion. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Yang Song, Sahaj Garg, Jiaxin Shi, and Stefano Ermon. Sliced Score Matching: A Scalable Ap-
  proach to Density and Score Estimation. In Ryan P Adams and Vibhav Gogate (eds.), Proceedings
  of The 35th Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence Conference, volume 115 of Proceedings of Ma-
  chine Learning Research, pp. 574–584. PMLR, 9 2020.
Yang Song Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon,
  and Ben Poole. Score-Based Generative Modeling Through Stochastic Differential Equations. In
  ICLR, 2021.
Peter Spirtes, Clark Glymour, and Richard Scheines. Causation, Prediction, and Search. 81, 1993.
Marc Teyssier and Daphne Koller. Ordering-Based Search: A Simple and Effective Algorithm for
 Learning Bayesian Networks. In Proceedings of the Twenty-First Conference on Uncertainty in
 Artificial Intelligence, UAI’05, pp. 584–590, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2005. AUAI Press.
Tim Van den Bulcke, Koenraad Van Leemput, Bart Naudts, Piet van Remortel, Hongwu Ma, Alain
  Verschoren, Bart De Moor, and Kathleen Marchal. SynTReN: a generator of synthetic gene
  expression data for design and analysis of structure learning algorithms. BMC Bioinformatics, 7
  (1):43, 2006.
Thomas Verma and Judea Pearl. Causal Networks: Semantics and Expressiveness. In Ross D
  SHACHTER, Tod S LEVITT, Laveen N KANAL, and John F LEMMER (eds.), Uncertainty in
  Artificial Intelligence, volume 9 of Machine Intelligence and Pattern Recognition, pp. 69–76.
  North-Holland, 1990.
Pascal Vincent. A connection between score matching and denoising autoencoders. Neural Compu-
  tation, 23(7):1661–1674, 12 2011.
Xiaoqiang Wang, Yali Du, Shengyu Zhu, Liangjun Ke, Zhitang Chen, Jianye Hao, and Jun Wang.
  Ordering-Based Causal Discovery with Reinforcement Learning. In Zhi-Hua Zhou (ed.), Pro-
  ceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI, pp.
  3566–3573. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 8 2021.
Yue Yu, Jie Chen, Tian Gao, and Mo Yu. DAG-GNN: DAG structure learning with graph neural
  networks. In 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, volume 2019-
  June, pp. 12395–12406. International Machine Learning Society (IMLS), 2019.
Xun Zheng, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric P Xing. DAGs with NO TEARS: Con-
  tinuous Optimization for Structure Learning. In n Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2018.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Xun Zheng, Chen Dan, Bryon Aragam, Pradeep Ravikumar, and Eric Xing. Learning Sparse Non-
  parametric DAGs. In Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, volume 108 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 3414–
  3425. PMLR, 9 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P ROOFS
We re-write Equation 1 here for improved readability:
                                ∂ log pϵ (xj − fj )           X         ∂fi ∂ log pϵ (xi − fi )
               ∇xj log p(x) =                       −                                           .     (10)
                                       ∂xj                              ∂xj        ∂x
                                                            i∈Ch(xj )


A.1   P ROOF L EMMA 1

Proof. We start by showing the “⇐” direction by deriving Equation 1 w.r.t. xj . If xj is a leaf, only
the first term of the equation is present, then taking its derivative results in
                                                    ∂ 2 log pϵ (xl − fl ) dfl
                             Hl,l (log p(x)) =                            ·
                                                            ∂x2             dxl
                                                      2      ϵ
                                                                                                      (11)
                                                    ∂ log p (xl − fl )
                                                  =                      .
                                                            ∂x2
                                        ϵ
Therefore, only if j is a leaf and d log
                                     dx2
                                         p
                                           = a, VarX [Hl,l (log p(x))] = 0. The remaining of the proof
follows Rolland et al. (2022) (which was done for a Gaussian noise only), we prove by contradiction
that ⇒ is also true. In particular, if we consider that xj is not a leaf and Hj,j log p(x) = c, with c
being a constant, we can write
                                    ∇xj log p(x) = cxj + g(x−j ).                                     (12)
Replacing Equation 12 in to Equation 1, we have
                                ∂ log pϵ (xj − fj )            X          ∂fi ∂ log pϵ (xi − fi )
              cxj + g(x−j ) =                       −                                             .   (13)
                                        ∂x                                ∂xj        ∂x
                                                            xi ∈Ch(xj )

Let xc ∈ Ch(xj ) such that xc ̸∈ P a(Ch(xj )). xc always exist since xj is not a leaf, and it suffices
to pick a child of xc appearing at last position in some topological order. If we isolate the terms
depending on xc on the RHS of Equation 13, we have
       ∂ log pϵ (xj − fj )       X          ∂fi ∂ log pϵ (xi − fi )   ∂fc ∂ log pϵ (xc − fc )
cxj +                      −                                        =                         − g(x−j ).
               ∂x                           ∂xj        ∂x             ∂xj         ∂x
                            xi ∈Ch(xj ),xi ̸=xc
                                                                                                      (14)
Deriving both sides w.r.t. xc , since the LHS of Equation 14 does not depend on xc , we can write
                                    ∂fc ∂ log pϵ (xc − fc )

                              ∂
                                                            − g(x−j ) = 0
                            ∂xc ∂xj              ∂x
                                                          a                                      (15)
                                  ∂fc ∂ log pϵ (x
                                                 c − fc
                                                       )
                                                       :    ∂g(x−j )
                            ⇒                            =
                                  ∂x    ∂x2

                                   j                          ∂x          c

Since g does not depend on xj , ∂f
                                ∂xj does not depend on xj neither, implying that fc is linear in xj ,
                                  c


contradicting the non-linearity assumption.

A.2   P ROOF T HEOREM 1

Proof. Using Equation 1, we will derive expressions for each of the elements in Equation 6 and
show that it is equivalent to δl in Equation 5. First, note that the score of a leaf node xl can be
denoted as:
                                           ∂ log pϵ (xj − fj )
                           ∇xl log p(x) =
                                                  ∂xj
                                           ∂ log pϵ (xl − fl ) d (xl − fl )                    (16)
                                        =                      ·
                                                  ∂x               dxl
                                           ∂ log pϵ (xl − fl )
                                        =
                                                  ∂x

                                                       14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Second, replacing Equation 16 into each element of Hl (log p(x)) ∈ Rd , we can write

                                                  ∂
                         Hl,j (log p(x)) =           [∇xl log p(x)]
                                                 ∂xj
                                                 ∂ 2 log pϵ (xl − fl ) d (xl − fl )
                                             =                        ·                                       (17)
                                                         ∂x2               dxj
                                                 ∂ 2 log pϵ (xl − fl ) dfl
                                             =                        ·     .
                                                         ∂x2            dxj

If j = l in Equation 17, we have

                                                    ∂ 2 log pϵ (xl − fl ) dfl
                             Hl,l (log p(x)) =                             ·
                                                            ∂x2              dxl
                                                                                                              (18)
                                                    ∂ 2 log pϵ (xl − fl )
                                                  =                       .
                                                            ∂x2
Finally, replacing Equations 16, 17 and 11 into the Equation 5 for a single node xj , if j ̸= l, we have

                                       Hl,j (log p(x)) · ∇xl log p(x)
                               δj =
                                               Hl,l (log p(x))
                                       ∂ log pϵ (xl −fl ) dfl           ϵ

                                             ∂x2         · dxj · ∂ log p∂x(xl −fl )
                                   =                                                                          (19)
                                                     ∂ log pϵ (xl −fl )
                                                           ∂x2
                                       dfl ∂ log pϵ (xl − fl )
                                   =         ·                          .
                                       dxj              ∂x

The last line in Equation 19 is the same as in Equation 5 from Lemma 2, proving that δj can be
written using the first and second order derivative of the log-likelihood.


B    S CORE OF N ONLINEAR ANM WITH G AUSSIAN NOISE

A SCM entails a distribution
                                                   d
                                                   Y
                                       p(x) =           p(xi | P a(xi )),                                     (20)
                                                  i=1

over the variables x (Peters et al., 2017) By assuming that the noise variables ϵi ∼ N (0, σi2 ) and
inserting the ANM function, Equation 20 can be written as
                                       d                             2             d
                                   1X          xi − fi (P a(xi ))               1X
                   log p(x) = −                                             −         log(2πσi2 ).            (21)
                                   2 i=1              σi                        2 i=1

The score of p(x) can hence be written as

                            xj − fj (P a(xj ))               X          ∂fi            xi − fi (P a(xi ))
         ∇xj log p(x) = −                      +                            (P a(xi ))                    .   (22)
                                   σj2                                  ∂xj                   σi2
                                                        i∈children(j)



C    V ISUALISATION OF THE S CORE ’ S JACOBIAN FOR T WO VARIABLES

Considering a two variables problem where the causal mechanisms are B = fω (A)+ϵB and A = ϵA
with ϵA , ϵB ∼ N (0, 1) and fω being a two-layer MLP with randomly initialised weights. Note that,
                              2
in Figure 5, the variance of ∂ log∂B
                                   p(A,B)
                                     2    , while not 0 as predicted by Equation 2, is smaller than
∂ 2 log p(A,B)
      ∂A2      allowing discovery of the true causal direction.


                                                        15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 5: Visualisation of the diagonal of the score’s Jacobian estimated with a diffusion model as
in Equation 7 for a two-variable SCM where A → B.

Table 1: MLP architecture. The hyperparameters of each Linear layer depend on d such that big
= max(1024, 5 ∗ d) and small = max(128, 3 ∗ d).

                                 Layer           Hyperparameters
                                 Linear          Ch: (d + 1, small)
                                 LeakyReLU
                                 LayerNorm
                                 Dropout         Prob: 0.2
                                 Linear          Ch: (small, big)
                                 LeakyReLU
                                 LayerNorm
                                 Linear          Ch: (big, big)
                                 LeakyReLU
                                 Linear          Ch: (big, big)
                                 LeakyReLU
                                 Linear          Ch: (big, d)


D     E XPERIMENTS D ETAILS

D.1   H YPERPARAMETERS OF DPM TRAINING

We now describe the hyperparameters for the diffusion training. We use number of time steps
T = 100, βt is a linearly scheduled between βmin = 0.0001 and βmax = 0.02. The model is trained
according to Equation 3 which follows Ho et al. (2020). During sampling, t is sampled from a
Uniform distribution.

D.2   N EURAL A RCHITECTURE

The neural network follows a simple MLP with 5 Linear layers, LeakyReLU activation function,
Layer Normalization and Dropout in the first layer. The full architecture is detailed in Table 1.

D.3   M ETRICS

For each method, we compute the
SHD. Structural Hamming distance between the output and the true causal graph, which counts the
number of missing, falsely detected, or reversed edges.
SID. Structural Intervention Distance is based on a graphical criterion only and quantifies the
closeness between two DAGs in terms of their corresponding causal inference statements(Peters
& Bühlmann, 2015).
Order Divergence. Rolland et al. (2022) propose this quantity for measuring how well the topolog-
ical order is estimated. For an ordering π, and a target adjacency matrix A, we define the topological


                                                 16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


order divergence Dtop (π, A) as
                                                   d
                                                   X X
                                   Dtop (π, A) =                   Aij .                            (23)
                                                    i=1 j:πi >πj
If π is a correct topological order for A, then Dtop (π, A) = 0. Otherwise, Dtop (π, A) counts
the number of edges that cannot be recovered due to the choice of topological order. Therefore, it
provides a lower bound on the SHD of the final algorithm (irrespective of the pruning method).

E     OTHER R ESULTS
E.1   R EAL DATA

We consider two real datasets: (i) Sachs: A protein signaling network based on expression levels of
proteins and phospholipids (Sachs et al., 2005). We consider only the observational data (n = 853
samples) since our method targets discovery of causal mechanisms when only observational data is
available. The ground truth causal graph given by Sachs et al. (2005) has 11 nodes and 17 edges.
(ii) SynTReN: We also evaluate the models on a pseudo-real dataset sampled from SynTReN gener-
ator (Van den Bulcke et al., 2006). Results, in Table 2, show that our method is competitive against
other state-of-the-art causal discovery baselines on real datasets.
                          Table 2: SHD and SID results over real datasets.

                                                Sachs          SynTReN
                                              SHD SID         SHD   SID
                            CAM                12    55       40.5 152.3
                            GraN-DAG           13    47       34.0 161.7
                            SCORE              12    45       36.2 193.4
                            DiffAN (ours)      13    56       39.7 173.5

E.2   OVERFITTING

The data used for topological ordering (inference) is a subset of the training data. Therefore, it is not
obvious if overfitting would be an issue with our algorithm. Therefore, we run an experiment where
we fix the number of epochs to 2000 considered high for a set of runs and use early stopping for
another set in order to verify if overfitting is an issue. On average across all 20 nodes datasets, the
early stopping strategy output an ordering diverge of 9.5 whilst overfitting is at 11.1 showing that
the method does not benefit from overfitting.

E.3   O PTIMAL t FOR SCORE ESTIMATION

As noted by Vincent (2011), the best approximation of the score by a learned denoising function is
when the training signal-to-noise (SNR) ratio is low. In diffusion model training, t = 0 corresponds
to the coefficient with lowest SNR. However, we found empirically that the best score estimate varies
somehow randomly across different values of t. Therefore, we run the the leaf finding function
(Equation 9) N times for values of t evenly spaced in the [0, T ] interval and choose the best leaf
based on majority vote. We show in Figure 6 that majority voting is a better approach than choosing
a constant value for t.

E.4   A BLATIONS OF D IFF AN M ASKING AND G REEDY

We now verify how DiffAN masking and DiffAN greedy compare against the original version de-
tailed in the main text which computes the deciduous score. Here, we use the same datasets decribed
in Section 5.1 which comprises 4 (20ER1, 20ER5, 20SF1, 20SF5) synthetic dataset types with 27
variations over seeds, noise type and noise scale.
DiffAN Greedy. A greedy version of the algorithm re-trains the ϵθ after each leaf removal iteration.
In this case, the deciduous score is not computed, decreasing the complexity w.r.t. d but increasing
w.r.t. n. DiffAN greedy has O(nd2 ) ordering complexity.


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 6: The distribution of order divergence measured for different values of t is highly variable.
Therefore, we show that we obtain a better approximation with majority voting.


We observe, in Figure 7, that the greedy version performs the best but it is the slowest, as seen in
Figure 8. DiffAN masking

               400
                            method
               300         DiffAN
                           DiffANM_masking
               200         DiffAN_greedy
         SID


               100

                 0

                             R1                 F1                   R5            F5
                          20E                20S                  20E           20S
                                                     Experiment

                       Figure 7: SID metric for different versions of DiffAN.


E.5   D ETAILED R ESULTS

We present the numerical results for the violinplots in Section 5.1 in Tables 3 and 4. The results are
presented in meanstd with statistics acquired over experiments with 3 seeds.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                  200

        runtime   150

                  100

                   50


                                    R1                 F1                   R5              F5
                                20E                 20S                  20E             20S
                                                            Experiment

                        Figure 8: Runtime in seconds for different versions of DiffAN.


                                          Table 3: Erdös-Rényi (ER) graphs.

    Exp Name            noisetype        method              shd          sid           runtime (seconds)
    20ER1               exp              CAM                 6.503.21     35.5027.54    112.1769.57
                                         DiffAN              7.674.68     38.8324.94    30.071.60
                                         DiffAN Greedy       6.674.68     34.1718.37    121.664.19
                                         GranDAG             12.835.60    65.1721.99    341.6974.82
                                         SCORE               4.172.86     17.5011.26    50.4941.87
                        gauss            CAM                 1.331.03     6.506.69      83.2711.75
                                         DiffAN              8.174.02     41.6724.21    30.982.28
                                         DiffAN Greedy       3.332.16     18.3311.40    129.109.54
                                         GranDAG             10.508.62    44.5037.90    304.0717.39
                                         SCORE               8.674.13     41.6721.54    24.770.20
                        laplace          CAM                 0.830.98     4.006.96      90.8515.49
                                         DiffAN              2.332.07     8.674.68      31.011.18
                                         DiffAN Greedy       3.001.67     14.334.76     175.3019.71
                                         GranDAG             10.335.82    41.1724.98    302.0016.23
                                         SCORE               4.173.43     24.1719.57    26.621.88
    20ER5               exp              CAM                 60.679.77    240.0033.02   105.6527.49
                                         DiffAN              67.504.32    278.8322.83   30.332.12
                                         DiffAN Greedy       63.006.07    266.3350.25   186.213.28
                                         GranDAG             80.177.99    304.1726.90   310.2413.71
                                         SCORE               55.837.55    190.6732.91   18.413.73
                        gauss            CAM                 64.675.85    214.6711.11   130.8226.10
                                         DiffAN              68.508.12    289.0042.31   29.581.99
                                         DiffAN Greedy       63.176.18    228.8332.86   178.177.17
                                         GranDAG             81.006.72    273.0046.72   319.1718.81
                                         SCORE               63.506.69    233.8339.65   21.296.63
                        laplace          CAM                 68.007.04    228.5027.86   157.7022.55
                                         DiffAN              68.837.86    248.6730.36   29.521.73
                                         DiffAN Greedy       67.338.55    238.0035.19   176.714.80
                                         GranDAG             82.676.47    271.3335.19   305.2913.93
                                         SCORE               66.337.09    218.6725.81   23.014.33


                                                            19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Table 4: Scale Free (SF) graphs.

   Exp Name     noisetype   method             shd          sid           runtime (seconds)
   20SF1        exp         CAM                7.172.86     32.6719.54    85.0827.71
                            DiffAN             8.672.80     38.6720.99    29.231.36
                            DiffAN Greedy      9.172.32     35.3317.26    183.804.81
                            GranDAG            15.502.59    68.6724.19    298.884.96
                            SCORE              5.835.04     23.5023.65    26.131.39
                gauss       CAM                1.832.23     9.1710.21     84.4619.07
                            DiffAN             9.836.24     56.6741.59    30.190.92
                            DiffAN Greedy      7.335.32     46.8338.42    175.638.82
                            GranDAG            12.172.71    46.6716.22    299.2513.14
                            SCORE              8.174.45     41.6728.75    26.291.83
                laplace     CAM                2.833.92     7.8310.93     85.1521.84
                            DiffAN             6.003.74     24.1716.18    29.682.00
                            DiffAN Greedy      4.833.66     17.1717.47    177.058.82
                            GranDAG            9.503.27     35.6720.84    295.122.88
                            SCORE              5.673.50     22.5015.27    26.391.79
   20SF5        exp         CAM                47.835.78    228.8353.89   113.8213.32
                            DiffAN             46.8311.48   243.5034.68   30.032.17
                            DiffAN Greedy      43.506.89    236.8323.17   173.133.52
                            GranDAG            60.678.80    275.0022.56   284.345.33
                            SCORE              38.509.14    180.3357.44   19.792.92
                gauss       CAM                46.838.11    199.1753.13   130.4120.55
                            DiffAN             50.834.62    259.5047.54   28.581.16
                            DiffAN Greedy      45.176.15    224.1741.80   174.903.69
                            GranDAG            61.674.03    241.6743.11   292.777.29
                            SCORE              44.505.24    217.8350.05   19.772.51
                laplace     CAM                49.509.01    191.3327.43   160.5323.16
                            DiffAN             52.005.66    230.6750.66   29.051.60
                            DiffAN Greedy      47.009.94    191.3326.16   173.423.52
                            GranDAG            65.007.13    262.5044.23   295.407.72
                            SCORE              46.6710.03   193.8334.14   43.8427.14


                                               20
