Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F ED E X P: S PEEDING U P F EDERATED AVERAGING VIA
E XTRAPOLATION
 Divyansh Jhunjhunwala1 , Shiqiang Wang2 , Gauri Joshi1
 1
   Carnegie Mellon University, 2 IBM Research
 {djhunjhu, gaurij}@andrew.cmu.edu, wangshiq@us.ibm.com


                                            A BSTRACT

         Federated Averaging (FedAvg) remains the most popular algorithm for Federated
         Learning (FL) optimization due to its simple implementation, stateless nature, and
         privacy guarantees combined with secure aggregation. Recent work has sought to
         generalize the vanilla averaging in FedAvg to a generalized gradient descent step
         by treating client updates as pseudo-gradients and using a server step size. While
         the use of a server step size has been shown to provide performance improvement
         theoretically, the practical benefit of the server step size has not been seen in most
         existing works. In this work, we present FedExP, a method to adaptively deter-
         mine the server step size in FL based on dynamically varying pseudo-gradients
         throughout the FL process. We begin by considering the overparameterized convex
         regime, where we reveal an interesting similarity between FedAvg and the Pro-
         jection Onto Convex Sets (POCS) algorithm. We then show how FedExP can be
         motivated as a novel extension to the extrapolation mechanism that is used to speed
         up POCS. Our theoretical analysis later also discusses the implications of FedExP
         in underparameterized and non-convex settings. Experimental results show that
         FedExP consistently converges faster than FedAvg and competing baselines on
         a range of realistic FL datasets.


1   I NTRODUCTION

Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a key distributed learning paradigm in which a central server
orchestrates the training of a machine learning model across a network of devices. FL is based on
the fundamental premise that data never leaves a clients device, as clients only communicate model
updates with the server. Federated Averaging or FedAvg, first introduced by McMahan et al. (2017),
remains the most popular algorithm in this setting due to the simplicity of its implementation, stateless
nature (i.e., clients do not maintain local parameters during training) and the ability to incorporate
privacy-preserving protocols such as secure aggregation (Bonawitz et al., 2016; Kadhe et al., 2020).
Slowdown Due to Heterogeneity. One of the most persistent problems in FedAvg is the slowdown
in model convergence due to data heterogeneity across clients. Clients usually perform multiple
steps of gradient descent on their heterogeneous objectives before communicating with the server
in FedAvg, which leads to what is colloquially known as client drift error (Karimireddy et al.,
2019). The effect of heterogeneity is further exacerbated by the constraint that only a fraction
of the total number of clients may be available for training in every round (Kairouz et al., 2021).
Various techniques have been proposed to combat this slowdown, among the most popular being
variance reduction techniques such as Karimireddy et al. (2019); Mishchenko et al. (2022); Mitra et al.
(2021), but they either lead to clients becoming stateful, add extra computation or communication
requirements or have privacy limitations.
Server Step Size. Recent work has sought to deal with this slowdown by using two separate
step sizes in FedAvg – a client step size used by the clients to minimize their local objectives
and a server step size used by the server to update the global model by treating client updates as
pseudo-gradients (Karimireddy et al., 2019; Reddi et al., 2021). To√achieve
                                                                            the fastest convergence
rate, these works propose keeping the client step size as O 1/τ T and the server step size as
   √
O τ M , where T is the number of communication rounds, τ is the number of local steps and
M is the number of clients. Using a small client step size mitigates client drift, and a large server


                                                   1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


step size prevents global slowdown. While this idea may be asymptotically optimal, it is not always
effective in practical non-asymptotic and communication-limited settings (Charles & Konečnỳ, 2020).
In practice, a small client step size severely slows down convergence
in the initial rounds and cannot be fully compensated for by a large


                                                                                                   0.1
                                                                            5.8 8.2 42 55 9.1
server step size (see Figure 1). Also, if local objectives differ signif-


                                                                           Server Step Size (ηg)
icantly, then it may be beneficial to use smaller values of the server                            60


                                                                                                   0.3
                                                                            16  46  58 71  55
step size (Malinovsky et al., 2022).
                                                                                                         46    60     73    77   6.2   40


                                                                                                   1
Therefore, we seek to answer the following question: For a moderate
                                                                                                         36    57     60    50    6


                                                                                                   3
client step size, can we adapt the server step size according to the                                                                   20
local progress made by the clients and the heterogeneity of their ob-                                    10    6.4   6.1   5.7   4.8


                                                                                                   10
jectives? In general, it is challenging to answer this question because                                  0.01 0.03 0.1 0.3         1
it is difficult to obtain knowledge of the heterogeneity between the                                         Client Step Size (ηℓ)
local objectives and appropriately use it to adapt the server step size.
                                                                        Figure 1: Test accuracy (%)
Our Contributions. In this paper, we take a novel approach to achieved by different server
address the question posed above. We begin by considering the and client step sizes on
case where the models are overparameterized, i.e., the number of EMNIST dataset (Cohen et al.,
model parameters is larger than the total number of data points 2017) after 50 rounds (details
across all clients. This is often true for modern deep neural network of experimental setup are in
models (Zhang et al., 2017; Jacot et al., 2018) and the small datasets Section 6 and Appendix D).
collected by edge clients in the FL setting. In this overparameterized
regime, the global minimizer becomes a common minimizer for all local objectives, even though they
may be arbitrarily heterogeneous. Using this fact, we obtain a novel connection between FedAvg and
the Projection Onto Convex Sets (POCS) algorithm, which is used to find a point in the intersection
of some convex sets.
Based on this connection, we find an interesting analogy between the server step size and the
extrapolation parameter that is used to speed up POCS (Pierra, 1984). We propose new extensions to
the extrapolated POCS algorithm to support inexact and noisy projections as in FedAvg. In particular,
we derive a time-varying bound on the progress made by clients towards the global minimum and
show how this bound can be used to adaptively estimate a good server step size at each round. The
result is our proposed algorithm FedExP, which is a method to adaptively determine the server step
size in each round of FL based on the pseudo-gradients in that round.
Although motivated by the overparameterized regime, our proposed FedExP algorithm performs
well (both theoretically and empirically) in the general case, where the model can be either overpa-
rameterized or underparameterized. For this general case, we derive the convergence upper bounds
for both convex and non-convex objectives. Some highlights of our work are as follows.

• We reveal a novel connection between FedAvg and the POCS algorithm for finding a point in the
  intersection of convex sets.
• The proposed FedExP algorithm is simple to implement with virtually no additional communica-
  tion, computation, or storage required at clients or the server. It is well suited for both cross-device
  and cross-silo FL, and is compatible with partial client participation.
• Experimental results show that FedExP converges 1.4–2× faster than FedAvg and most compet-
  ing baselines on standard FL tasks.

Related Work. Popular algorithms for adaptively tuning the step size when training neural
networks include Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011) and its variants RMSProp (Tieleman et al., 2012)
and Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012). These algorithms consider the notion of coordinate-wise adaptivity
and adapt the step size separately for each dimension of the parameter vector based on the magnitude
of the accumulated gradients. While these algorithms can be extended to the federated setting
using the concept of pseudo-gradients as done by Reddi et al. (2021), these extensions are agnostic
to inherent data heterogeneity across clients, which is central to FL. On the contrary, FedExP is
explicitly designed for FL settings and uses a client-centric notion of adaptivity that utilizes the
heterogeneity of client updates in each round. The work closest to us is Johnson et al. (2020), which
proposes a method to adapt the step size for large-batch training by estimating the gradient diversity
(Yin et al., 2018) of a minibatch. This result has been improved in a recent work by Horváth et al.
(2022). However, both Johnson et al. (2020); Horváth et al. (2022) focus on the centralized setting. In


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


FedExP, we use a similar concept, but within a federated environment which comes with a stronger
theoretical motivation, since client data are inherently diverse in this case. We defer a more detailed
discussion of other adaptive step size methods and related work to Appendix A.

2     P ROBLEM F ORMULATION AND P RELIMINARIES
As in most standard federated learning frameworks, we consider the problem of optimizing the model
parameters w ∈ Rd to minimize the global objective function F (w) defined as follows:
                                                                  M
                                                            1 X
                                       min F (w) :=               Fi (w),                                           (1)
                                    w∈Rd                    M i=1

where Fi (w) := |D1i | δi ∈Di ℓ(w, δi ) is the empirical risk objective computed on the local data
                        P

set Di at the the i-th client. Here, ℓ(·, ·) is a loss function and δi represents a data sample from the
empirical local data distribution Di . The total number of clients in the FL system is denoted by M .
Without loss of generality, we assume that all the M client objectives are given equal weight in the
global objective function defined in (1). Our algorithm and analysis can be directly extended to the
case where client objectives are unequally weighted, e.g., proportional to local dataset sizes |Di |.
FedAvg. We focus on solving (1) using FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021). At
round t of FedAvg, the server sends the current global model w(t) to all clients. Upon receiving the
global model, clients perform τ steps of local stochastic gradient descent (SGD) to compute their
            (t)
updates {∆i }M  i=1 for round t as follows.
                             (t,k+1)         (t,k)                    (t,k)
    Perform Local SGD: wi               = wi         − ηl ∇Fi (wi             , ξ (t,k) ) ∀k ∈ {0, 1, . . . , τ − 1} (2)
                                       (t)               (t,τ )
    Compute Local Difference: ∆i = w(t) − wi                                                                        (3)
         (t,0)                                                                               (t,k)
where wi      = w(t) for all i ∈ [M ], ηl is the client step size and ∇Fi (wi , ξ (t,k) ) represents a
                                                  (t,k)
stochastic gradient computed on the minibatch ξi        sampled randomly from Di .
Server Optimization in FedAvg. In vanilla FedAvg (McMahan et al., 2017), the global model
                                                                                       1
                                                                                         PM      (t,τ )
would simply be updated as the average of the client local models, that is, w(t+1) = M      i=1 wi      .
To improve over this, recent work (Reddi et al., 2021; Hsu et al., 2019) has focused on optimizing the
                                                           (t)
server aggregation process by treating the client updates ∆i as “pseudo-gradients” and multiplying
by a server step size when aggregating them as follows.
                 Generalized FedAvg Global Update:      w(t+1) = w(t) − ηg ∆ ¯ (t)              (4)

where ∆¯ (t) = 1 PM ∆(t) is the aggregated client update in round t and ηg acts as server step size.
                M    i=1 i
Note that setting ηg = 1 recovers the vanilla FedAvg update.
While the importance of the server step size has been theoretically well established in these works, we
find that its practical relevance has not been explored. In this work, we take a step towards bridging
this gap between theory and practice by adaptively tuning the value of ηg that we use in every round.

3     P ROPOSED A LGORITHM : F ED E X P
Before discussing our proposed algorithm, we first highlight a useful and novel connection between
FedAvg and the POCS algorithm used to find a point in the intersection of some convex sets.

3.1    M OTIVATION FOR E XTRAPOLATION

Connection Between FedAvg and POCS in the Overparameterized Convex Regime. Consider
the case where the local objectives of the clients {Fi (w)}M  i=1 are convex. In this case, we know
that the set of minimizers of Fi (w) given by Si∗ = {w : w ∈ arg min Fi (w)} is also a convex
set for all i ∈ [M ]. Now let us assume that we are in the overparameterized regime where d is
sufficiently larger than the total number of data points across clients. In this regime, the model can


                                                        3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


fit all the training data at clients simultaneously and hence be a minimizer for all local objectives.
Thus we assume that the global minimum satisfies w∗ ∈ Si∗ , ∀i ∈ [M ]. Our original problem in (1)
can then be reformulated as trying to find a point in the intersection of convex sets {Si∗ }Mi=1 since
w∗ ∈ Si∗ , ∀i ∈ [M ]. One of the most popular algorithms to do so is the Projection Onto Convex Sets
(POCS) algorithm (Gurin et al., 1967). In POCS, at every iteration the current model is updated as
follows1 .                                                      P
                                            (t+1)     (t)       1    M        (t)        (t)
        Generalized POCS update:          wPOCS = wPOCS − λ M            P
                                                                     i=1 i (w POCS ) − w POCS       (5)
             (t)                         (t)
where Pi (wPOCS ) is a projection of wPOCS on the set Si∗ and λ is known as the relaxation coefficient
(Combettes, 1997).
Extrapolation in POCS. Combettes (1997) notes that POCS has primarily been used with λ = 1,
with studies failing to demonstrate a systematic benefit of λ < 1 or λ > 1 (Mandel, 1984). This
prompts Combettes (1997) to study an adaptive method of setting λ, first introduced by Pierra (1984)
as follows:
                                                               (t) 2
                                       PM           (t)
                             (t)          i=1 Pi (w ) − w
                            λ =             PM                       2 .
                                         1              (t) ) − w(t)
                                    M M           P
                                              i=1 i (w
Pierra (1984) refer to the POCS algorithm with this adaptive λ(t) as Extrapolated Parallel Projection
Method (EPPM). This is referred to as extrapolation since we always have λ(t) ≥ 1 by Jensen’s
inequality. The intuition behind EPPM lies in showing that the update with the proposed λ(t)
                     (t+1)       2       (t)         2
always satisfies wPOCS − w∗ < wPOCS − w∗ , thereby achieving asymptotic convergence.
Experimental results in Pierra (1984) and Combettes (1997) show that EPPM can give an order-wise
speedup over POCS, motivating us to study this algorithm in the FL context.

3.2   I NCORPORATING E XTRAPOLATION IN FL

Note that to implement POCS we do not need to explicitly know the sets {Si∗ }M        i=1 ; we only need
to know how to compute a projection on these sets. From this point of view, we see that FedAvg
proceeds similarly to POCS. In each round, clients receive w(t) from the server and run multiple
                                                         (t,τ )
SGD steps to compute an “approximate projection” wi             of w(t) on their solution sets Si∗ . These
approximate projections are then aggregated at the server to update the global model. In this case, the
relaxation coefficient λ plays exactly the same role as the server step size ηg in FedAvg.
Inspired by this observation and the idea of extrapolation in POCS, we seek to understand if a similar
idea can be applied to tune the server step size ηg in FedAvg. Note that the EPPM algorithm makes
use of exact projections to prove convergence which is not available to us in FL settings. This is
further complicated by the fact that the client updates are noisy due to the stochasticity in sampling
minibatches. We find that in order to use an EPPM-like step size the use of exact projections can be
relaxed to the following condition, which bounds the distance of the local models from the global
minimum as follows.
                                                                             2                  2
                                                     1
                                                       PM       (t,τ )
      Approximate projection condition in FL: M          i=1 wi        − w∗ ≤ w(t) − w∗             (6)
                     (t,τ )
where w(t) and {wi }M                                                                                ∗
                           i=1 are the global and local client models, respectively, at round t and w is
a global minimum. Intuitively, this condition suggests that after the local updates, the local models are
closer to the optimum w∗ on average as compared to model w(t) at the beginning of that round. We
first show that this condition (6) holds in the overparameterized convex regime under some conditions.
The full proofs for lemmas and theorems in this paper are included in Appendix C.
Lemma 1. Let Fi (w) be convex and L-smooth for all i ∈ [M ] and let w∗ be a common minimizer
of all Fi (w). Assuming clients run full-batch gradient descent to minimize their local objectives with
ηl ≤ 1/L, then (6) holds for all t and τ ≥ 1.
In the case with stochastic gradient noise or when the model is underparameterized, although (6)
may not hold in general, we expect it to be satisfied at least during the initial phase of training when
             2
 w(t) − w∗ is large and clients make common progress towards a minimum.
   1
     We refer here to a parallel implementation of POCS. This is also known as Parallel Projection Method (PPM)
and Simultaneous Iterative Reconstruction Technique (SIRT) in some literature (Combettes, 1997).


                                                      4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Proposed Algorithm: FedExP
 1: Input: w(0) , number of rounds T , local iteration steps τ , parameters ηl , ϵ
 2: For t = 0, . . . , T − 1 communication rounds do:
 3:    Global server does:
 4:    Send w(t) to all clients
 5:    Clients i ∈ [M ] in parallel do:
                (t,0)
 6:      Set wi     ← w(t,0)
 7:      For k = 0, . . . , τ − 1 local iterations do:
                       (t,k+1)        (t,k)              (t,k) (t,k)
 8:        Update wi            ← wi          − ηl ∇Fi (wi , ξi )
                (t)                 (t,τ )
 9:      Send ∆i ← w(t) − wi               to the server
10:    Global server does:
                                                                               ¯ (t) 2 +ϵ
                                                               n           .               o
11:      Compute ∆  ¯ (t) ← 1 PM ∆(t) and ηg(t) ← max 1, PM ∆(t) 2 2M ∆
                              M    i=1      i                        i=1 i
                                                    (t) ¯ (t)
12:       Update global model with w(t+1) ← w(t) − ηg ∆

                                                                                                      (t)
Given that (6) holds, we now consider the generalized FedAvg update with a server step size ηg in
                                           (t)
round t. Our goal is to find the value of ηg that minimizes the distance of w(t+1) to w∗ :
                          2                  2
          w(t+1) − w∗ = w(t) − w∗ + (ηg )2 ∆
                                                  (t)   ¯ (t) 2 − 2ηg(t) w(t) − w∗ , ∆¯ (t) .  (7)
Setting the derivative of the RHS of (7) to zero we have,
                                             PM D (t)             (t)
                                                                      E
                        w (t)
                              − w  ∗ ¯ (t)
                                    , ∆              w − w ∗ , ∆i         PM      (t) 2
            (t)                                 i=1                        i=1 ∆i
          (ηg )opt =                       =                            ≥               ,               (8)
                              ¯ (t) 2
                              ∆                     M ∆   ¯ (t) 2         2M ∆ ¯ (t) 2
                                                        2          2          2                 (t)
where the last inequality follows from ⟨a, b⟩ = 12 [∥a∥ + ∥b∥ − ∥a − b∥ ], definition of ∆i in (3)
                                                    (t)                        (t)
and (6). Note that depending on the values of {∆i }M    i=0 , we may have (ηg )opt ≫ 1. Thus, we see
that (6) acts as a suitable replacement for projection to justify the use of extrapolation in FL settings.

3.3   P ROPOSED A LGORITHM

Motivated by our findings above, we propose the following server step size for the generalized
FedAvg update at each round:
                                                 PM         (t) 2
                                          (                        )
                          (t)                       i=1 ∆i
                        (ηg )FedExP = max 1,                         .                      (9)
                                               2M ( ∆ ¯ (t) 2 + ϵ)
We term our algorithm Federated Extrapolated Averaging or FedExP, in reference to the original
EPPM algorithm which inspired this work. Note that our proposed step size satisfies the property
       (t)         (t)            (t)
that (ηg )opt − (ηg )FedExP ≤ (ηg )opt − 1 when (6) holds, which can be seen by comparing
                                                 (t)
(8) and (9). Since (7) depends quadratically on ηg , we can show that in this case w(t+1) −
  (t)       ¯ (t) − w∗ 2 ≤ w(t+1) − w∗ 2 , implying we are at least as close to the optimum as
(ηg )FedExP ∆
                                                             (t)            (t)
the FedAvg update. In the rest of the paper, we denote (ηg )FedExP as ηg when the context is clear.
Importance of Adding Small Constant to Denominator. In the case where (6) does not hold, using
the lower bound established in (8) can cause the proposed step size to blow up. This is especially true
                                                                          2
towards the end of training where we can have ∆    ¯ (t) 2 ≈ 0 but ∆(t) ̸= 0. Thus we propose to
                                                                        i
add a small positive constant ϵ to the denominator in (9) to prevent this blow-up. For a large enough ϵ
our algorithm reduces to FedAvg and therefore tuning ϵ can be a useful tool to interpolate between
vanilla averaging and extrapolation. Similar techniques exist in adaptive algorithms such as Adam
(Kingma & Ba, 2015) and Adagrad (Duchi et al., 2011) to improve stability.
Compatibility with Partial Client Participation and Secure Aggregation. Note that FedExP
                                                                                     (t)
can be easily extended to support partial participation of clients by calculating ηg using only the
updates of participating clients, i.e., the averaging and division in (9) will be only over the clients
that participate in the round. Furthermore, since the server only needs to estimate the average of
                           (t)                                                                  ¯ (t) .
pseudo-gradient norms, ηg can be computed with secure aggregation, similar to computing ∆


                                                    5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                    (t)
Connection with Gradient Diversity. We see that our lower bound on (ηg )opt naturally depends
on the similarity of the client updates with each other. In the case where τ = 1 and clients run
                                                             PM                 2                   2
full-batch gradient descent, our lower bound (8) reduces to i=1 ∇Fi (w(t) )       2M ∇F (w(t) )
which is used as a measure of data-heterogeneity in many FL works (Wang et al., 2020; Haddadpour &
Mahdavi, 2019). Our lower bound suggests using larger step-sizes as this gradient diversity increases,
which can be a useful tool to speed up training in heterogeneous settings. This is an orthogonal
approach to existing optimization methods to tackle heterogeneity such as Karimireddy et al. (2020b);
Li et al. (2020); Acar et al. (2021), which propose additional regularization terms or adding control
variates to the local client objectives to limit the impact of heterogeneity.

4    C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS
Our analysis so far has focused on the overparameterized convex regime to motivate our algorithm. In
this section we discuss the convergence of our algorithm in the presence of underparameterization and
non-convexity. We would like to emphasize that (6) is not needed to show convergence of FedExP;
it is only needed to motivate why FedExP might be beneficial. To show general convergence, we
only require that ηl be sufficiently small and the standard assumptions stated below.
Challenge in incorporating stochastic noise and partial participation. Our current analysis fo-
cuses on the case where clients are computing full-batch gradients in every step with full participation.
                                                                                                      (t)
This is primarily due to the difficulty in decoupling the effect of stochastic and sampling noise on ηg
                                (t) M
                       h {∆i }ii=1 . To beh moreispecific,
and the pseudo-gradients                                       if we use ξ (t) to denote the randomness
                           (t) ¯ (t)             (t)          ¯
                                                               (t)
at round t, then Eξ(t) (ηg )∆         ̸= Eξ(t) (ηg ) Eξ(t) ∆         which significantly complicates the
proof. This is purely a theoretical limitation. Empirically, our results in Section 6 show that FedExP
performs well with both SGD and partial client participation.
Assumption 1. (L-smoothness) Local objective Fi (w) is differentiable and L-smooth for all i ∈ [M ],
i.e., ∥∇Fi (w) − ∇Fi (w′ )∥ ≤ L∥w − w′ ∥, ∀w, w′ ∈ Rd .
Assumption 2. (Bounded data heterogenenity at optimum) The norm of the client gradients at the
                                              1
                                                PM                ∗ 2
global optima w∗ is bounded as follows: M          i=1 ∥∇Fi (w )∥ ≤ σ∗ .
                                                                                  2

Theorem 1. (Fi are convex) Under Assumptions 1,2 and assuming clients compute full-batch
gradients with full participation and ηl ≤ 6τ1L , the iterates {w(t) } generated by FedExP satisfy,
                                            ∗ 2
                                                !
                                   (0)
                                 w     − w
       F (w̄(T ) ) − F ∗ ≤ O                               2                   2                   2

                                    PT −1 (t) + O ηl τ (τ − 1)Lσ∗ + O ηl τ σ∗                            , (10)
                               ηl τ t=0 ηg           |          {z               }      | {z }
                           |         {z          }     T2 :=client drift error      T3 :=noise at optimum
                             T1 :=initialization error
                                                                         PT −1  (t) (t)
        (t)                                                                t=0 ηg w
where ηg is the FedExP server step size at round t and w̄(T ) =            PT −1 (t) .
                                                                             t=0 ηg


For the non-convex case, we need the data heterogeneity to be bounded everywhere as follows.
Assumption 3. (Bounded global gradient variance) There exists a constant σg2 > 0 such that the
                                                    1
                                                      PM                                   2       2       d
global gradient variance is bounded as follows. M        i=1 ∥∇Fi (w) − ∇F (w)∥ ≤ σg , ∀w ∈ R .
Theorem 2. (Fi are non-convex) Under Assumptions 1, 3 and assuming clients compute full-batch
gradients with full participation and ηl ≤ 6τ1L , the iterates {w(t) } generated by FedExP satisfy,
                                                !
                 (t)
                       2        F (w(0) ) − F ∗            2 2                   2
                                                                                                     2

    min ∇F (w ) ≤ O                 PT −1 (t) + O ηl L (τ − 1)τ σg + O ηl Lτ σg , (11)
   t∈[T ]                       ηl τ t=0 ηg           |           {z               }   |      {z       }
                            |        {z          }       T2 :=client drift error     T3 := global variance
                               T1 :=initialization error

       (t)
where ηg is the FedExP server step size at round t.

Discussion. In the  convex case, the  error of FedAvg can be bounded by
O ∥w(0) − w∗ ∥2 /ηl τ T +  O ηl2 τ (τ − 1)Lσ∗2 (Khaled et al., 2020) and in the non-convex case
by O (F (w0 ) − F ∗ )/ηl τ T + O ηl2 L2 τ (τ − 1)σg2 (Wang et al., 2020). A careful inspection



                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             Trajectory of Iterates                                                                             Global Objective                                                     Distance to Optimum
                                                                                                                                                                                     0
     3.0                                                             FedAvg                                                                                                     10
                                                                     FedExP
     2.8                                                             Initialization
                                  9


                                                                                                                                                               |w(t) − w * |2
                                                                     Global Minimum                         −1
                                          7                                                            10
     2.6         8
                                                   5


                                                                                                F(w)
w2

                     6
                                                                                    2*
                                                                                                                                                                                     −1
                                              98                 3                                                                                                              10
     2.4                                           76
                         4                              54
                                                             3                  1
                                                                 2                                          −2
     2.2                      2                                   1                                    10            FedAvg (Last iterate)                                                    FedAvg (Last iterate)
                                               1*                                                                   FedExP (Last iterate)                                                    FedExP (Last iterate)
     2.0                              0                                                                              FedExP (Avg. of last two iterates)                              −2
                                                                                                                                                                                              FedExP (Avg. of last two iterates)
                                                                                                                                                                                10
           0.0   0.1          0.2         0.3           0.4           0.5       0.6       0.7                    0          5             10              15                              0          5             10              15
                                              w1                                                                                Training rounds                                                          Training rounds

Figure 2: Training characteristics of FedAvg and FedExP for the 2-D toy problem in Section 5.
The last iterate of FedExP has an oscillating behavior in F (w) but monotonically decreases w(t) −
           2
w∗             ; the average of the last two iterates lies in a lower loss region than the last iterate.

reveals that the impact of T1 on convergence of FedExP is different from FedAvg (effect of T2 is
                                 PT −1 (t)
the same). We see that since t=0 ηg ≥ T , FedExP reduces T1 faster than FedAvg. However
this comes at the price of an increased error floor due to T3 . Thus, the larger step-sizes in FedExP
help us reach the vicinity of an optimum faster, but can ultimately end up saturating at a higher error
floor due to noise around the optimum. Note that the impact of the error floor can be controlled by
setting the client step size ηl appropriately. Moreover, in the overparameterized convex regime where
σ∗2 = 0, the effect of T2 and T3 vanishes and thus FedExP clearly outperforms FedAvg. This
aligns well with our initial motivation of using extrapolation in the overparameterized regime.

5          F URTHER I NSIGHTS INTO F ED E X P

In this section, we discuss some further insights into the training of FedExP and how we leverage
these insights to improve the performance of FedExP.
                                                                                                                                     2
FedExP monotonically decreases w(t) − w∗ but not necessarily F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ ). Recall
that our original motivation for the FedExP step size was aimed at trying to minimize the distance
                                         2                                                     2
to the optimum give by w(t+1) − w∗ , when (6) holds. Doing so satisfies w(t+1) − w∗ ≤
                                      2
 w(t) − w∗                                but does not necessarily satisfy F (w(t+1) ) ≤ F (w(t) ).
To better illustrate this phenomenon, we consider the following toy example in R2 . We consider a
setup with two clients, where the objective at each client is given as follows:
                                                                 F1 (w) = (3w1 + w2 − 3)2 ; F2 (w) = (w1 + w2 − 3)2 .                                                                                                                   (12)
We denote the set of minimizers of F1 (w) and F2 (w) by S1∗ = {w : 3w1 + w2 = 3} and
S2∗ = {w : w1 + w2 = 3} respectively. Note that S1∗ and S2∗ intersect at the point w∗ = [0, 3],
making it a global minimum. To minimize their local objectives, we assume clients run gradient
descent with τ → ∞ in every round2 . Figure 2 shows the trajectory of the iterates generated by
                                                             2
FedExP and FedAvg. We see that while w(t) − w∗ decreases monotonically for FedExP,
F (w(t) ) does not do so and in fact has an oscillating nature as we discuss below.

Understanding oscillations in F (w(t) ). We see that the oscillations in F (w(t) ) are caused by
FedExP iterates trying to minimize their distance from the solution sets S1∗ and S2∗ simultaneously.
The initialization point w(0) is closer to S1∗ than S2∗ , which causes the FedExP iterate at round 1
to move towards S2∗ , then back towards S1∗ and so on. To understand why this happens, consider
                   (t)         (t)                                 (t)
the case where ∆1 = 0, ∆2 ̸= 0. In this case, we have ηg = 2 and therefore w(t+1) =
                                                                                              2
w(t) − 2∆¯ (t) = w(t,τ ) , which indicates that FedExP is now trying to minimize ∆(t+1) . This
                                                        2                                                                                                                                                           2
gives us the intuition that the FedExP update in round t is trying to minimize the objectives of the
                                                                            2
                                                              (t)
clients that have ∆i                                                            ≫ 0. While this leads to a temporary increase in global loss F (w(t) ) in

     The local models will be an exact projection of the global model on the solution sets {Si∗ }2i=1 . In this case,
       2
                                                                              (t)                            ¯ (t) ∥2
the lower bound in (8) can be improved by a factor of 2 and therefore we use ηg = (∥∆1 ∥2 +∥∆2 ∥2 )/2∥∆
for this experiment (see Appendix C.4 and Appendix C.4.1 for proof).


                                                                                                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                     FedExP (ours)                                    FedAvg                    SCAFFOLD                                       FedAdagrad
                                      Synthetic                                            EMNIST                                              CIFAR-10                                             CIFAR-100                                             CINIC-10
                                                                                86                                                                                                        50                                                   65
                           −1
                                                                                                                                     80
                     10
                                                                                85
Mean Squared Error
                                                                                                                                     70                                                                                                        60


                                                            Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                 Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                      Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Test Accuracy (%)
                           −4
                     10                                                         84                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                     60                                                                                                        55
                           −7
                     10                                                         83
                          −10                                                                                                        50                                                                                                        50
                     10                                                         82                                                                                                        30
                          −13                                                   81                                                   40                                                                                                        45
                     10
                                                                                80                                                   30                                                   20                                                   40
                                0         100         200                            0         250         500                            0         250         500                            0         250         500                            0         250         500
                                    Training rounds                                      Training rounds                                      Training rounds                                      Training rounds                                      Training rounds


Figure 3: Experimental results on a synthetic linear regression experiments and a range of realistic FL
tasks. FedExP consistently gives faster convergence compared to baselines while adding no extra
computation, communication or storage at clients or server.

some rounds as shown in Figure 2, it is beneficial in the long run as it leads to a faster decrease in
distance to the global optimum w∗ .
Averaging last two iterates in FedExP. Given the oscillating behavior of the iterates of FedExP,
we find that measuring progress on F (w) using the last iterate can be misleading. Motivated by this
finding, we propose to set the final model as the average of the last two iterates of FedExP. While
the last iterate oscillates between regions that minimize the losses F1 (w) and F2 (w) respectively,
the behavior of the average of the last two iterates is more stable and proceeds along a globally low
loss region. Interestingly, we find that the benefits of averaging the iterates of FedExP also extend
to training neural networks with multiple clients in practical FL scenarios (see Appendix D.1). In
practice, the number of iterates to average over could also be a hyperparameter for FedExP, but we
find that averaging the last two iterates works well, and we use this for our other experiments.

6                           E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of FedExP on synthetic and real FL tasks. For our synthetic experiment,
we consider a distributed overparameterized linear regression problem. This experiment aligns most
closely with our theory and allows us to carefully examine the performance of FedExP when (6)
holds. For realistic FL tasks, we consider image classification on the following datasets i) EMNIST
(Cohen et al., 2017), ii) CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009), iii) CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009),
iv) CINIC-10 (Darlow et al., 2018). In all experiments, we compare against the following baselines
i) FedAvg, ii) SCAFFOLD (Karimireddy et al., 2020b), and iii) FedAdagrad (Reddi et al., 2021)
which is a federated version of the popular Adagrad algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, we
are not aware of any other baselines that adaptively tune the server step size in FL.
Experimental Setup. For the synthetic experiment, we consider a setup with 20 clients, 30 samples
at each client, and model size to be 1000, making this an overparameterized problem. The data at each
client is generated following a similar procedure as the synthetic dataset in Li et al. (2020). We use
the federated version of EMNIST available at Caldas et al. (2019), which is naturally partitioned into
3400 clients. For CIFAR-10/100 we artifically partition the data into 100 clients, and for CINIC-10
we partition the data into 200 clients. In both cases, we follow a Dirichlet distribution with α = 0.3
for the partitioning to model heterogeneity among client data (Hsu et al., 2019). For EMNIST we use
the same CNN architecture used in Reddi et al. (2021). For CIFAR10, CIFAR100 and CINIC-10
we use a ResNet-18 model (He et al., 2016). For our baselines, we find the best performing ηg
and ηl by grid-search tuning. For FedExP we optimize for ϵ and ηl by grid search. We fix the
number of participating clients to 20, minibatch size to 50 and number of local updates to 20 for all
experiments. In Appendix D, we provide additional details and results, including the best performing
hyperparameters, comparison with FedProx (Li et al., 2020), and results for more rounds.
FedExP comprehensively outperforms FedAvg and baselines. Our experimental results in
Figure 3 demonstrate that FedExP clearly outperforms FedAvg and competing baselines that use
the best performing ηg and ηl found by grid search. Moreover, FedExP does not require additional
communication or storage at clients or server unlike SCAFFOLD and FedAdagrad. The order-
wise improvement in the case of the convex linear regression experiment confirms our theoretical
motivation for FedExP outlined in Section 3.2. In this case, since (6) is satisfied, we know that the
FedExP iterates are always moving towards the optimum. For realistic FL tasks, we see a consistent


                                                                                                                                               8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Table showing the average number of rounds to reach desired accuracy for FedExP and
baselines. FedExP provides a consistent speedup over all baselines.
         Dataset      Target Acc.   FedExP       FedAvg           SCAFFOLD                       FedAdagrad
        EMNIST           84%          186       328 (1.76×)       232 (1.24×)                     277 (1.48×)
       CIFAR-10          72%          267       434 (1.62×)       429 (1.61×)                     419 (1.56×)
       CIFAR-100         40%          242       500 (2.06×)     > 500 (> 2.06×)                   494 (2.04×)
       CINIC-10          58%          318       450 (1.42×)       470 (1.48×)                     444 (1.40×)

speedup of over 1.4 − 2× over FedAvg. This verifies that FedExP also provides performance
                                                                                        (t)
improvement in more general settings with realistic datasets and models. Plots showing ηg can be
found in Appendix D.5. The key takeaway from our experiments is that adapting the server step
size allows FedExP to take much larger steps in some (but not all) rounds compared to the constant
optimum step size taken by our baselines, leading to a large speedup.
Comparison with FedAdagrad. As discussed in Section 1, FedAdagrad and FedExP use
different notions of adaptivity; FedAdagrad uses coordinate-wise adaptivity, while FedExP uses
client-based adaptivity. We believe that the latter is more meaningful for FL settings as seen in our
experiments. In many experiments, especially image classification tasks like CIFAR, the gradients
produced are dense with relatively little variance in coordinate-wise gradient magnitudes (Reddi et al.,
2021; Zhang et al., 2020). In such cases, FedAdagrad is unable to leverage any coordinate-level
information and gives almost the same performance as FedAvg.
Comparison with SCAFFOLD. We see that FedExP outperforms SCAFFOLD in all experiments,
showing that adaptively tuning the server step size is sufficient to achieve speedup in FL settings.
Furthermore, SCAFFOLD even fails to outperform FedAvg for the more difficult CIFAR and
CINIC datasets. Several other papers have reported similar findings, including Reddi et al. (2021);
Karimireddy et al. (2020a); Yu et al. (2022). Several reasons have been postulated for this behavior,
including the staleness of control variates (Reddi et al., 2021) and the difficulty in characterizing
client drift in non-convex scenarios (Yu et al., 2022). Thus, while theoretically attractive, simply
using variance reduction techniques such as SCAFFOLD may not provide any speedup in practice.
                                                                                                     CIFAR-10
Adding extrapolation to SCAFFOLD. We note that SCAFFOLD
                                                                         80
only modifies the Local SGD procedure at clients and keeps the global
                                                                             Test Accuracy (%)


aggregation at the server unchanged. Therefore, it is easy to modify the 70

SCAFFOLD algorithm to use extrapolation when updating the global         60
model at the server (algorithm details in Appendix E). Figure 4 shows                          FedExP
                                                                                               SCAFFOLD-ExP
the result of our proposed extrapolated SCAFFOLD on the CIFAR-10         50
                                                                                               FedAvg
                                                                                               SCAFFOLD
dataset. Interestingly, we observe that while SCAFFOLD alone fails to    40
                                                                            0  100  200      300    400  500
outperform FedAvg, the extrapolated version of SCAFFOLD achieves                   Training rounds
the best performance among all algorithms. This result highlights the
importance of carefully tuning the server step size to achieve the best Figure 4: Adding extrap-
performance for variance-reduction algorithms. It is also possible to olation to SCAFFOLD for
add extrapolation to algorithms with server momentum (Appendix F). greater speedup.

7    C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed FedExP, a novel extension of FedAvg that adaptively determines
the server step size used in every round of global aggregation in FL. Our algorithm is based on
the key observation that FedAvg can be seen as an approximate variant of the POCS algorithm,
especially for overparameterized convex objectives. This has inspired us to leverage the idea of
extrapolation that is used to speed up POCS in a federated setting, resulting in FedExP. We have also
discussed several theoretical and empirical perspectives of FedExP. In particular, we have explained
some design choices in FedExP and how it can be used in practical scenarios with partial client
participation and secure aggregation. We have also shown the convergence of FedExP for possibly
underparameterized models and non-convex objectives. Our experimental results have shown that
FedExP consistently outperforms baseline algorithms with virtually no additional computation
or communication at clients or server. We have also shown that the idea of extrapolation can be
combined with other techniques, such as the variance-reduction method in SCAFFOLD, for greater
speedup. Future work will study the convergence analysis of FedExP with stochastic gradient noise
and the incorporation of extrapolation into a wider range of algorithms used in FL.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by NSF grants CCF 2045694, CNS-2112471, ONR N00014-23-1-
2149, and the CMU David Barakat and LaVerne Owen-Barakat Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Durmus Alp Emre Acar, Yue Zhao, Ramon Matas, Matthew Mattina, Paul Whatmough, and Venkatesh
  Saligrama. Federated learning based on dynamic regularization. In International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2021.

Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Yingyu Liang. Learning and generalization in overparameterized
  neural networks, going beyond two layers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  32, 2019.

Larry Armijo. Minimization of functions having Lipschitz continuous first partial derivatives. Pacific
  Journal of mathematics, 16(1):1–3, 1966.

Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Russ R Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On
  exact computation with an infinitely wide neural net. Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 32, 2019.

Jonathan Barzilai and Jonathan M Borwein. Two-point step size gradient methods. IMA journal of
  numerical analysis, 8(1):141–148, 1988.

K. A. Bonawitz, Vladimir Ivanov, Ben Kreuter, Antonio Marcedone, H. Brendan McMahan, Sarvar
  Patel, Daniel Ramage, Aaron Segal, and Karn Seth. Practical secure aggregation for federated
  learning on user-held data. In NeurIPS Workshop on Private Multi-Party Machine Learning, 2016.

Stephen Boyd and Jon Dattarro. Alternating projections, 2003. https://web.stanford.edu/
  class/ee392o/alt_proj.pdf.

Oleg Burdakov, Yu-Hong Dai, and Na Huang. Stabilized Barzilai-Borwein method. Journal of
  Computational Mathematics, 37(6):916–936, 2019.

Sebastian Caldas, Sai Meher Karthik Duddu, Peter Wu, Tian Li, Jakub Konečnỳ, H Brendan McMa-
  han, Virginia Smith, and Ameet Talwalkar. Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings. In Workshop
  on Federated Learning for Data Privacy and Confidentiality, 2019.

Zachary Charles and Jakub Konečnỳ. On the outsized importance of learning rates in local update
  methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.00878, 2020.

Gregory Cohen, Saeed Afshar, Jonathan Tapson, and Andre Van Schaik. Emnist: Extending mnist
  to handwritten letters. In 2017 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), pp.
  2921–2926. IEEE, 2017.

Patrick L Combettes. Convex set theoretic image recovery by extrapolated iterations of parallel
  subgradient projections. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 6(4):493–506, 1997.

Luke N Darlow, Elliot J Crowley, Antreas Antoniou, and Amos J Storkey. CINIC-10 is not Imagenet
  or CIFAR-10. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03505, 2018.

Yuyang Deng, Mohammad Mahdi Kamani, and Mehrdad Mahdavi. Local SGD optimizes overparam-
  eterized neural networks in polynomial time. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
  and Statistics, pp. 6840–6861. PMLR, 2022.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
  stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(7), 2011.

AA Goldstein. Optimization of Lipschitz continuous functions. Mathematical Programming, 13(1):
 14–22, 1977.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Leonid Georgievich Gurin, Boris Teodorovich Polyak, and È V Raik. The method of projections for
  finding the common point of convex sets. Zhurnal Vychislitel’noi Matematiki i Matematicheskoi
  Fiziki, 7(6):1211–1228, 1967.
Farzin Haddadpour and Mehrdad Mahdavi. On the convergence of local descent methods in federated
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.14425, 2019.
Elad Hazan and Sham Kakade. Revisiting the Polyak step size. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.00313,
  2019.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image
  recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
  pp. 770–778, 2016.
Samuel Horváth, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. Adaptive learning rates for faster
  stochastic gradient methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05287, 2022.
Tzu-Ming Harry Hsu, Hang Qi, and Matthew Brown. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
  distribution for federated visual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.
Baihe Huang, Xiaoxiao Li, Zhao Song, and Xin Yang. FL-NTK: A neural tangent kernel-based
  framework for federated learning analysis. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  4423–4434. PMLR, 2021.
Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and
  generalization in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Tyler Johnson, Pulkit Agrawal, Haijie Gu, and Carlos Guestrin. Adascale SGD: A user-friendly
  algorithm for distributed training. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4911–
  4920. PMLR, 2020.
Swanand Kadhe, Nived Rajaraman, O Ozan Koyluoglu, and Kannan Ramchandran. FastSecAgg: Scal-
  able secure aggregation for privacy-preserving federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.11248,
  2020.
Peter Kairouz, H Brendan McMahan, Brendan Avent, Aurélien Bellet, Mehdi Bennis, Arjun Nitin
  Bhagoji, Kallista Bonawitz, Zachary Charles, Graham Cormode, Rachel Cummings, et al. Ad-
  vances and open problems in federated learning. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning,
  14(1–2):1–210, 2021.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Quentin Rebjock, Sebastian Stich, and Martin Jaggi. Error feedback
  fixes SignSGD and other gradient compression schemes. In Proceedings of the 36th International
  Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97, pp. 3252–3261. PMLR, 2019.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Martin Jaggi, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank J Reddi, Sebastian U
  Stich, and Ananda Theertha Suresh. Mime: Mimicking centralized stochastic algorithms in
  federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.03606, 2020a.
Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Satyen Kale, Mehryar Mohri, Sashank Reddi, Sebastian Stich, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Scaffold: Stochastic controlled averaging for federated learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5132–5143. PMLR, 2020b.
Ahmed Khaled, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. Tighter theory for local sgd on identical
  and heterogeneous data. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp.
  4519–4529. PMLR, 2020.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR (Poster),
  2015. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. 2009.
Tian Li, Anit Kumar Sahu, Manzil Zaheer, Maziar Sanjabi, Ameet Talwalkar, and Virginia Smith.
  Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems,
  2:429–450, 2020.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nicolas Loizou, Sharan Vaswani, Issam Hadj Laradji, and Simon Lacoste-Julien. Stochastic polyak
  step-size for sgd: An adaptive learning rate for fast convergence. In International Conference on
  Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1306–1314. PMLR, 2021.
Grigory Malinovsky, Konstantin Mishchenko, and Peter Richtárik. Server-side stepsizes and sampling
  without replacement provably help in federated optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11066,
  2022.
Yura Malitsky and Konstantin Mishchenko. Adaptive gradient descent without descent. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of PMLR, pp.
  6702–6712, 2020.
Jan Mandel. Convergence of the cyclical relaxation method for linear inequalities. Mathematical
  programming, 30(2):218–228, 1984.
Brendan McMahan, Eider Moore, Daniel Ramage, Seth Hampson, and Blaise Aguera y Arcas.
  Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial Intelli-
  gence and Statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
Konstantin Mishchenko, Grigory Malinovsky, Sebastian Stich, and Peter Richtarik. ProxSkip: Yes!
  Local gradient steps provably lead to communication acceleration! Finally! In Proceedings of the
  39th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 162, pp. 15750–15769. PMLR, 2022.
Aritra Mitra, Rayana Jaafar, George J Pappas, and Hamed Hassani. Linear convergence in federated
  learning: Tackling client heterogeneity and sparse gradients. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:14606–14619, 2021.
Guy Pierra. Decomposition through formalization in a product space. Mathematical Programming,
  28(1):96–115, 1984.
Boris Teodorovich Polyak. Minimization of unsmooth functionals. USSR Computational Mathematics
  and Mathematical Physics, 9(3):14–29, 1969. ISSN 0041-5553. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
  0041-5553(69)90061-5.
Marcos Raydan. On the barzilai and borwein choice of steplength for the gradient method. IMA
 Journal of Numerical Analysis, 13(3):321–326, 1993.
Sashank J. Reddi, Zachary Charles, Manzil Zaheer, Zachary Garrett, Keith Rush, Jakub Konečný,
  Sanjiv Kumar, and Hugh Brendan McMahan. Adaptive federated optimization. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Tijmen Tieleman, Geoffrey Hinton, et al. Lecture 6.5-RMSProp: Divide the gradient by a running
  average of its recent magnitude. COURSERA: Neural networks for machine learning, 4(2):26–31,
  2012.
Jianyu Wang, Qinghua Liu, Hao Liang, Gauri Joshi, and H Vincent Poor. Tackling the objective
   inconsistency problem in heterogeneous federated optimization. Advances in Neural Information
   Processing Systems, 33:7611–7623, 2020.
Dong Yin, Ashwin Pananjady, Max Lam, Dimitris Papailiopoulos, Kannan Ramchandran, and Peter
  Bartlett. Gradient diversity: a key ingredient for scalable distributed learning. In International
 Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 1998–2007. PMLR, 2018.
Yaodong Yu, Alexander Wei, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Yi Ma, and Michael I Jordan. TCT:
  Convexifying federated learning using bootstrapped neural tangent kernels. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2207.06343, 2022.
Kai Yue, Richeng Jin, Ryan Pilgrim, Chau-Wai Wong, Dror Baron, and Huaiyu Dai. Neural tangent
  kernel empowered federated learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  25783–25803. PMLR, 2022.
Matthew D Zeiler. Adadelta: an adaptive learning rate method. arXiv preprint arXiv:1212.5701,
 2012.


                                                12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio, Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht, and Oriol Vinyals. Understand-
  ing deep learning requires rethinking generalization. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2017.
Jingzhao Zhang, Sai Praneeth Karimireddy, Andreas Veit, Seungyeon Kim, Sashank Reddi, Sanjiv
   Kumar, and Suvrit Sra. Why are adaptive methods good for attention models? Advances in Neural
   Information Processing Systems, 33:15383–15393, 2020.


                                               13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                        A PPENDIX
A Additional Related Work                                                                         15

B Table of Notation and Schematic                                                                 16
   B.1 Table of Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    16
   B.2 Schematic of Client-Server communication in FedExP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           16

C Proofs                                                                                          17
   C.1 Proof of Lemma 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17
   C.2 Convergence Analysis for Convex Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .         18
   C.3 Convergence Analysis for Non-Convex Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           21
   C.4 Exact Projection with Gradient Descent for Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . .         23

D Additional Experiments and Setup Details                                                        26
   D.1 Impact of Averaging Iterates for Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       26
   D.2 Dataset Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    26
   D.3 Hyperparameter Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     27
   D.4 Sensitivity of FedExP to ϵ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   27
   D.5 Additional Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28

E Combining Extrapolation with SCAFFOLD                                                           32

F Combining Extrapolation with Server Momentum                                                    33


                                                14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A    A DDITIONAL R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we provide further discussion on some additional related work that complements our
discussion in Section 1.
Adaptive Step Size in Gradient Descent. Here we briefly discuss methods for tuning the step
size in gradient descent and the challenges in applying them to the FL setting. Early methods to
tune the step size in gradient descent were based on line search (or backtracking) strategies (Armijo,
1966; Goldstein, 1977). However, these strategies need to repeatedly compute the function value
or gradient within an iteration, making them computationally expensive. Another popular class of
adaptive step sizes is based on the Polyak step size (Polyak, 1969; Hazan & Kakade, 2019; Loizou
et al., 2021). Similar to FedExP, the Polyak step size is derived from trying to minimize the distance
to the optimum for convex functions. However it is not clear how this can be extended to the federated
setting where we only have access to pseudo-gradients. Also, the Polyak step size requires knowledge
of the function value at the optimum which is hard to estimate. Another related class of step sizes is
the Barzilai-Borwein stepsize (Barzilai & Borwein, 1988). However, to the best of our knowledge,
these are known to provably work only for quadratic functions (Raydan, 1993; Burdakov et al., 2019)
only. A recent work (Malitsky & Mishchenko, 2020) alleviates some of the concerns associated with
these classical methods by setting the step size as an approximation of the inverse local Lipschitz
constant; however it is again not clear how this intuition can be applied to the federated setting. An
orthogonal line of work has focused on methods that adapt to the geometry of the data using gradient
information in previous iterations, the most popular among them being Adagrad (Duchi et al.,
2011) and its extensions RMSProp (Tieleman et al., 2012) and Adadelta (Zeiler, 2012). There
exist federated counterparts of these algorithms, namely FedAdagrad; however, as we show in our
experiments these methods can fail to even outperform FedAvg in standard FL tasks.
Overparameterization in FL. Inspired by the success of analyzing deep neural networks in the
neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime (Jacot et al., 2018; Arora et al., 2019; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019),
recent work has looked at studying the convergence of overparameterized neural networks in the FL
setting. Huang et al. (2021) and Deng et al. (2022) show that for a sufficiently wide neural network
and proper step size conditions, FedAvg will converge to a globally optimal solution even in the
presence of data heterogeneity. We note that these works are primarily concerned with convergence
analysis, whereas our focus is on developing a practical algorithm that is inspired by characteristics in
the overparameterized regime for speeding up FL training. Another recent line of work has looked at
utilizing NTK style Jacobian features for learning a FL model in just a few rounds of communication
(Yu et al., 2022; Yue et al., 2022). While interesting, these approaches are orthogonal to our current
work.


                                                  15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B       TABLE OF N OTATION AND S CHEMATIC
B.1     TABLE OF N OTATION

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Table 2: Summary of notation used in paper

        Symbol                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Description
          ∥∥                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L2 norm
          M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Number of clients
         ℓ(·, ·)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Loss function
          Di                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dataset at i-th client
         Fi (w)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Local objective at i-th client
         F (w)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Global objective at server
           ηl                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Client step size
           ηg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Server step size
          w(t)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Global model at round t
            (t)
          ηg                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FedExP server step size at round t
           (t,k)
         wi                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Local model at i-th client at t-th round and k-th iteration
            τ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Number of local SGD steps
             (t)
          ∆i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Update of i-th client at round t
          ¯
          ∆  (t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Average of client updates at round t
          Si∗                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Set of minimizers of Fi (w)
           T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Number of communication rounds
            ϵ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Small constant added to denominator of FedExP step size
          w∗                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Global minimum
          F∗                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Minimum value of global objective
            L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L-smoothness constant used in Assumption 1
          σ∗2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Upper bound on variance of client gradients at optimum (see Assumption 2)
          σ2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Upper bound on variance of client gradients (see Assumption 3)



B.2     S CHEMATIC OF C LIENT-S ERVER COMMUNICATION IN F ED E X P

At each round t, the server first sends global model w(t) to all clients. Clients perform local
                                                      (t,τ )                             (t)
optimization on w(t) to compute their local models wi        and send back their update ∆i =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
  (t)      (t,τ )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (t)
wi − wi             and norm of update ∆i                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  to the server. This procedure is illustrated in Figure 5.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cloud Server
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           <latexit sha1_base64="vC017/Bqmjrtiuc75oiguazEKfc=">AAAB/XicbVDJSgNBFOxxjXEbl5uXxiB4CjMi6jGQi8eIZoFkCD09L0mTnoXuN2Icgr/ixYMiXv0Pb/6NnWQOmljQUFTV470uP5FCo+N8W0vLK6tr64WN4ubW9s6uvbff0HGqONR5LGPV8pkGKSKoo0AJrUQBC30JTX9YnfjNe1BaxNEdjhLwQtaPRE9whkbq2ocdhAfMaFXGaUBvQZnwuGuXnLIzBV0kbk5KJEeta391gpinIUTIJdO67ToJehlTKLiEcbGTakgYH7I+tA2NWAjay6bXj+mJUQLai5V5EdKp+nsiY6HWo9A3yZDhQM97E/E/r51i78rLRJSkCBGfLeqlkmJMJ1XQQCjgKEeGMK6EuZXyAVOMoymsaEpw57+8SBpnZfei7N6clypOXkeBHJFjckpcckkq5JrUSJ1w8kieySt5s56sF+vd+phFl6x85oD8gfX5A3bZlS4=</latexit>


                    <latexit sha1_base64="wIfj5Q2rugicXXHXdORBVWn/QCs=">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</latexit>


                    1) Server sends global
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         <latexit sha1_base64="5o/EfzBP3obsjACcTVWnpD3w7jE=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (t)  (t)    (t,⌧ )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3) Clients send back                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  i =w       wi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             model w         to all clients                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (t) 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             and k     i k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Client 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Client M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="W2MYlrBnSGcpjmxeI21gMZvEbo0=">AAAB+XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfqx69DAbBU9gVUY+BXDxGMA9IQpiddJIhsw9meoNhyZ948aCIV//Em3/j5HHQxIKBoqqL7qkgUdKQ5307uY3Nre2d/G5hb//g8Mg9PqmbONUCayJWsW4G3KCSEdZIksJmopGHgcJGMKrM/MYYtZFx9EiTBDshH0SyLwUnK3Vdt034RBmrKIkRsanfdYteyZuDrRN/SYqwRLXrfrV7sUhDGxeKG9PyvYQ6GdckhcJpoZ0aTLgY8QG2LI14iKaTzS+fsgur9Fg/1vbZ9XP1dyLjoTGTMLCTIaehWfVm4n9eK6X+XSeTUZISRmKxqJ8qRjGb1cB6UqMgNbGECy3trUwMueaCbFkFW4K/+uV1Ur8q+Tcl/+G6WPaWdeThDM7hEny4hTLcQxVqIGAMz/AKb07mvDjvzsdiNOcsM6fwB87nD/Nlkyg=</latexit>                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               <latexit sha1_base64="GVLde3CMf/ZfWFPefYy+AL60p8Y=">AAAB+XicbVDLSgNBEOyNrxhfqx69DAbBU9gVUY+BXLwIEUwMJCHMTjrJkNkHM73BsORPvHhQxKt/4s2/cfI4aGLBQFHVRfdUkChpyPO+ndza+sbmVn67sLO7t3/gHh7VTZxqgTURq1g3Am5QyQhrJElhI9HIw0DhYzCsTP3HEWoj4+iBxgm2Q96PZE8KTlbquG6L8IkyVlESI2KTu45b9EreDGyV+AtShAWqHfer1Y1FGtq4UNyYpu8l1M64JikUTgqt1GDCxZD3sWlpxEM07Wx2+YSdWaXLerG2z66fqb8TGQ+NGYeBnQw5DcyyNxX/85op9W7amYySlDAS80W9VDGK2bQG1pUaBamxJVxoaW9lYsA1F2TLKtgS/OUvr5L6Rcm/Kvn3l8Wyt6gjDydwCufgwzWU4RaqUAMBI3iGV3hzMufFeXc+5qM5Z5E5hj9wPn8AHeSTRA==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Client 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            <latexit sha1_base64="mNMqN3UVpBFTk5NhZT6P20NjLXs=">AAAB+XicbVDLSgNBEOz1GeNr1aOXwSB4CrtB1GMgF48RzAOSEGYnnWTI7IOZ3mBY8idePCji1T/x5t84eRw0sWCgqOqieypIlDTked/OxubW9s5ubi+/f3B4dOyenNZNnGqBNRGrWDcDblDJCGskSWEz0cjDQGEjGFVmfmOM2sg4eqRJgp2QDyLZl4KTlbqu2yZ8ooxVlMSI2LTUdQte0ZuDrRN/SQqwRLXrfrV7sUhDGxeKG9PyvYQ6GdckhcJpvp0aTLgY8QG2LI14iKaTzS+fskur9Fg/1vbZ9XP1dyLjoTGTMLCTIaehWfVm4n9eK6X+XSeTUZISRmKxqJ8qRjGb1cB6UqMgNbGECy3trUwMueaCbFl5W4K/+uV1Ui8V/Zui/3BdKHvLOnJwDhdwBT7cQhnuoQo1EDCGZ3iFNydzXpx352MxuuEsM2fwB87nD/Tpkyk=</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="LqyI3A/BZuc+VGPZJTXbtt5rhIc=">AAACAHicbVC7SgNBFJ2Nrxhf0RQWNoNBiCBh10ItAzY2QgTzgGxcZiezyZDZBzN3lbBs46/YWCjB1g+wsrKztPE7nDwKTTxw4XDOvdx7jxsJrsA0P43MwuLS8kp2Nbe2vrG5ld/eqaswlpTVaChC2XSJYoIHrAYcBGtGkhHfFazh9s9HfuOWScXD4BoGEWv7pBtwj1MCWnLyu7ZPoOd6yV3qXN4kJTiygcSHqZMvmmVzDDxPrCkpVgr4e/j+9VZ18h92J6SxzwKggijVsswI2gmRwKlgac6OFYsI7ZMua2kaEJ+pdjJ+IMUHWulgL5S6AsBj9fdEQnylBr6rO0fnqllvJP7ntWLwztoJD6IYWEAni7xYYAjxKA3c4ZJREANNCJVc34ppj0hCQWeW0yFYsy/Pk/px2TopW1c6DRNNkEV7aB+VkIVOUQVdoCqqIYpS9ICe0LNxbzwaQ+Nl0poxpjMF9AfG6w+ehZrS</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (t,⌧ )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              <latexit sha1_base64="Gv0cxlC+5B5gZAK6uC+GYh7cdq8=">AAACAHicbVDLSsNAFJ3UV62vVBcu3ASLUEFKIqIuC25cVrAPaGKYTCft0MmDmRulhGz8ERduXCji1s9w586ln+Gk7UJbD1w4nHMv997jxZxJMM1PrbCwuLS8Ulwtra1vbG7p5e2WjBJBaJNEPBIdD0vKWUibwIDTTiwoDjxO297wIvfbt1RIFoXXMIqpE+B+yHxGMCjJ1XftAMPA89O7zLVu0ioc2YCTw8zVK2bNHMOYJ9aUVOpl7+vhe3DScPUPuxeRJKAhEI6l7FpmDE6KBTDCaVayE0ljTIa4T7uKhjig0knHD2TGgVJ6hh8JVSEYY/X3RIoDKUeBpzrzc+Wsl4v/ed0E/HMnZWGcAA3JZJGfcAMiI0/D6DFBCfCRIpgIpm41yAALTEBlVlIhWLMvz5PWcc06rVlXKg0TTVBEe2gfVZGFzlAdXaIGaiKCMvSIntGLdq89aa/a26S1oE1ndtAfaO8/bR6Z8Q==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (t,⌧ )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     <latexit sha1_base64="fXxOmsKy1kGcjU02Z7mKlRvjWHQ=">AAACAHicbVDLSsNAFJ34rPWV6sKFm2ARKkhJiqjLghuXFewDmhgm00k7dPJg5kYpIRt/xIUbF4q49TPcuXPpZzhpu9DWAxcO59zLvfd4MWcSTPNTW1hcWl5ZLawV1zc2t7b10k5LRokgtEkiHomOhyXlLKRNYMBpJxYUBx6nbW94kfvtWyoki8JrGMXUCXA/ZD4jGJTk6nt2gGHg+eld5tZu0goc24CTo8zVy2bVHMOYJ9aUlOsl7+vhe3DScPUPuxeRJKAhEI6l7FpmDE6KBTDCaVa0E0ljTIa4T7uKhjig0knHD2TGoVJ6hh8JVSEYY/X3RIoDKUeBpzrzc+Wsl4v/ed0E/HMnZWGcAA3JZJGfcAMiI0/D6DFBCfCRIpgIpm41yAALTEBlVlQhWLMvz5NWrWqdVq0rlYaJJiigfXSAKshCZ6iOLlEDNRFBGXpEz+hFu9eetFftbdK6oE1ndtEfaO8/bq2Z8g==</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (t,⌧ )                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            wM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   w1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        <latexit sha1_base64="+RwOKx1VbMTbBHerVHkal6A/Kas=">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</latexit>


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2) Clients perform local training


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 5: Schematic of client-server communication in FedExP.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     P ROOFS

We first state some preliminary lemmas that will used throughout the proofs.
Lemma 2. (Jensen’s inequality) For any ai ∈ Rd , i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , M }:
                                                      M          2                M
                                              1 X                         1 X        2
                                                    ai               ≤          ∥ai ∥ ,                                        (13)
                                              M i=1                       M i=1
                                                      M          2            M
                                                                                             2
                                                      X                       X
                                                            ai       ≤M               ∥ai ∥ .                                  (14)
                                                      i=1                     i=1


We also note the following known result related to the Bregman divergence.
Lemma 3. (Khaled et al., 2020) If F is smooth and convex, then
                                              2
                   ∥∇F (w) − ∇F (w′ )∥ ≤ 2L(F (w) − F (w′ ) − ⟨∇F (w′ ), w − w′ ⟩).                                            (15)
Lemma 4. (Co-coercivity of convex smooth function) If F is L-smooth and convex then,
                                                                              1                    2
                         ⟨∇F (w) − ∇F (w′ ), w − w′ ⟩ ≥                         ∥∇F (w) − ∇F (w′ )∥ .                          (16)
                                                                              L

A direct consequence of this lemma is,
                                                                              1         2
                                       ⟨∇F (w), w − w∗ ⟩ ≥                      ∥∇F (w)∥                                       (17)
                                                                              L
where w∗ is a minimizer of F (w).

C.1    P ROOF OF L EMMA 1

Let Fi (w) be the local objective at a client and w∗ be the global minimum. From the overparameteri-
zation assumption, we know that w∗ is also a minimizer for Fi (w). We have,
                    2                                                                 2
    (t,k)                    (t,k−1)                      (t,k−1)
 wi         − w∗        = wi           − ηl ∇F (wi                   ) − w∗                                                    (18)
                                               2                                                                                        2
                             (t,k−1)                                      (t,k−1)            (t,k−1)                      (t,k−1)
                        = wi           −w∗ − 2ηl ⟨∇F (wi                              ), wi            −w∗ ⟩ + ηl2 ∇F (wi           )
                                                                                                                               (19)
                                          2ηl     2                                              2                    2
                             (t,k−1)                 (t,k−1)              (t,k−1)
                        ≤ wi           − w∗    ∇F (wi −      ) + ηl2 ∇F (wi       )                                            (20)
                                           L
                                       2  ηl                  2
                           (t,k−1)                 (t,k−1)
                        ≤ wi       − w∗ −     ∇F (wi       )                                                                   (21)
                                          L
where (20) follows from (17) and (21) follows from ηl ≤ L1 . Summing the above inequality from
k = 0 to τ − 1 we have,
                                          2                               2               τ −1  2
                           (t,τ )                                               ηl X      (t,k)
                          wi      − w∗        ≤ w         (t)
                                                                 −w   ∗
                                                                              −      ∇F (wi ) .                                (22)
                                                                                L
                                                                                          k=0

Thus we have,
                  M              2           2       M τ −1            2
               1 X    (t,τ )                    ηl X X           (t,k)
                     wi      − w∗ ≤ w(t) − w∗ −             ∇F (wi )                                                           (23)
               M i=1                            M L i=1
                                                                                                     k=0
                                                                              2
                                               ≤ w(t) − w∗                        .                                            (24)

This completes the proof of this lemma.


                                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2       C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS FOR C ONVEX O BJECTIVES


Our proof technique is inspired by Khaled et al. (2020) with some key differences. The biggest
difference is the incorporation of the adaptive FedExP server step sizes which Khaled et al. (2020)
does not account for. Another difference is that we provide convergence guarantees in terms of
number of rounds T while Khaled et al. (2020) focus on number of iterations T ′ = T τ . We highlight
the specific steps where we made adjustments to the analysis of Khaled et al. (2020) below.
We begin by modifying Khaled et al. (2020, Lemma 11 and Lemma 13) to bound client drift in every
round instead of every iteration.


Lemma 5. (Bounding client aggregate gradients)



      M τ −1                                      M τ −1
1 XX            (t,k)
                      2 3L2 X X     (t,k)
                                           2
          ∇Fi (wi ) ≤              wi −w(t) + 6τ L(F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 3τ σ∗2 .
M i=1                    M i=1
      k=0                      k=0
                                                                            (25)


Proof of Lemma 5:



           M τ −1    2
   1 XX        (t,k)
         ∇Fi (wi )
   M i=1
               k=0
             M τ −1                                                                                  2
           1 XX                      (t,k)
      =                    ∇Fi (wi           ) − ∇Fi (w(t) ) + ∇Fi (w(t) ) − ∇Fi (w∗ ) + ∇Fi (w∗ )       (26)
          M i=1
                   k=0
             M τ −1                        2     M τ −1                         2
          3 XX            (t,k)               3 XX
      ≤             ∇Fi (wi ) − ∇Fi (w(t) ) +           ∇Fi (w(t) ) − ∇Fi (w∗ )                          (27)
          M i=1                               M i=1
                   k=0                                                      k=0
               M τ −1
           3 XX             2
      +          ∥∇Fi (w∗ )∥
           M i=1
                     k=0
              M τ
            2 X   −1                             2
          3L    X            (t,k)
      ≤                     wi       − w(t)          + 6τ L(F (w(t) ) − F ∗ ) + 3τ σ∗2 .                 (28)
           M   i=1 k=0


The first term in (28) follows from L-smoothness of Fi (w), the second term follows from Lemma 3
and the third term follows from bounded noise at optimum.


Lemma 6. (Bounding client drift)



          M τ −1      2
  1 XX          (t,k)
        w(t) − wi       ≤ 12ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)L(F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 6ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)σ∗2 . (29)
  M i=1
            k=0


                                                               18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Lemma 6:
         M τ −1         2
    1 XX          (t,k)
          w(t) − wi
    M i=1
             k=0
              M τ −1 k−1                                  2
          1   X X    X                   (t,l)
    = ηl2                          ∇Fi (wi )                                                                            (30)
            M i=1
                    k=0     l=0
                  M τ −1    k−1 2
            1 XX X        (t,l)
    ≤ ηl2         k ∇Fi (wi )                                                                                           (31)
            M i=1
                    k=0      l=0
                            M τ −1      2
                      1 XX        (t,k)
    ≤ ηl2 τ (τ − 1)         ∇Fi (wi )                                                                                   (32)
                      M i=1
                                  k=0
                                   M τ −1       2
                            1 XX          (t,k)
    ≤ 3ηl2 τ (τ − 1)L2            w(t) − wi       + 6ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)L(F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ ))                              (33)
                            M i=1
                                         k=0
     + 3ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)σ∗2
              M τ −1         2
         1 XX          (t,k)
    ≤          w(t) − wi       + 6ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)L(F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ ))                                                 (34)
        2M i=1
                   k=0
     + 3ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)σ∗2
where (33) uses Lemma 5 and (34) uses ηl ≤ 6τ1L .
Therefore we have,
        M τ −1        2
  1 XX          (t,k)
        w(t) − wi       ≤ 12ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)L(F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 6ηl2 τ 2 (τ − 1)σ∗2 . (35)
  M i=1
            k=0



Proof of Theorem 1:
We define the following auxiliary variables that will used in the proof.

                                                                                      τ −1
                                                                                (t)                (t,k)
                                                                                      X
                           Aggregate Client Gradient: hi =                                   ∇Fi (wi       ).           (36)
                                                                                      k=0

                       1
                               PM        (t)
We also define h̄(t) = M            i=1 hi .
                                                                                                                (t)
Recall that the update of the global model can be written as w(t+1) = w(t) − ηg ηl h̄(t) .
We have
                      2                                                     2
     w(t+1) − w∗           = w(t) − ηg(t) ηl h̄(t) − w∗                                                                 (37)
                                                    2               D               E                      2
                           = w(t) − w∗                   − 2ηg(t) ηl wt − w∗ , h̄(t) + (ηg(t) )2 ηl2 h̄(t)              (38)
                                                    2                                                  M       2
                                                                                               (t) 2 1
                                                                           D              E
                                                                                                           (t)
                                                                                                       X
                                   (t)         ∗
                           ≤ w           −w              − 2ηg(t) ηl         t   ∗
                                                                            w − w , h̄(t)
                                                                                            + ηg ηl       hi            (39)
                                                                                                    M i=1
                                               PM             (t)   2
                         (t)                       i=1    hi
where (39) follows from ηg ≤                                    2       . Inequality (39) is a key step in our proof and the
                                               M ∥h̄(t) ∥
differentiating factor in our approach from Khaled et al. (2020). Following a similar technique as
                                  (t)          2                                               (t)
Khaled et al. (2020) to bound (ηg )2 ηl2 h̄(t) will end up requiring the condition ηl ≤ 1/8Lηg ,
                                                                      (t)
which cannot be satisfied in our setup due to the adaptive choice of ηg . Therefore we first upper


                                                                         19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        2                            2
          (t)                 (t)   1
                                       PM       (t)
bound (ηg )2 ηl2 h̄(t) by ηg ηl2 M       i=1 hi        and focus on further bounding this quantity in
the rest of the proof, which does not require the aforementioned condition. Note that this comes at
the expense of the additional T3 error seen in our final convergence bound in Theorem 1.
Therefore,


                    2                   2                                             M
                                                       D               E            1 X (t) 2
    w(t+1) − w∗         ≤ w(t) − w∗         − 2ηg(t) ηl wt − w∗ , h̄(t) +ηg(t) ηl2         h   .   (40)
                                                       |     {z        }           M i=1 i
                                                             T1                    |    {z   }
                                                                                      T2

Bounding T2
We have,
                         M
                    1 X (t) 2
             T2 =         h                                                                        (41)
                    M i=1 i
                       M  τ −1                     2
                    1 X X            (t,k)
                =              ∇Fi (wi )                                                           (42)
                    M i=1
                              k=0
                         M τ −1       2
                    τ XX        (t,k)
                ≤         ∇Fi (wi )                                                                (43)
                    M i=1
                             k=0
                             M τ −1
                    3τ L2 X X  (t,k)
                                           2
                ≤             wi     − w(t) + 6τ 2 L(F (w(t) ) − F ∗ ) + 3τ 2 σ∗2                  (44)
                     M i=1
                               k=0
where (43) follows from Jensen’s inequality and and (44) follows from Lemma 5.
Bounding T1
                                       M
                                    1 XD t          (t)
                                                        E
                             T1 =         w − w∗ , hi                                              (45)
                                    M i=1
                                       M τ −1
                                    1 X X D (t)           (t,k)
                                                                E
                               =           w − w∗ , ∇Fi (wi ) .                                    (46)
                                    M i=1
                                            k=0
We have,
 D                         E D                     E D                          E
                     (t,k)         (t,k)     (t,k)     (t,k)              (t,k)
   w(t) − w∗ , ∇Fi (wi ) = w(t) − wi , ∇Fi (wi ) + wi        − w∗ , ∇Fi (wi ) .
                                                                                                   (47)

From L-smoothness of Fi we have,
       D                            E                   L               2
                 (t,k)        (t,k)               (t,k)           (t,k)
        w(t) − wi , ∇Fi (wi ) ≥ Fi (w(t) ) − Fi (wi ) −   w(t) − wi       .                        (48)
                                                        2
From convexity of Fi we have,
                     D                           E
                        (t,k)              (t,k)      (t,k)
                       wi     − w∗ , ∇Fi (wi ) ≥ Fi (wi ) − Fi (w∗ ).                              (49)
Therefore, adding the above inequalities we have,
            D                         E                       L               2
                                (t,k)                                   (t,k)
              w(t) − w∗ , ∇Fi (wi ) ≥ Fi (w(t) ) − Fi (w∗ ) −   w(t) − wi       .                  (50)
                                                              2
Substituting (50) in (46) we have,
                                                            M τ −1          2
                                                        L XX          (t,k)
                  T1 ≥ τ (F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) −              w(t) − wi       .                    (51)
                                                       2M i=1
                                                              k=0



                                                       20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Here we would like to note that the bound for T1 is our contribution and is needed in our proof
due to the relaxation in (39). The bound for T2 follows a similar technique as Khaled et al. (2020,
Lemma 12).
Substituting the bounds for T1 and T2 in (40) we have,
                    2                        2
   w(t+1) − w∗          ≤ w(t) − w∗              − 2ηg(t) ηl τ (1 − 3ηl τ L)(F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 3ηg(t) ηl2 τ 2 σ∗2
                                                                  M τ −1         2
                                                             1 XX   (t,k)
                        + (3ηg(t) ηl2 τ L2 + ηg(t) ηl L)           wi     − w(t)
                                                             M i=1
                                                                      k=0
                                             2
                              (t)        ∗
                        ≤ w         −w           − ηg(t) ηl τ (F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 3ηg(t) ηl2 τ 2 σ∗2           (52)
                                             M τ −1         2
                                        1 XX   (t,k)
                        + 2ηg(t) ηl L         wi     − w(t)
                                        M i=1
                                                     k=0
                                             2
                        ≤ w(t) − w∗              − ηg(t) ηl τ (F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 3ηg(t) ηl2 τ 2 σ∗2           (53)
                        + 24ηg(t) ηl3 τ 2 (τ − 1)L2 (F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 12ηg(t) ηl3 τ 2 (τ − 1)Lσ∗2
                                             2        (t)
                                               ηg ηl τ
                        ≤ w(t) − w∗              −     (F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )) + 3ηg(t) ηl2 τ 2 σ∗2                  (54)
                                                  3
                        + 12ηg(t) ηl3 τ 2 (τ − 1)Lσ∗2

where both (52) and (55) use ηl ≤ 6τ1L , and (53) uses Lemma 6.
Rearranging terms and averaging over all rounds we have,
        PT −1     (t)                                                   2
                 ηg F (w(t) ) − F (w∗ )  3 w(0) − w∗
           t=0
                   PT −1 (t)            ≤ PT −1 (t)    + 9ηl τ σ∗2 + 36ηl2 τ (τ − 1)Lσ∗2 .                         (55)
                      t=0 ηg               t=0 ηg ηl τ


This implies,
                                                               2!
                                              w(0) − w∗
        F (w̄(T ) ) − F (w∗ ) ≤ O                                    + O ηl2 τ (τ − 1)Lσ∗2 + O ηl τ σ∗2

                                                 PT −1 (t)                                                         (56)
                                             ηl τ t=0 ηg
                  PT −1 (t) (t)
                   t=0 ηg w
where w̄(T ) =     PT −1 (t) . This completes the proof.
                     t=0 ηg



C.3   C ONVERGENCE A NALYSIS FOR N ON -C ONVEX O BJECTIVES

Our proof technique is inspired by Wang et al. (2020) and we use one of their intermediate results to
bound client drift in non-convex settings as we describe below. We highlight the specific steps where
we made adjustments to the analysis of Wang et al. (2020) below.
We begin by defining the following auxiliary variables that will used in the proof.
                                                                         τ −1
                                                               (t)    1X       (t,k)
                           Normalized Gradient: hi =                     ∇Fi (wi ).                                (57)
                                                                      τ
                                                                         k=0

                       1
                             PM          (t)
We also define h̄(t) = M            i=1 hi .
Lemma 7. (Bounding client drift in Non-Convex Setting)
                    M                     2             2
                 1 X                  (t)     1
                       ∇Fi (w(t) ) − hi     ≤   ∇F (w(t) + 5ηl2 L2 τ (τ − 1)σg2 .                                  (58)
                 M i=1                        8



                                                             21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof of Lemma 7: Let D = 4ηl2 L2 τ (τ − 1). We have the following bound from equation (87) in
Wang et al. (2020),
                      M
                   1 X                  (t)
                                            2    D            2  Dσg2
                         ∇Fi (w(t) ) − hi     ≤     ∇F (w(t) ) +      .                                      (59)
                   M i=1                        1−D              1−D

From ηl ≤ 6τ1L we have D ≤ 19 which implies 1−D
                                             1
                                                ≤ 98 and 1−D
                                                          D
                                                             ≤ 18 .
Therefore we have,
                       M                 2               2
                1 X                  (t)     1              9D 2
                      ∇Fi (w(t) ) − hi     ≤   ∇F (w(t) ) +   σ                                              (60)
                M i=1                        8               8 g
                                                             1         2
                                                         ≤     ∇F (w(t) + 5ηl2 L2 τ (τ − 1)σg2 .             (61)
                                                             8


Proof of Theorem 2:
The update of the global model can be written as follows,
                                           w(t+1) = w(t) − ηg(t) ηl τ h̄(t) .                                (62)

Now using the Lipschitz-smoothness assumption we have,
                                             D                  E (η (t) )2 η 2 τ 2 L         2
                                                                     g
        F (w(t+1) ) − F (w(t) ) ≤ −ηg(t) ηl τ ∇F (w(t) ), h̄(t) +             l
                                                                                       h̄(t)                 (63)
                                                                           2
                                             D                  E η (t) η 2 τ 2 L X M          2
                                     (t)           (t)
                                ≤ −ηg ηl τ ∇F (w ), h       ¯
                                                            (t)  +
                                                                   g     l
                                                                                        hi
                                                                                          (t)
                                                                                                             (64)
                                                                       2M          i=1
                           PM      (t)     2
                 (t)        i=1   hi
where (64) uses ηg ≤                   2       . As in the convex case, inequality (64) is a key step in our proof
                           M ∥h̄(t) ∥
and the differentiating factor in our approach from Wang et al. (2020). Following a similar technique
                                      (t)               2                                           (t)
as Wang et al. (2020) to bound (ηg )2 ηl2 τ 2 L h̄(t) /2 will need the condition ηl ≤ 1/2Lτ ηg ,
                                                                          (t)
which cannot be satisfied in our setup due to the adaptive choice of ηg . Therefore we first upper
                               2                               2 .
         (t)                         (t)       1    M      (t)
bound (ηg )2 ηl2 τ 2 L2 h̄(t) by ηg ηl2 τ 2 L M
                                                 P
                                                    i=1 hi         2 and focus on further bounding this
quantity in the rest of the proof, which does not require the aforementioned condition. Note that this
comes at the expense of the additional T3 error seen in our final convergence bound in Theorem 2.
Therefore we have,
                                                D                 E η (t) η 2 τ 2 L XM       2
                                                                     g                   (t)
           F (w(t+1) ) − F (w(t) ) ≤ −ηg(t) ηl τ ∇F (w(t) ), h̄(t) +       l
                                                                                        hi     .             (65)
                                                |     {z          }     2M          i=1
                                                      T1                            | {z }
                                                                                               T2


Bounding T1
We have,
                                           M
                   *                                 +
                             1 X (t)
                            (t)
            T1 =    ∇F (w ),      h                                                                          (66)
                             M i=0 i
                                                         M        2                       M          2
                 1           2  1 1 X (t)                               1              1 X (t)
               =   ∇F (w(t) ) +        h                              −   ∇F (w(t) ) −      h                (67)
                 2              2 M i=1 i                               2              M i=1 i
                               2      M                     2
                   1               1 X                  (t)
               ≥     ∇F (w(t) ) −        ∇Fi (w(t) ) − hi                                                    (68)
                   2              2M i=1


                                                             22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  2          2                      2
where (67) uses ⟨a, b⟩ = 21 ∥a∥ + 12 ∥b∥ − 12 ∥a − b∥ and (68) uses Jensen’s inequality and the
definition of the global objective function F .
Bounding T2
We have,
                 M
               1 X (t) 2
   T2 =              h                                                                                    (69)
               M i=1 i
                 M                                                        2
           1 X (t)
         =       hi − ∇Fi (w(t) ) + ∇Fi (w(t) ) − ∇F (w(t) ) + ∇F (w(t) )                                 (70)
           M i=1
              M                     2                             2             2

           3 X     (t)        (t)                (t)          (t)           (t)
         ≤        hi − ∇Fi (w ) + ∇Fi (w ) − ∇F (w ) + ∇F (w )                                            (71)
           M i=1
                 M               2                      2
           3 X (t)
         ≤       hi − ∇Fi (w(t) ) + 3σg2 + 3 ∇F (w(t) )                                                   (72)
           M i=1
where (71) uses Jensen’s inequality, (72) uses bounded data heterogeneity assumption.
Here we would like to note that the bound for T2 is our contribution and is needed in our proof due to
the relaxation in (39). The bound for T1 follows a similar technique as in Wang et al. (2020).
Substituting the T1 and T2 bounds into (65), we have,
                                                     2      M                     2
                                         1               1 X                  (t)
F (w(t+1) ) − F (w(t) ) ≤ −ηg(t) ηl τ      ∇F (w(t) ) +        ∇Fi (w(t) ) − hi                           (73)
                                         2              2M i=1
                                                                                 M
                                                                                                         !!
                              ηl τ L                                    2     3 X (t)                2
                            +           3σg2 + 3   ∇F (w )    (t)
                                                                            +       hi − ∇Fi (w(t) )
                                2                                             M i=1
                                                            M
                                                                                                     !
                                        1             2 1                             2
                                                                                 (t)
                                                           X
                        ≤ −ηg(t) ηl τ     ∇F (w(t) ) +          ∇Fi (w(t) ) − hi        + 3ηl τ Lσg2
                                        4               M i=1
                                                                                                (74)

                                        1           2
                        ≤ −ηg(t) ηl τ     ∇F (w(t) + 3ηl τ Lσg2 + 5ηl2 L2 τ (τ − 1)σg2          (75)
                                        8

where (74) uses ηl ≤ 6τ1L , (75) uses Lemma 7.
Thus rearranging terms and averaging over all rounds we have,
     PT −1 (t)               2
       t=0 ηg     ∇F (w(t) )      8(F (w(0) ) − F ∗ )
            PT −1 (t)          ≤ PT −1 (t)            + 40ηl2 L2 τ (τ − 1)σg2 + 24ηl Lτ σg2 .             (76)
               t=0 ηg                 t=0 ηg ηl τ
This implies,
                                                       !
                       2          (F (w(0) ) − F ∗ )
      min ∇F (w(t) )                                        + O ηl2 L2 τ (τ − 1)σg2 + O ηl Lτ σg2 .

                           ≤O      PT −1 (t)                                                              (77)
      t∈[T ]
                                      t=0 ηg ηl τ

This completes the proof.

C.4      E XACT P ROJECTION WITH G RADIENT D ESCENT FOR L INEAR R EGRESSION
                           2
Let F (w) = ∥Aw − b∥ where A is a (n × d) matrix and b is a n dimensional vector. We assume
that d ≥ n here and A has rank n. The singular value decomposition (SVD) of A can be written as,
                                                       ⊤
                                    ⊤                 V1
                        A = UΣV = U [Σ1 0]                 = UΣ1 V1⊤                       (78)
                                                      V2⊤


                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where U is an (n × n) orthogonal matrix, Σ is an (n × n) diagonal matrix, V1 is a (d × n) matrix
with orthogonal columns and V2 is a (d × (d − n)) matrix with orthogonal columns. Here V1 is a
basis for the row space of A, while V2 is a basis for the null space of A. We first prove the following
lemmas about the set of minimizers of F (w) and the projection on this set.
Lemma 8. The set of minimizers of F (w) is given by,


                            S ∗ = {V2 V2⊤ w + V1 Σ−1 ⊤       d
                                                  1 U b|w ∈ R }.                                  (79)

Proof. Let w = V2 V2⊤ x + V1 Σ−1 ⊤                d
                              1 U b for some x ∈ R . We have,

                            Aw = UΣ1 V1⊤ (V2 V2⊤ x + V1 Σ−1 ⊤
                                                         1 U b)                                   (80)
                               =b                                                                 (81)
                                                                                          2
where the last line uses V1⊤ V2 = 0, V1⊤ V1 = I, UU⊤ = I. This implies ∥Aw − b∥ = 0. Thus
any w in S ∗ is a minimizer of F (w).
Now let w∗ be a minimizer of F (w), implying Aw∗ = UΣ1 V1⊤ w∗ = b. We have,
                                  w∗ = V2 V2⊤ w∗ + V1 V1⊤ w∗                                      (82)
                                      = V2 V2⊤ w∗ + V1 Σ−1 ⊤
                                                        1 U b                                     (83)
where (82) uses V1 V1⊤ + V2 V2⊤ = I and (83) uses UΣ1 V1⊤ w∗ = b. Thus any minimizer of F (w)
must lie in S ∗ .
Combining the above statements we have,
                             w is a minimizer of F (w) ⇐⇒ w ∈ S ∗ .                               (84)
which completes the proof.
Lemma 9. The projection of any w ∈ Rd on S ∗ is given by,
                                                   2
                   PS ∗ (w) = arg min ∥w − w′ ∥ = V2 V2⊤ w + V1 Σ−1 ⊤
                                                                 1 U b.                           (85)
                                w′ ∈S ∗


Proof. When w ∈ S ∗ , it is easy to see that this holds. Therefore we consider the case where w ∈
                                                                                                / S ∗.
Let x = V2 V2⊤ w + V1 Σ−1  1  U ⊤
                                  b  and  P S ∗ (w) = V   V
                                                         2 2
                                                            ⊤
                                                              w 0 + V  Σ
                                                                      1 1
                                                                         −1 ⊤
                                                                           U    b where  w0 ̸
                                                                                            =  w. We
have,
                                              2
           w − V2 V2⊤ w0 − V1 Σ−1 ⊤
                               1 U b                                                              (86)
                                                      2
          =   V2 V2⊤ (w − w0 ) + V1 V1⊤ w − V1 Σ−1  ⊤
                                                1 U b    (V1 V1⊤ + V2 V2⊤ = I)                    (87)
                               2                         2
          =   V2 V2⊤ (w − w0 ) + V1 V1⊤ w − V1 Σ−1    ⊤
                                                   1 U b                                          (88)
                               2           2
          =   V2 V2⊤ (w − w0 ) + ∥w − x∥                                                          (89)
                      2
          > ∥w − x∥                                                                               (90)
leading to a contradiction. The cross term in (88) is zero since V1⊤ V2 = 0. Equation (89) follows by
the definition of x.
We now show that running gradient descent on F (w) starting from w with a sufficiently small step
size converges to PS ∗ (w).
Lemma 10. Let w(0) , w(1) , . . . be the iterates generated by running gradient descent on F (w)
with w(0) = w and learning rate ηl ≤ λmax , where λmax is the largest eigen value of A⊤ A. Then
limT →∞ w(T ) = PS ∗ (w).

Proof. By the gradient descent update we have,
                              w(t+1) = w(t) − ηl (A⊤ Aw(t) − A⊤ b)                                (91)
                                                  ⊤      (t)        ⊤
                                      = (I − ηl A A)w          + ηl A b.                          (92)


                                                  24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore,
                                                T
                                                X −1
        w(T ) = (I − ηl A⊤ A)T w(0) + ηl                (I − ηl A⊤ A)t A⊤ b                                                 (93)
                                                t=0
                                                         T
                                                         X −1
             = V(I − ηl Σ⊤ Σ)T V⊤ w(0) + ηl                       V(I − ηl Σ⊤ Σ)t Σ⊤ U⊤ b                                   (94)
                                                          t=0
                                                                                     T −1
                                                                                                            !
                                                                                     X
             = (V1 (I − ηl Σ21 )T V1 + V2 V2⊤ )w(0) + ηl V1                                (I − ηl Σ21 )t       Σ1 U⊤ b.    (95)
                                                                                     t=0


In the limit T → ∞ and with ηl ≤ λmax , we have,
                                                                    T −1
                                                                    X                              1 −2
                      lim (I − ηl Σ21 )T = 0 and lim                         (I − ηl Σ21 )t =        Σ .                    (96)
                     T →∞                                 T →∞
                                                                       t=0
                                                                                                   ηl 1

Thus,
                                lim w(T ) = V2 V2⊤ w(0) + V1 Σ−1 ⊤
                                                              1 U b                                                         (97)
                               T →∞

                                               = PS ∗ (w(0) )                                                               (98)
                                               = PS ∗ (w).                                                                  (99)



C.4.1     I MPROVING L OWER B OUND IN (8) IN THE C ASE OF E XACT P ROJECTIONS
                                                                                                (t,τ )
Let Si∗ be convex and let w∗ ∈ Si for all i ∈ [M ]. We assume that wi                  = PSi∗ (w(t) ) ∀i ∈ [M ],
                                                           (t)
i.e., the local models are an exact projection of w on their respective solution sets. From (8) we
have,
                                                               PM D (t)                (t)
                                                                                           E
                                   w (t)
                                         −   w ∗ ¯ (t)
                                                , ∆             i=1     w − w ∗ , ∆i
                       (t)
                     (ηg )opt =                            =                                 .            (100)
                                          ¯ (t) 2
                                          ∆                            M ∆    ¯ (t) 2
                       D                     E
                                         (t)
We can lower bound w(t) − w∗ , ∆i              as follows,
              D                   E D                                                           E
                              (t)                    (t,τ )     (t,τ )                   (t,τ )
                w(t) − w∗ , ∆i     = w(t) − wi              + wi       − w∗ , w(t) − wi                   (101)
                                                             2  D                                     E
                                                     (t,τ )           (t,τ )                   (t,τ )
                                   = w(t) − wi                 + wi          − w∗ , w(t) − wi             (102)
                                                                   2
                                                         (t,τ )
                                     ≥ w(t) − wi                                                                           (103)
                                                    2
                                              (t)
                                     = ∆i                                                                                  (104)
                                                                                                                           (105)
                                 D                                               E
                                     (t,τ )                             (t,τ )
where (103) uses the fact that wi             − w∗ , w(t) − wi                       ≥ 0 following the properties of projec-
tion (Boyd & Dattarro, 2003).
Thus we have,
                                                           PM                (t) 2
                                              (t)               ∆ii=1
                                         (ηg )opt ≥                                                                        (106)
                                                               ¯ (t) 2
                                                             M ∆

Note here the improvement by a factor of 2 in the lower bound compared to (8).



                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D                              A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND S ETUP D ETAILS

Our code is available at the following link https://github.com/Divyansh03/FedExP.

D.1                            I MPACT OF AVERAGING I TERATES FOR N EURAL N ETWORKS

As discussed in Section 5, we find that setting the final FedExP model as the average of the last
two iterates also improves performance when training neural networks in practical FL scenarios. To
demonstrate this, we consider an experiment on the CIFAR-10 dataset with 10 clients, where the data
at each client is distributed using a Dirichlet distribution with α = 0.3. We set the number of local
steps to be τ = 20 and train a CNN model having the same architecture as outlined in McMahan et al.
(2017) with full client participation. Figure 6 shows the training accuracy as a function of the last
iterate and the average of last two iterates for FedAvg and FedExP. We see that the last iterate of
FedExP has an oscillating behavior that can hide improvements in training accuracy. On the other
hand, the average of the last two iterates of FedExP produces a more stable training curve and shows
a considerable improvement in the final accuracy. Note however that this improvement only shows
for FedExP; averaging iterates does not make significant difference for FedAvg.

                                    FedExP (Avg. of last two iterates)        FedExP (Last iterate)                                                                    FedExP
                                    FedAvg (Avg. of last two iterates)        FedAvg (Last iterate)

                          80


                                                                                                        Server Step Size ηg(t)
  Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                 3.0
                          60
                                                                                                                                 2.5
                          40
                                                                                                                                 2.0
                          20

                                0           20            40             60         80            100                                  0   20    40         60    80       100
                                                           Training rounds                                                                      Training rounds



Figure 6: Benefit of averaging the last two iterates for FedExP in training a CNN model on
CIFAR-10. Note that averaging does not make significant difference for FedAvg.


D.2                            DATASET D ETAILS

Here we provide more details about the datasets used in Section 6.
Synthetic Linear Regression. In this case we assume that the local objective of each client is given
                          2
by Fi (w) = ∥Ai w − bi ∥ where Ai ∈ R(30×1000) , bi ∈ R30 and w ∈ R1000 . We set the number
                                              PM
of clients to be M = 20. Note that since d ≥ i=1 ni , this is an overparameterized convex problem.
To generate Ai and bi , we follow a similar process as Li et al. (2020). We have (Ai )j: ∼ N (mi , Id )
and (bi )j = wi⊤ (Ai )j: where mi ∼ N (ui , 1), wi ∼ N (yi , 1), ui ∼ N (0, 0.1), yi ∼ N (0, 0.1).
EMNIST. EMNIST is an image classification task consisting of handwritten characters associated
with 62 labels. The federated EMNIST dataset available at Caldas et al. (2019) is naturally partitioned
into 3400 clients based on the identities of the character authors. The number of training and test
samples is 671,585 and 77,483 respectively.
CIFAR-10/100. CIFAR-10 is a natural image dataset consisting of 60,000 32x32 images divided
into 10 classes. CIFAR-100 uses a finer labeling of the CIFAR images to divide them into 100 classes
making it a harder dataset for image classification. In both cases the number of training examples
and test examples is 50,000 and 10,000 respectively. To simulate a federated setting, we artificially
partition the training data into 100 clients following the procedure outlined in Hsu et al. (2019).
CINIC-10. CINIC-10 is a natural image dataset that can be used as a direct replacement of CIFAR
for machine learning tasks. It is intended to act as a harder dataset than CIFAR-10 while being easier
than CIFAR-100. The number of training and test examples is both 90,000. We partition the training
data into 200 clients in this case, following a similar procedure as for CIFAR.


                                                                                            26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D.3    H YPERPARAMETER D ETAILS

For our baselines, we find the best performing ηg and ηl by grid-search tuning. For FedExP we
search for ϵ and ηl . This is done by running algorithms for 50 rounds and finding the parameters that
achieve the highest training accuracy averaged over the last 10 rounds. We provide details of the grid
used below for each experiment below.
Grid for Synthetic.
For FedAvg and SCAFFOLD, the grid for ηg is {100 , 100.5 , 100.5 , 101 , 102 }. For FedAdagrad,
the grid for ηg is {10−1 , 10−0.5 , 10−0 , 100.5 , 101 }. For FedExP we keep ϵ = 0 in this experiment
as (6) is satisfied in this case. The grid for ηl is {10−2 , 10−1.5 , 10−1 , 10−0.5 , 100 } for all algorithms.
Grid for Neural Network Experiments.
For FedAvg and SCAFFOLD the grid for ηg is {10−1 , 10−0.5 , 100 , 100.5 , 101 }. For FedAdagrad,
the grid for ηg is {10−2 , 10−1.5 , 10−1 , 10−0.5 , 100 }.      For FedExP the grid for ϵ is
{10−3 , 10−2.5 , 10−2 , 10−1.5 , 10−1 }. The grid for ηl is {10−2 , 10−1.5 , 10−1 , 10−0.5 , 100 } for all
algorithms.
We use lower values of ηg in the grid for FedAdagrad based on observations from Reddi et al.
(2021) which show that FedAdagrad performs better with smaller values of the server step size.
We provide details of the best performing hyperparameters below.

Table 3: Base-10 logarithm of the best combination of ϵ and ηl for FedExP and combination of ηl
and ηg for baselines. For the synthetic dataset we keep ϵ = 0 for FedExP.

                                FedExP           FedAvg            SCAFFOLD         FedAdagrad
        Dataset
                            ϵ         ηl       ηg    ηl            ηg   ηl           ηg     ηl
        Synthetic         *         −1         1     −1            1    −1          −1         −1
        EMNIST          −1          −0.5       0     −0.5          0    −0.5        −0.5       −0.5
        CIFAR-10        −3          −2         0     −2            0    −2          −1         −2
        CIFAR-100       −3          −2         0     −2            0    −2          −1         −2
        CINIC-100       −3          −2         0     −2            0    −2          −1         −2

Other hyperparameters are kept the same for all algorithms. In particular, we apply a weight decay
of 0.0001 for all algorithms and decay ηl by a factor of 0.998 in every round. We also use gradient
clipping to improve stability of the algorithms as done in previous works (Acar et al., 2021). In all
experiments we fix the number of participating clients to be 20, minibatch size to be 50 (for the
synthetic dataset this reduces to full-batch gradient descent) and number of local updates τ to be 20.

D.4    S ENSITIVITY OF F ED E X P TO ϵ

To evaluate the sensitivity of FedExP to ϵ, we compute the training accuracy of FedExP after 500
rounds for varying ϵ and on different tasks. For each task, we fix ηl to be the value used in our
experiments in Section 6 and only vary ϵ. The results are summarized below.

Table 4: Training accuracy obtained by FedExP with different choices of ϵ after 500 rounds of
training on various tasks. Value of ηl is fixed for each task (10−0.5 for EMNIST and 10−2 for others).
Results averaged over last 10 rounds.

                  Dataset        ϵ = 10−3   ϵ = 10−2.5    ϵ = 10−2     ϵ = 10−1.5   ϵ = 10−1
                 EMNIST           85.40      86.26         85.73         85.49       84.90
                CIFAR-10          84.79      77.82         77.63         77.66       77.64
                CIFAR-100         59.01      44.76         44.21         44.37       44.40
                CINIC-10          66.31      60.93         61.05         60.47       60.96



We see that the sensitivity of ϵ is similar to that of the τ parameter which is added to the denominator
of FedAdam and FedAdagrad (Reddi et al., 2021) to prevent the step size from blowing up.


                                                     27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Keeping ϵ too large reduces the adaptivity of the method and makes the behavior similar to FedAvg.
At the same time, keeping ϵ too small may not also be beneficial always as seen in the case of EMNIST.
In practice, we find that a grid search for ϵ in the range {10−3 , 10−2.5 , 10−2 , 10−1.5 , 10−1 } usually
suffices to yield a good value of ϵ. A general rule of thumb would be to start with ϵ = 10−3 and
increase ϵ till the performance drops.

D.5                         A DDITIONAL R ESULTS

In this section, we provide additional results obtained from our experiments.
Synthetic Linear Regression. Note that for the synthetic linear regression experiments there is no
test data. Also note that there is no randomness in this experiment since clients compute full-batch
                                                            (t)
gradients with full participation. We provide the plot of ηg for FedExP in Figure 7. We see that
FedExP takes much larger steps in some (but not all) rounds compared to the constant optimum
step size taken by our baselines, leading to a large speedup. Recall that we also let ϵ = 0 in this
                                                                                        (t)
experiment (since it aligns with our theory) which also explains the larger values of ηg taken by
FedExP in this case.

                                                      FedExP (ours)                                       FedAvg             SCAFFOLD                                FedAdagrad



                          150
 Server Step Size ηg(t)


                          100


                           50


                            0
                                    0            25            50                                    75          100         125                            150        175            200
                                                                                                           Training rounds


Figure 7: Global learning rates for synthetic data with linear regression. Results from a single instance
of experiment.


EMNIST. For EMNIST we observe that SCAFFOLD gives slightly better training loss than
FedExP towards the end of training. As described in Section 6, extrapolation can be combined with
the variance-reduction in SCAFFOLD (the resulting algorithm is referred to as SCAFFOLD-ExP) to
further improve performance. This gives the best result in this case as shown in Figure 8.

                             FedExP (ours)                SCAFFOLD-ExP (ours)                                      FedAvg          SCAFFOLD                               FedAdagrad

                      0.70                                                                  86
                                                                                                                                                            3
                      0.65                                                                  85
                                                                    Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                   Server Step Size ηg(t)
 Training Loss


                      0.60                                                                  84
                                                                                                                                                            2
                      0.55                                                                  83

                      0.50                                                                  82
                                                                                                                                                            1
                      0.45                                                                  81

                      0.40                                                                  80
                                0             250           500                                  0              250          500                                0         250           500
                                        Training rounds                                                   Training rounds                                           Training rounds


Figure 8: Additional results for EMNIST dataset. Mean and standard deviation from experiments
with 20 different random seeds. The shaded areas show the standard deviation.


                                                                                                            28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and CINIC-10. From Figure 3 and Figures 9–11, we see that FedExP
comprehensively outperforms baselines in these cases, achieving almost 10%–20% higher accuracy
than the closest baseline by the end of training. The margin of improvement is most in CIFAR-100,
which can be considered as the toughest dataset in our experiments. This points to the practical utility
of FedExP even in challenging FL scenarios.

                                    FedExP (ours)                                           FedAvg             SCAFFOLD                                         FedAdagrad


                 1.4                                                                       80                                                             2.0


                                                                   Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                 Server Step Size ηg(t)
                 1.2                                                                       70
 Training Loss


                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                 1.0
                                                                                           60
                 0.8                                                                                                                                      1.0
                                                                                           50
                 0.6                                                                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                           40
                 0.4
                                                                                           30                                                             0.0
                           0          250          500                                          0          250         500                                      0           250         500
                                Training rounds                                                      Training rounds                                                  Training rounds

Figure 9: Additional results for CIFAR-10 dataset. Mean and standard deviation from experiments
with 5 different random seeds. The shaded areas show the standard deviation.


                                   FedExP (ours)                                           FedAvg              SCAFFOLD                                         FedAdagrad

                                                                                     60
                                                                                                                                                          2.0
                                                         Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                             Server Step Size ηg(t)


                 4                                                                   50
 Training Loss


                                                                                                                                                          1.5

                 3                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                          1.0

                                                                                     30                                                                   0.5
                 2

                                                                                     20                                                                   0.0
                       0             250          500                                           0          250         500                                      0          250          500
                               Training rounds                                                       Training rounds                                                 Training rounds

Figure 10: Additional results for CIFAR-100 dataset. Mean and standard deviation from experiments
with 5 different random seeds. The shaded areas show the standard deviation.


                                    FedExP (ours)                                           FedAvg             SCAFFOLD                                         FedAdagrad

                 1.8                                                                                                                                      2.0
                                                                                           65
                                                                   Training Accuracy (%)


                 1.6
                                                                                                                                 Server Step Size ηg(t)


                                                                                           60                                                             1.5
 Training Loss


                 1.4
                                                                                           55
                                                                                                                                                          1.0
                 1.2
                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                 1.0                                                                       45

                 0.8                                                                       40
                           0          250          500                                          0          250         500                                      0           250         500
                                Training rounds                                                      Training rounds                                                  Training rounds

Figure 11: Additional results for CINIC-10 dataset. Mean and standard deviation from experiments
with 5 different random seeds. The shaded areas show the standard deviation.


                                                                                                        29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Long-Term Behavior of Algorithms and Comparison with FedProx. To evaluate the long-term
behavior of different algorithms, we ran the experiments for 2000 rounds. Here, we also consider an
additional algorithm, namely FedProx, for comparison. For fair comparison, we have tuned the µ
parameter of FedProx for each dataset, by doing a grid search over the range {10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 , 1}
as done in the original FedProx paper (Li et al., 2020). The results of EMNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-
100, and CINIC-10 in Figures 12–14 and Table 5 are from experiments with 3 different random seeds.
Except for the synthetic dataset, the plots show mean and standard deviation values across all the
random seeds and also over a moving average window of size 20.



                                                    FedExP (ours)                                                                    FedAvg                              SCAFFOLD                                                       FedAdagrad                                          FedProx
                                             Synthetic                                                                           EMNIST                                             CIFAR-10                                                      CIFAR-100                                                               CINIC-10
                                                                                  0.6                                                                              2.0
                        10
                              −1                                                                                                                                                                                                        4.0                                                                  2.0
Mean Squared Error


                              −7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3.0
                        10                                                        0.5                                                                              1.0
                                                                  Training Loss


                                                                                                                                                   Training Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Training Loss


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Training Loss
                                                                                                                                                                   0.9
                                                                                                                                                                   0.8
                             −13                                                                                                                                   0.7                                                                  2.0
                        10                                                                                                                                         0.6
                                                                                                                                                                   0.5
                             −19                                                  0.4                                                                              0.4
                        10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.0
                                                                                                                                                                   0.3                                                                                                                                       0.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                        10
                             −25                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                   0.2                                                                  0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.7                                                                  0.7
                                                                                  0.3
                                       0        1000       2000                               0                                  1000       2000                         0          1000       2000                                           0        1000       2000                                             0         1000       2000
                                           Training rounds                                                                  Training rounds                                    Training rounds                                                    Training rounds                                                       Training rounds



Figure 12: Training loss results of FedExP, FedAvg, SCAFFOLD, FedAdagrad and FedProx
on the Synthetic, EMNIST, CIFAR-10,CIFAR-100 and CINIC-10 datasets for 2000 rounds.


                                                    FedExP (ours)                                                                    FedAvg                              SCAFFOLD                                                       FedAdagrad                                          FedProx
                                               EMNIST                                                                                     CIFAR-10                                                                       CIFAR-100                                                                                     CINIC-10
                        88                                                                                                  95                                                                               80
Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                    Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                     Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                            90                                                                                                                                                         70
                        87                                                                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                            85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                        86                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                            80
                        85                                                                                                                                                                                   50                                                                        50
                                                                                                                            75

                        84                                                                                                  70                                                                               40                                                                        40
                                   0       500    1000 1500       2000                                                           0     500    1000 1500                      2000                                 0   500    1000 1500                  2000                                 0                 500    1000 1500        2000
                                             Training rounds                                                                             Training rounds                                                                Training rounds                                                                          Training rounds



Figure 13: Training accuracy results of FedExP, FedAvg, SCAFFOLD, FedAdagrad and
FedProx on the EMNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and CINIC-10 datasets for 2000 rounds.


                                                    FedExP (ours)                                                                    FedAvg                              SCAFFOLD                                                       FedAdagrad                                          FedProx
                                               EMNIST                                                                                     CIFAR-10                                                                       CIFAR-100                                                                                     CINIC-10
                                                                                                                85.0                                                                                                                                                                   70
                                                                                                                                                                                                             55
                        87                                                                                      82.5                                                                                                                                                                   65
Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                        Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                     Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                80.0                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                        86
                                                                                                                77.5                                                                                                                                                                   55

                                                                                                                75.0                                                                                         45                                                                        50
                        85
                                                                                                                72.5                                                                                                                                                                   45

                        84                                                                                      70.0                                                                                         40                                                                        40
                                   0       500    1000 1500       2000                                                           0     500    1000 1500                      2000                                 0   500    1000 1500                  2000                                 0                 500    1000 1500        2000
                                             Training rounds                                                                             Training rounds                                                                Training rounds                                                                          Training rounds



Figure 14: Test accuracy results of FedExP, FedAvg, SCAFFOLD, FedAdagrad and FedProx
on the EMNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and CINIC-10 datasets for 2000 rounds.


                                                                                                                                                                               30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 5: Test accuracy obtained by FedExP and baselines after 2000 rounds of training on various
tasks. Results are averaged across 3 random seeds and last 20 rounds.

    Dataset       FedExP          FedAvg        SCAFFOLD       FedAdagrad         FedProx
   EMNIST       86.96 ± 0.58    85.78 ± 0.35    86.22 ± 0.35    85.53 ± 1.04     85.77 ± 0.39
  CIFAR-10      82.94 ± 0.42    80.10 ± 0.56    82.02 ± 0.30    80.21 ± 0.60     80.16 ± 0.59
  CIFAR-100     54.65 ± 0.49    49.63 ± 0.37    49.40 ± 0.38    49.64 ± 0.39     49.47 ± 0.31
  CINIC-10      66.45 ± 1.28    64.87 ± 0.44    64.61 ± 0.49    64.87 ± 0.44     64.52 ± 0.45


We see that FedExP continues to outperform baselines including FedProx in the long-term behavior
as well.


                                               31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E     C OMBINING E XTRAPOLATION WITH SCAFFOLD
As described in Section 6, the extrapolation step can be added to the SCAFFOLD algorithm in a similar
way as FedExP. The detailed steps of this SCAFFOLD-ExP algorithm are shown in Algorithm 2.

Algorithm 2 SCAFFOLD-ExP
                                          (0)
 1: Input: w(0) , control variate c(0) , ci , ∀i ∈ [M ], number of rounds T , local iteration steps τ ,
      parameters ηl , ϵ
 2: For t = 0, . . . , T − 1 communication rounds do:
 3:   Global server do:
 4:   Send w(t) , c(t) to all clients
 5:   Clients i ∈ [M ] in parallel do:
                  (t,0)
 6:         Set wi   ← w(t,0)
 7:         For k = 0, . . . , τ − 1 local iterations
                                                    do:
                         (t,k+1)        (t,k)            (t,k) (t,k) (t)
 8:           Update wi           ← wi        − ηl ∇Fi (wi , ξi ) − ci + c(t)
                          (t)          (t,τ )        (t)               (t)
 9:         Compute ∆i ← w(t) − wi              and Ψi ← c(t) − τ1ηl ∆i
                    (t)         (t)
10:        Send ∆i and Ψi to the server
                                         (t+1)    (t)  (t)
11:        Update local control variate ci     ← ci − Ψi
12:      Global server do:
                                                                       ¯ (t) 2 +ϵ
                                                         n       .                 o
13:        Compute ∆¯ (t) ← 1 PM ∆(t) and ηg(t) ← max 1, PM ∆(t) 2 2M ∆
                            M     i=1 i                    i=1 i
                                                         (t) ¯ (t)
14:         Update global model with w(t+1) ← w(t) − ηg ∆
                              1    M      (t)
            Compute Ψ̄(t) ← M i=1 Ψi
                                P
15:
16:         Update global control variate with c(t+1) ← c(t) − Ψ̄(t)


                                                     32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    C OMBINING E XTRAPOLATION WITH S ERVER M OMENTUM
We begin by recalling some notation from our work. The vector w(t) is the global model at round
      ¯ (t) is the average of client updates at round t. The server momentum update at round t can
t and ∆
be written as v(t) = ∆   ¯ (t) + βv(t−1) (let v−1 = 0) and the global model update can be written as
                     (t)                               (t)                             2
w(t+1) = w(t) − ηg v(t) . Our goal is now to find ηg that minimizes w(t+1) − w∗ . We have,
                       2                   2                              2
        w(t+1) − w∗        = w(t) − w∗         + (ηg(t) )2 v(t)               − 2ηg(t) ⟨w(t) − w∗ , v(t) ⟩.   (107)

Setting the derivative of the RHS of (107) to zero we have,
                                                      w(t) − w∗ , v(t)
                                   (ηg(t) )opt =                      2             .                         (108)
                                                               v(t)

Our goal now is to find a lower bound on ⟨w(t) − w∗ , v(t) ⟩. We have the following lemma.
                                                                     2
Lemma 11. Assume that w(t) − w∗ , ∆   ¯ (t) ≥ m(t) = PM ∆(t) /M (see Appendix C.4.1) for
                                                          i=1     i
               (r)            Pr−1                            2
all t ≥ 0 and ηg ≤ (m(r) + k=0 (β/2)r−k m(k) )/2 v(r) for all r < t − 1. Then,
                           D                E         t−1
                                                      X
                            w(t) − w∗ , v(t) ≥ m(t) +     (β/2)t−k m(k) ,                                     (109)
                                                                 k=0

which implies,
                                                (t)
                                                          Pt−1                t−k
                                            m         +     k=0 (β/2)               m(k)
                              (ηg(t) )opt ≥                        2                       .                  (110)
                                                           2 v(t)

Proof. We proceed via a proof by induction. The statement clearly holds at t = 0 since
                                ¯ (0) ≥ m(0) .
 w(0) − w∗ , v(0) = w(0) − w∗ , ∆
Now assuming the lemma holds at t − 1 we have,
  D                 E D                   E    D                    E
    w(t) − w∗ , v(t) = w(t) − w∗ , ∆ ¯ (t) + β w(t) − w∗ , v(t−1)                                             (111)
                      D                   E    D                                     E
                     = w(t) − w∗ , ∆ ¯ (t) + β w(t−1) − ηg(t−1) v(t−1) − w∗ , v(t−1)                          (112)
                                  D
                                                         E                    2
                        (t)           (t−1)    ∗   (t−1)      (t−1)     (t−1)
                     ≥m +β w                − w ,v         − ηg       v                                       (113)
                                  t−1
                                  X
                       ≥ m(t) +         (β/2)t−k m(k) ,                                                       (114)
                                  k=0

where the last line follows from the fact that w(t−1) − w∗ , v(t−1)      ≥ m(t−1) +
Pt−2       t−1−k (k)     (t−1)             t−2                            2
                               ≤ (m(t−1) + k=0 (β/2)t−1−k m(k) )/2 v(t−1) .
                                          P
  k=0 (β/2)     m and ηg
Thus we propose to keep the following server step size when using server momentum,
                                             Pt−1
                                      m(t) + k=0 (β/2)t−k m(k)
                              ηg(t) =                 2           ,                                           (115)
                                            2( v(t) + ϵ)
                              2
                PM        (t)
where m(t) = i=1 ∆i             /M . Note that we also add a small constant ϵ to the denominator to
prevent the step size from blowing up as done for FedExP. We call server momentum with this step
size as FedExP-M.
We compare the performance of FedExP-M with FedAdam and FedAvg-M (FedAvg with server
momentum) on the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets as shown in Figures 15–17, where the mean
and standard deviation values are computed over 3 random seeds and a moving average window of


                                                          33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


size 20. The experimental setup is the same as described in Section 6. The hyperparameters ηl , ϵ
for FedExP-M and ηl , ηg for FedAdam and FedAvg-M were tuned following a similar process as
described in Appendix D.3, and their resulting values are in Table 6.

Table 6: Base-10 logarithm of the best combination of ϵ and ηl for FedExP-M and combination of
ηl and ηg for FedAdam and FedAvg-M.

                                                                        FedExP                       FedAdam                                           FedAvgm-M
                      Dataset
                                                                    ϵ         ηl                    ηg     ηl                                          ηg    ηl
                      CIFAR-10                                  −3             −2              −2                                       −2             0         −2
                      CIFAR-100                                 −3             −2              −2                                       −2             0         −2



                                                                     FedExP-M (ours)                    FedAvg-M                                   FedAdam

                                                                   CIFAR-10                                                                         CIFAR-100
                                             0
                                       10
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                           10
               Training Loss


                                                                                                Training Loss
                                            −1
                                       10
                                                                                                                               −1
                                                                                                                          10

                                            −2
                                       10
                                                                                                                               −2
                                                                                                                          10

                                                     0    500         1000       1500   2000                                        0        500        1000       1500   2000
                                                                 Training rounds                                                                   Training rounds



Figure 15: Training loss results of FedExP-M, FedAdam and FedAvg-M on the CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 datasets.

                                                                     FedExP-M (ours)                 FedAvg-M                                      FedAdam

                                                                  CIFAR-10                                                                          CIFAR-100

                                       100                                                                                 100
               Training Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                  Training Accuracy (%)


                                        95                                                                                  95



                                        90                                                                                  90



                                        85                                                                                  85
                                                 0       500         1000       1500    2000                                        0        500        1000       1500   2000
                                                                Training rounds                                                                    Training rounds



Figure 16: Training accuracy results of FedExP-M, FedAdam and FedAvg-M on the CIFAR10
and CIFAR100 datasets.

                                                                    FedExP-M (ours)             FedAvg-M                                           FedAdam

                                                                 CIFAR-10                                                                           CIFAR-100
                                       90                                                                                  62

                                       88                                                                                  60
               Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                       Test Accuracy (%)


                                                                                                                           58
                                       86
                                                                                                                           56
                                       84
                                                                                                                           54
                                       82                                                                                  52

                                       80                                                                                  50
                                                 0       500         1000       1500    2000                                        0        500        1000       1500   2000
                                                                Training rounds                                                                    Training rounds



Figure 17: Test accuracy results of FedExP-M, FedAdam and FedAvg-M on the CIFAR10 and
CIFAR100 datasets.

Our result shows that server momentum can be successfully combined with extrapolation for the best
speed-up among all baselines. The behavior of FedAdam and FedAvg-M are quite similar in these
experiments which can be attributed to the dense nature of the gradients in image classification as


                                                                                               34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


discussed in Section 6. We note that this is only a preliminary result and future work will look to
study the effect of combining server momentum and extrapolation more rigorously.


                                                35
