Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


U NDERSTANDING THE G ENERALIZATION OF A DAM IN
L EARNING N EURAL N ETWORKS WITH P ROPER R EGU -
LARIZATION

 Difan Zou1 , Yuan Cao2 , Yuanzhi Li3 , Quanquan Gu4
 1
   Department of Computer Science & Institute of Data Science, The University of Hong Kong
 dzou@cs.hku.hk
 2
   Department of Statistics & Actuarial Science, The University of Hong Kong
 yuancao@hku.hk
 3
   Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University
 yuanzhil@andrew.cmu.edu
 4
   Department of Computer Science, University of California, Los Angeles
 qgu@cs.ucla.edu



                                          A BSTRACT

        Adaptive gradient methods such as Adam have gained increasing popularity in
        deep learning optimization. However, it has been observed in many deep learn-
        ing applications such as image classification, Adam can converge to a different
        solution with a worse test error compared to (stochastic) gradient descent, even
        with a fine-tuned regularization. In this paper, we provide a theoretical expla-
        nation for this phenomenon: we show that in the nonconvex setting of learn-
        ing over-parameterized two-layer convolutional neural networks starting from the
        same random initialization, for a class of data distributions (inspired from image
        data), Adam and gradient descent (GD) can converge to different global solutions
        of the training objective with provably different generalization errors, even with
        weight decay regularization. In contrast, we show that if the training objective is
        convex, and the weight decay regularization is employed, any optimization algo-
        rithms including Adam and GD will converge to the same solution if the training
        is successful. This suggests that the generalization gap between Adam and SGD
        in the presence of weight decay regularization is closely tied to the nonconvex
        landscape of deep learning optimization, which cannot be covered by the recent
        neural tangent kernel (NTK) based analysis.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Adaptive gradient methods (Duchi et al., 2011; Hinton et al., 2012; Kingma & Ba, 2015; Reddi
et al., 2018) such as Adam are very popular optimizers for training deep neural networks. By
adjusting the learning rate coordinate-wisely based on historical gradient information, they are
known to be able to automatically choose appropriate learning rates to achieve fast convergence
in training. Because of this advantage, Adam and its variants are widely used in deep learning.
Despite their fast convergence, adaptive gradient
methods have been observed to achieve worse
generalization performance compared with gra-          Models AlexNet VGG-16 ResNet-18
dient descent and stochastic gradient descent
                                                         SGD        75.22     93.25       94.62
(SGD) (Wilson et al., 2017; Luo et al., 2019;
                                                        Adam        73.08     92.19       92.93
Chen et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020) in many
deep learning tasks such as image classification
(we have done some simple deep learning exper- Table 1: Test accuracy (%) comparison between
iments to justify this, the results are reported in Adam and SGD on the CIFAR-10 dataset.
Table 1). Even with explicit weight decay regu-
larization, achieving good test error with adaptive gradient methods seems to be challenging. More-
over, we have also visualized the first layer of AlexNet trained by Adam and SGD in Figure 1, where


                                                1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


we can also observe a clear difference between Adam and SGD: the model learned by Adam is more
“noisy” than that learned by SGD.
Several recent works provided theoretical explanations of this generalization gap between Adam
and GD by showing that Adam and GD have different implicit bias. Wilson et al. (2017); Agarwal
et al. (2019) considered a setting of linear regression, and showed that Adam can fail when learning
an overparameterized linear model on certain specifically designed data, while SGD can learn the
linear model to achieve zero test error. This example in linear regression offers valuable insights into
the difference between SGD and Adam. However, there is a gap between their theoretical results
and the practical observations, since they consider a convex optimization setting, and the difference
between Adam and SGD will no longer be observed when adding weight decay regularization.
In fact, as we will show in this paper (Theorem 4.2), regularization can successfully correct the
different implicit bias and push different algorithms to find the same solution, since the regularized
training loss function of a convex model becomes strongly convex, which exhibits one unique global
optimum. For this reason, we argue that the example in the convex setting cannot fully capture the
differences between GD and Adam for training neural networks. More recently, Zhou et al. (2020)
studied the expected escaping time of Adam and SGD from a local basin, and utilized this to explain
the difference between SGD and Adam. However, their results do not take NN architecture into
consideration, and do not provide an analysis of test errors either.
In this paper, we aim at answering the following question
Why is there a generalization gap between Adam and gradient descent in learning neural networks,
even with weight decay regularization?
Specifically, we study Adam and GD for training neural networks with weight decay regularization
on an image-like data model, and demonstrate the different behaviors of Adam and GD based on
the notion of feature learning/noise memorization decomposition. Inspired by the experimental
observation in Figure 1 where Adam tends to overfit the noise component of the data, we consider
a model where the data are generated as a combination of feature and noise patches, and analyze
the convergence and generalization of Adam and GD for training a two-layer convolutional neural
network (CNN). The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
• We establish global convergence guarantees for Adam and GD with weight decay regularization.
  We show that, starting at the same random initialization, Adam and GD can both train a two-layer
  convolutional neural network to achieve zero training error after polynomially many iterations,
  despite the nonconvex optimization landscape.
• We further show that GD and Adam in fact converge to different global solutions with different
  generalization performance: when performed on the considered image-like data model, GD can
  achieve nearly zero test error, while the generalization performance of the model found by Adam
  is no better than a random guess. In particular, we show that the reason for this gap is due to the
  different training behaviors of Adam and GD: Adam is more likely to fit dense noises and output
  a model that is largely contributed by the noise patches; GD prefers to fit training data using their
  feature patch and finds a solution that is mainly composed by the true features.
• We also show that for convex settings with weight decay regularization, both Adam and gradient
  descent converge to the same solution and therefore have no test error difference. This suggests
  that the difference between Adam and GD cannot be fully explained by linear models or neural
  networks trained in the “almost convex” neural tangent kernel (NTK) regime (Jacot et al., 2018;
  Allen-Zhu et al., 2019b; Du et al., 2019a; Zou et al., 2019). It also demonstrates that the inferior
  generalization performance of Adam is closely tied to the nonconvex landscape of deep learning
  optimization, and cannot be solved by adding regularization.

2   R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we discuss the works that are closely related to our paper.
Generalization gap between Adam and SGD. The worse generalization of Adam compared with
SGD has also been observed by some recent works and has motivated new variants of neural net-
work training algorithms. Keskar & Socher (2017) proposed to switch between Adam and SGD
to achieve better generalization. Merity et al. (2018) proposed a variant of the averaged stochastic
gradient method to achieve good generalization performance for LSTM language models. Luo et al.
(2019) proposed to use dynamic bounds on learning rates to achieve a smooth transition from adap-
tive methods to SGD to improve generalization. Our theoretical results for GD and Adam can also


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     (a) Adam                                            (b) SGD
Figure 1: Visualization of the first layer of AlexNet trained by Adam and SGD on the CIFAR-10
dataset. Both algorithms are run for 100 epochs with weight decay regularization and standard data
augmentations. Clearly, the model learned by Adam is more “noisy” than that learned by SGD,
implying that Adam is more likely to overfit the noise in the training data.
provide theoretical insights into the effectiveness of these empirical studies.
Optimization and generalization in deep learning. Our work is also closely related to the recent
line of work studying the optimization and generalization guarantees of neural networks in the neu-
ral tangent kernel (NTK) regime (Jacot et al., 2018) or lazy training regime (Chizat et al., 2019). In
particular, recent works (Du et al., 2019b;a; Allen-Zhu et al., 2019b; Zou et al., 2019) showed that
the optimization only happens within a small neighborhood region around the random initialization
and proved the global convergence of GD and SGD when the neural network is sufficiently wide.
Moreover, the generalization ability of GD/SGD has been further studied in the same setting (Allen-
Zhu et al., 2019a; Arora et al., 2019a;b; Ji & Telgarsky, 2020; Chen et al., 2021), which suggests
that wide neural network trained by GD/SGD can learn a low-dimensional function class. Moreover,
Allen-Zhu & Li (2019); Bai & Lee (2019) initiated the study of learning neural networks beyond the
NTK regime as it differs from the practical DNN training. Our analysis in this paper is also beyond
NTK, and gives a detailed comparison between GD and Adam.
Feature learning by neural networks. This paper is also closely related to several recent works
that studied how neural networks can learn features. Allen-Zhu & Li (2020a) showed that adversar-
ial training purifies the learned features by removing certain “dense mixtures” in the hidden layer
weights of the network. Allen-Zhu & Li (2020b) studied how ensemble and knowledge distillation
work in deep learning when the data have “multi-view” features. Frei et al. (2022b) studied the fea-
ture learning for two-layer networks, and demonstrated its superior performance than linear models.
Shen et al. (2022) explored the benefit of data augmentation by showing its ability to achieve more
effective feature learning. This paper studies a different aspect of feature learning by Adam and GD,
and shows that GD can learn the features while Adam may fail even with proper regularization.

3   P ROBLEM S ETUP AND P RELIMINARIES
We consider learning a CNN with Adam and GD based on n independent training examples
{(xi , yi )}ni=1 generated from a data model D. In the following. we first introduce our data model
D, and then explain our neural network model and the details of the training algorithms.
Data model. We consider a data model where the data inputs consist of feature and noise patches.
Such a data model is motivated by image classification problems where the label of an image usually
only depends on part of an image, and the other parts of the image showing random objects, or fea-
tures that belong to other classes, can be considered as noises. When using CNN to fit the data, the
convolution operation is applied to each patch of the data input separately. We claim that our data
model is more practical than those considered in Wilson et al. (2017); Reddi et al. (2018), which
are handcrafted for showing the failure of Adam in term of either convergence or generalization (de-
tailed illustrations of the data models in these works are deferred to the appendix). For simplicity, we
only consider the case where the data consists of one feature patch and one noise patch. However,
our result can be easily extended to cover the setting where there are multiple feature/noise patches.
The detailed definition of our data model is given in Definition 3.1 as follows.
Definition 3.1. Each data point (x, y) with x ∈ R2d and y ∈ {−1, 1} is generated as follows:
x = [x>        > >
         1 , x2 ] , where one of x1 and x2 denotes the feature patch that consists of a feature vector


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


y · v, which is assumed to be 1-sparse, and the other one denotes the noise patch and consists of
a noise vector ξ. Without loss of generality, we assume v = [1, 0, . . . , 0]> . The noise vector ξ is
generated according to the following process:
• Randomly select s coordinates from [d]\{1} uniformly, denoted as a vector s ∈ {0, 1}d .
• Generate ξ from distribution N (0, σp2 I), and then mask off the first coordinate and other d − s − 1
  coordinates, i.e., ξ = ξ s.
• Add feature noise to ξ, i.e., ξ = ξ − αyv, where 0 < α < 1 is the strength of the feature noise.
                                                                      1/2
In particular, throughout this paper we set d = Ω(n4 ), s = Θ dn2 , σp2 = Θ s·polylog(n)   1

                                                                                                    and

α = Θ σp · polylog(n) .

The most natural way to think of our data model is to treat x as the output of some intermediate
layer of a CNN. In literature, Papyan et al. (2017) pointed out that the outputs of an intermediate
layer of a CNN are usually sparse. Yang (2019) also discussed the setting where the hidden nodes
in such an intermediate layer are sampled independently. This motivates us to study sparse features
and entry-wisely independent noises in our model. In this paper, we focus on the case where the
feature vector v is 1-sparse and the noise vector is s-sparse for simplicity. However, these sparsity
assumptions can be generalized to the settings where the feature and the noises are denser, as long
as the sparsity gap between feature and noises exists.
Note that in Definition 3.1, each data input consists of two patches: a feature patch yv that is
positively correlated with the label, and a noise patch ξ which contains the “feature noise” −αyv
as well as random Gaussian noises. Importantly, the feature noise −αyv in the noise patch plays
a pivotal role in both the training and test processes, which connects the noise overfitting in the
training process and the inferior generalization ability in the test process.
Moreover, we would like to clarify that the data distribution considered in our paper is an extreme
case where we assume there is only one feature vector and all data has a feature noise, since we
believe this is the simplest model that captures the fundamental difference between Adam and SGD.
With this data model, we aim to show why Adam and SGD perform differently. Our theoretical
results and analysis techniques can also be extended to more practical settings where there are mul-
tiple feature vectors and multiple patches, each data can either contain a single feature or multiple
features, together with pure random noise or feature noise.
Two-layer CNN model. We consider a two-layer CNN model F using truncated polynomial acti-
vation function σ(z) = (max{0, z})q and fix the weights of second layer to be all 1’s, where q ≥ 3.
Given the data (x, y), the j-th output of the CNN can be formulated as
               m
               X                                      m
                                                     X
 Fj (W, x) =      σ(hwj,r , x1 i) + σ(hwj,r , x2 i) =    σ(hwj,r , y · vi) + σ(hwj,r , ξi) , (3.1)
               r=1                                       r=1

where m is the width of the network, wj,r ∈ Rd denotes the r-th CNN filter, and W is the collection
of model weights. For the ease of analysis, we set the output layer as all 1’s. Our analyses and results
can still be applied if we use random second layer weights.
Besides, the motivation of using polynomial ReLU activation function is to guarantee that the loss
function is (locally) smooth and the amplification ability of pattern learning. It can be replaced by a
smoothed ReLU activation function (e.g., the activation function used in Allen-Zhu & Li (2020b)).
If we assume the input data distribution is Gaussian, we can also deal with ReLU activation function
(Li et al., 2020). A set of similar smoothed ReLU-type activation functions have also been widely
considered to study the generalization performance of two-layer neural networks from different
aspects (Frei et al., 2022a; Cao et al., 2022; Shen et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022). Moreover, we
would like to emphasize that x1 and x2 denote two data patches, which are randomly assigned with
feature vectors or noise vectors independently for each data point. The leaner has no knowledge
about which one is the feature patch (or noise patch).
In this paper we assume the width of the network is polylogarithmic in the training sample size, i.e.,
m = polylog(n). We assume j ∈ {−1, 1} in order to make the logit index be consistent with the
data label. Moreover, we assume that the each weight
                                                   is initialized from a random draw of Gaussian
random variable ∼ N (0, σ02 ) with σ0 = Θ d−1/4 .


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Training objective. Given the training data points {(xi , yi )}i=1,...,n , we consider to learn the model
parameter W by optimizing the empirical loss function with weight decay regularization
                                                           n
                                             1X            λ
                                      L(W) =       Li (W) + kWk2F ,                                          (3.2)
                                             n i=1         2

                                   eFyi (W,xi )
where Li (W) = − log P                     Fj (W,xi ) denotes the individual loss for the data point (xi , yi ) and
                                j∈{−1,1} e
λ ≥ 0 is the regularization parameter. In particular, the regularization  parameter can be arbitrary as
                                                       1

long as it satisfies λ ∈ 0, λ0 with λ0 = Θ d(q−1)/4 n·polylog(n)    . We claim that the λ0 is the largest
feasible regularization parameter that the training process will not stuck at the origin point (recall
that L(W) admits zero gradient at W = 0.)
Training algorithms. In this paper, we consider full-batch gradient descent and Adam1 . In particu-
                             (0)
lar, starting from W(0) = {wj,r , j = {±1}, r ∈ [m]}, the gradient descent update rule is
                                          (t+1)           (t)
                                      wj,r        = wj,r − η · ∇wj,r L(W(t) ),
where η is the learning rate. Meanwhile, Adam store historical gradient information in the momen-
tum m(t) and a vector v(t) as follows
                                  (t+1)             (t)
                               mj,r       = β1 mj,r + (1 − β1 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t) ),                            (3.3)
                                (t+1)     (t)
                               vj,r = β2 vj,r + (1 − β2 ) · [∇wj,r L(W(t) )]2 ,                              (3.4)
and entry-wisely adjusts the learning rate:
                                                                           q
                                           (t+1)           (t)       (t)     (t)
                                       wj,r        = wj,r − η · mj,r /      vj,r ,                           (3.5)
where β1 , β2 are the hyperparameters of Adam (a popular choice in practice is β1 = 0.9, and
β2 = 0.99), which √ are considered as constants in our paper, and in (3.4) and (3.5), the square
(·)2 , square root ·, and division ·/· all denote entry-wise calculations. We would like to clarify the
                                                                                   (t)      (t)
original Adam paper (Kingma & Ba, 2015) considers to normalize the gradient mj,r via [vj,r + ]1/2 ,
while the small bias term   is ignored in our paper. In practice, tuning   can help improve the
generalization ability of Adam (Choi et al., 2019), as it allows to make a trade-off between the
normalized gradient update and gradient update. We remark that considering tunable   is beyond the
focus of this paper. For the ease of analysis, we do not consider the initialization bias correction in
                                            (0)                         (0)
the original Adam paper either and set mj,r = ∇wj,r L(W(0) ) and vj,r = [∇wj,r L(W(0) )]2 .

4       M AIN R ESULTS
In this section we will state the main theorems in this paper. We first provide the learning guarantees
of Adam and Gradient descent for training a two-layer CNN model in the following theorem. Recall
that in this setting the training objective is nonconvex.
Theorem 4.1 (Nonconvex setting). Consider a two-layer CNN defined in (3.1) with d = Ω(n4 )
and regularized training objective (3.2) with a regularization parameter λ > 0, suppose the network
width is m = polylog(n) and the data distribution follows Definition 3.1, then we have the following
guarantees on the training and test errors for the models trained by Adam and Gradient descent:
1. Suppose we run Adam for T = poly(n)  η
                                                                         1
                                               iterations with η = poly(n)  , then with probability at least
            −1                                   ∗                         ∗
   1 − O(n ), we can find a NN model WAdam such that k∇L(WAdam )k1 ≤ T1η . Moreover, the
             ∗
   model WAdam      also satisfies:
                                 Pn                 ∗                       ∗
   • Training error is zero: n1 i=1

                                      1   F yi
                                               (W   Adam , x i ) ≤ F −yi
                                                                         (WAdam  , x i )  = 0.
                                           ∗                        ∗
                                                                               1
   • Test error is high: P(x,y)∼D Fy (WAdam , x) ≤ F−y (WAdam , x) ≥ 2 .
2. Suppose we run gradient descent for T = poly(n)
                                                 η
                                                                                         1
                                                    iterations with learning rate η = poly(n) , then
                                  −1                              ∗                      ∗
   with probability at least 1−O(n ), we can find a NN model WGD such that k∇L(WGD )k2F ≤
    1                           ∗
   T η . Moreover, the model WGD also satisfies:

    1
        Our theory can still hold for mini-batch stochastic gradient descent, which we will discuss in Appendix.


                                                                 5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                 Pn            ∗                   ∗
    • Training error is zero: n1 i=1 1 Fyi (WGD

                                                 , xi ) ≤ F−yi (WGD    , xi ) = 0.
                                               ∗                 ∗               1

    • Test error is nearly zero: P(x,y)∼D Fy (WGD , x) ≤ F−y (WGD    , x) = poly(n) .

From the optimization perspective, Theorem 4.1 shows that both Adam and GD can be guaranteed
to find a point with a very small gradient, which can also achieve zero classification error on the
training data. Moreover, it can be seen that given the same iteration number T and learning rate η,
Adam can be guaranteed to find a point with up to 1/(T η) gradient
                                                              √     norm in `1 metric, while gradient
descent can only be guaranteed to find a point with up to 1/ T η gradient norm in `2 metric. More
specifically, let   be a sufficiently small quantity and ignoring other problem parameters, we can
set η = O( ) for Adam and η = O( 2 ) for GD, then Adam and GD will need T = O( 2 ) and
T = O( 4 ) to find a first-order  -stationary point. This suggests that Adam could enjoy a faster
convergence rate compared to SGD in the training process, which is consistent with the practice
findings. We would also like to point out that there is no contradiction between our result and the
recent work (Reddi et al., 2019) showing that Adam can fail to converge, as the counterexample in
Reddi et al. (2019) is for the online version of Adam, while we study the full batch Adam.
In terms of the test performance, their generalization abilities are largely different, even with weight
decay regularization. In particular, the output of gradient descent can generalize well and achieve
nearly zero test error, while the output of Adam gives nearly 1/2 test error. In fact, this gap is due
to two major aspects of the training process: (1) At the early stage of training where weight decay
exhibits negligible effect, Adam and GD behave very differently. In particular, Adam prefers the
denser and thus tends to fit the noise vectors ξ, gradient descent prefers the data patch of larger `2
norm and thus will learn the feature patch; (2) At the late stage of training where the weight decay
regularization cannot be ignored, both Adam and gradient descent will be enforced to converge to a
local minimum of the regularized objective, which maintains the pattern learned in the early stage.
Consequently, the model learned by Adam will be biased towards the noise patch to fit the feature
noise vector −αyv, which is opposite in direction to the true feature vector and therefore leads to a
test error no better than a random guess. More details about the training behaviors of Adam and GD
are given in Section 5. Experimental justification are provided in Appendix.
Theorem 4.1 shows that when optimizing a nonconvex training objective, Adam and gradient descent
will converge to different global solutions with different generalization errors, even with weight
decay regularization. In comparison, the following theorem gives the learning guarantees of Adam
and gradient descent when optimizing convex and smooth training objectives (e.g., linear model
F (w, x) = w> x with logistic loss).
Theorem 4.2 (Convex setting). For any convex and smooth training objective with positive regu-
larization parameter λ, suppose we run Adam and gradient descent for T = poly(n)       η     iterations,
then with probability at least 1 − n−1 , the obtained parameters WAdam    ∗
                                                                               and WGD ∗
                                                                                            satisfy that
          ∗                            ∗
k∇L(WAdam      )k1 ≤ T1η and k∇L(WAdam       )k22 ≤ T1η respectively. Moreover, let F (W, x) ∈ R be
the output of the convex model with parameter W and input x, it holds that:
                                   Pn                   ∗                        ∗
• Training errors are the same, n1 i=1 1  sgn F (WAdam

                                                             , xi )  6= sgn F (WGD  , xi )  = 0.
                                                         ∗                        ∗                1
• Test errors are nearly the same: P(x,y)∼D sgn F (WAdam      , xi ) 6= sgn F (WGD   , xi ) ≤ poly(n)  .
Theorem 4.2 shows that when optimizing a convex and smooth training objective (e.g., a linear
model with logistic loss) with weight decay regularization, both Adam and gradient can converge
to almost the same solution and enjoy very similar generalization performance. The proof will
be relying on the strong convexity of the training objective and the convergence (to the first-order
stationary) guarantee of Adam (Défossez et al., 2020) and GD. Combining this result and Theorem
4.1, it is clear that the inferior generalization performance is closely tied to the nonconvex landscape
of deep learning, and cannot be understood by standard weight decay regularization.

5    P ROOF O UTLINE OF THE M AIN R ESULTS
In this section we provide the proof sketch of Theorem 4.1 and explain the different generalization
abilities of the models found by gradient descent and Adam.
Before moving to the proof of main results, we first give the following lemma which shows that for
data generated from the data distribution D in Definition 3.1, with high probability all noise vectors
{ξi }i=1,...,n have nearly disjoint supports.


                                                   6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 5.1. Let {(xi , yi )}i=1,...,n be the training dataset generated by Definition 3.1. Moreover,
recall that xi = [yi v> , ξi> ]> (or xi = [ξi> , yi v> ]> ), let Bi = supp(ξi )\{1} be the support of ξi
except the first coordinate. Then with probability at least 1 − n−2 , Bi ∩ Bj = ∅ for all i 6= j.

This lemma implies that the optimization of each coordinate of the model parameter W, except for
the first one, is mostly determined by only one training data. Technically, this lemma can greatly
simplify the analysis for Adam so that we can better illustrate its optimization behavior and explain
the generalization performance gap between Adam and gradient descent.
Proof outline. For both Adam and gradient descent, we will show that the training process can be
decomposed into two stages. In the first stage, which we call pattern learning stage, the weight
decay regularization will be less important and can be ignored, while the algorithms tend to learn
the pattern from the training data. In particular, we will show that in the pattern learning stage, the
optimization algorithms have different algorithmic bias: Adam tends to fit the noise patch while
gradient descent will mainly learn the feature patch. In the second stage, which we call it regular-
ization stage, the effect of regularization cannot be neglected, which will regularize the algorithm
to converge at some local stationary points. However, due to the nonconvex landscape of the train-
ing objective, the pattern learned in the first stage will remain unchanged, even when running an
infinitely number of iterations.
5.1    P ROOF SKETCH FOR A DAM
Recall that in each iteration of Adam, the model weight is updated by using a moving-averaged
gradient, normalized by a moving average of the historical gradient squares. As pointed out in
Balles & Hennig (2018); Bernstein et al. (2018), Adam behaves similarly to sign gradient descent
(signGD) when using sufficiently small step size or the moving average parameters β1 , β2 are nearly
zero, which is also justified in our Lemma C.2. Specifically, we show that when considering constant
β1 and β2 , the Adam update on the coordinates with large gradient (e.g., |∇L(W(t) )[k]| > η)
can be well approximated by the signGD update (i.e., sign(∇L(W(t) )[k])). This motivates us to
understand the optimization behavior of signGD and then extends it to Adam using their similarities.
In particular, signGD updates the model parameter according to the following rule:
                                 (t+1)       (t+1)
                               wj,r      = wj,r      − η · sgn(∇wj,r L(W(t) )).
Recall that each data has a feature patch and a noise patch. By Lemma 5.1 and the data distribution
(see Definition 3.1), all noise vectors {ξi }i=1,...,n are supported on disjoint coordinates except the
first coordinate. For xi , let Bi denote its support excluding the first coordinate. In the subsequent
analysis, we will always assume that those Bi ’s are disjoint, i.e., Bi ∩ Bj = ∅ if i 6= j.
Next we will characterize two aspects of the training process: feature learning and noise memoriza-
                                                       (t)               (t)
tion. Mathematically, we focus on two quantities: hwj,r , j · vi and hwyi ,r , ξi i. In particular, given
                                                                            (t)
the training data point (xi , yi ) with xi = [yi v> , ξi> ]> , larger hwyi ,r , yi · vi implies better feature
                         (t)
learning and larger hwyi ,r , ξi i represents better noise memorization. Then regarding the feature
vector v that only has nonzero entry at the first coordinate, we have the following for signGD:
   (t+1)            (t)
hwj,r , jvi = hwj,r , jvi − η · sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) ) , jv

                                                                                                         (5.1)
                                          X n
                    (t)                            (t)         (t)                     (t)              (t)
                                               yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi) − ασ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1] ,

              = hwj,r , jvi + jη · sgn
                                              i=1

         (t)                                                              eFj (W,xi )
where `j,i := 1yi =j −logitj (F, xi ) and logitj (F, xi ) = P                      Fk (W,xi )   . From (5.1) we can
                                                                      k∈{−1,1} e
observe three terms in the signed gradient. Specifically, the first term represents the gradient over the
feature patch, the second term stems from the feature noise term in the noise patch (see Definition
3.1), and the last term is the gradient of the weight decay regularization. On the other hand, the
memorization of the noise vector ξi can be described as follows.
   hwy(t+1) , ξi i − hwy(t)   , ξi i = −η · sgn ∇wyi ,r L(W(t) ) , ξi

       i ,r              i ,r
                                                                                                              (5.2)

                                                       (t)
                                           X
                                     =η         sgn `yi ,i σ 0 (hwy(t)
                                                                    i ,r
                                                                         , ξi i)ξi [k] − nλwy(t)
                                                                                              i ,r
                                                                                                   [k] · ξi [k].
                                       k∈Bi ∪{1}



                                                        7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Throughout the proof, we will show that the training process of Adam can be decomposed into two
stages: pattern learning stage and regularization stage. In the first stage, the algorithm learns the
pattern of training data quickly, without being affected by the regularization term. In the second
stage, the training data has already been correctly classified since the pattern has been well captured,
the regularization will play an important role in the training process and guide the model to converge.
Stage I: Learning the pattern. At the beginning of training, the neural network output is smaller
than some constant for all data, and therefore all training data remain under-fitted and can provide
large gradient for model training. We specify this stage of training as Stage I. In this stage, the effect
of weight decay regularization can be ignored due to our choice of λ. We will show that in this stage
                       (t)                                   (t)
the inner product hwyi ,r , ξi i grows much faster than hwj,r , jvi since feature learning only makes
use of the first coordinate of the gradient, while noise memorization could take advantage of all the
coordinates in Bi (see (5.2), note that |Bi | = s   1).
Lemma 5.2 (General results in Stage I). Suppose the training data is generated according to Defi-
nition 3.1, assume λ = o(σ0q−2 σp /n) and η = 1/poly(d), then for any t ≤ T0 with T0 = O         e 1
                                                                                                    ηsσp
and any i ∈ [n],
                (t+1)                 (t)
          hwj,r         , j · vi ≤ hwj,r , j · vi + Θ(η),       hwy(t+1)
                                                                    i ,r
                                                                         , ξi i = hwy(t)
                                                                                      i ,r
                                                                                           , ξi i + Θ(ηsσ
                                                                                                    e    p ).
          (t)                                                                            (t)
Since hwj,r , ξi i enjoys a much faster increasing rate than that of hwj,r , j · vi, after a certain
number of iterations, the learning of noise patch will dominate the learning of feature patch (i.e.,
         (t)                 (t)
ασ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) > σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi)). Thus, by (5.1), the model will tend to fit the feature noise in the
noise patch (i.e., −αyi v), leading to a flipped feature learning phenomenon.
Lemma 5.3 (Flipping the feature learning).           Suppose the training data is generated according to
                                    1−q      q−1                       −1
Definition 3.1, α ≥ Θ (sσp )
                          e              ∨ σ0      and σ0 < O((sσ
                                                                e   p)    ), then for any t ∈ [Tr , T0 ] with
                  σ0

Tr = O ηsσp α1/(q−1) ≤ T0 ,
       e

                                            (t+1)               (t)
                                      hwj,r
                                       , j · vi = hwj,r , j · vi − Θ(η).
                             (T )                   e 1 ; (2) w(T0 ) [k] = sgn(ξi [k]) · Ω

                                                                                         e 1 or

Moreover, it holds that (1) wj,r0 [1] = −sgn(j) · Ω     sσp         j,r                    sσp
 (T )                                                   (T )
w 0 [k] = ±O(η)
  j,r
              e     for k ∈ Bi with yi = j; and (3) w 0 [k] = ±O(η)  e
                                                                      j,rotherwise.
                                                                                                                (T )
From Lemma 5.3 it can be observed that at the iteration T0 , the sign of the first coordinate of wj,r0
is different from that of the true feature, i.e., j · v. This implies that at the end of the first training
stage, the model is biased towards the noise patch to fit the feature noise.
Stage II: Regularizing the model. In this stage, as the neural network output becomes larger, part of
training data starts to be well fitted and gives smaller gradient. As a consequence, the feature learning
and noise memorization processes will be slowed down and the weight decay regularization term
cannot be ignored. However, although weight decay regularization can prevent the model weight
from being too large, it will maintain the pattern learned in Stage I and cannot push the model back
to “forget” the noise and learn the feature and stops at some local stationary points. We summarize
these results in the following lemma.
Lemma 5.4 (Maintain the pattern). If α = O sσp2 /n and η = o(λ), then let r∗ =

                    (t)
arg maxr∈[m] hwyi ,r , ξi i, for any t ≥ T0 , i ∈ [n], j ∈ {±1} and r ∈ [m], it holds that
    (t)
                           X (t)                                   (t)
  hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = Θ(1),
                    e           |wyi ,r∗ [k]| · |ξi [k]| = Θ(1),
                                                           e     hwj,r , sgn(j) · vi ∈ [−o(1), O(λ−1 η)].
                               k∈Bi
                                                       (t)                                             (t)
Lemma 5.4 shows that in the second stage, hwyi ,r , ξi i will always be large while hwyi ,r , yi · vi is
still negative, or positive but extremely small. Next we will show that within polynomial steps, the
algorithm can be guaranteed to find a point with small gradient.
Lemma 5.5 (Convergence guarantee). If η = O(d−1/2 ), then for any t it holds that
                            L(W(t+1) ) − L(W(t) ) ≤ −ηk∇L(W(t) )k1 + Θ(η
                                                                     e 2 d).

Lemma 5.5 shows that we can pick a sufficiently small η and T = poly(n)/η to ensure that the
algorithm can find a point with up to O(1/(T η)) in `1 norm. Then we can show that given the results
in Lemma 5.4, the formula of the algorithm output W∗ can be precisely characterized, which we


                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


can show that hwy∗i ,r , yi · vi < 0. This implies that the output model will be biased to fit the feature
noise −αyv but not the true one v. Then when it comes to a fresh test example the model will fail
to recognize its true feature. Also note that the noise in the test data is nearly independent of the
noise in training data. Consequently, the model will not be able to identify the label of the test data
and therefore cannot be better than a random guess.
5.2   P ROOF SKETCH FOR GRADIENT DESCENT
Similar to the proof for Adam, we also decompose the entire training process into two stages.
Stage I: Learning the pattern. In this stage the gradient from training loss function is large and
and the effect of regularization can be ignored. Unlike Adam that is sensitive to the sparsity of the
feature vector or noise vector, gradient descent is more focusing on the `2 norm of them, where the
vector (which can be either feature or noise) with larger `2 norm is more likely to be discovered and
learned by GD. Note that the feature vector has a larger `2 norm than the noise, we can show that
gradient descent will learn the feature vector very quickly, while barely memorize the noise.
                     (t)                    (t+1)            (t)                   (t)             (t)
Lemma 5.6. Let Λj          = maxr∈[m] hwj,r   , j · vi, Γj,i = maxr∈[m] hwj,r , ξi i, and Γj =
            (t)                                        (t)
maxi:yi =j Γj,i . Let Tj be the iteration number that Λj reaches Θ(1/m) = Θ(1),
                                                                            e        then we have
          2−q
Tj = Θ(σ0 ) for all j ∈ {−1, 1}. Moreover, let T0 = maxj {Tj }, then for all t ≤ T0 it holds that
     e
 (t)    e 0 ) for all j ∈ {−1, 1}.
Γj = O(σ
Stage II: Regularizing the model. Similar to Lemma 5.4, we show that in the second stage at
which the impact of weight decay regularization cannot be ignored, the pattern of the training data
learned in the first stage will remain unchanged.
                                            (t)           (t)
Lemma 5.7. If η ≤ O(σ0 ), it holds that Λ = Θ(1)
                                             j
                                                  e and Γ = O(σ e 0 ) for all t ≥ minj Tj .
                                                                   j

The following lemma further shows that within polynomial steps, gradient descent is guaranteed to
find a point with small gradient.
Lemma 5.8. If the learning rate satisfies η = o(1), then for any t ≥ 0 it holds that
                                                        η
                           L(W(t+1) ) − L(W(t) ) ≤ − k∇L(W(t) )k2F .
                                                        2
Lemma 5.8 shows that we can pick a sufficiently small η and T = poly(n)/η to ensure that gradient
descent can find a point with up to O(1/(T η)1/2 ) in `2 norm. By Lemma 5.7, it is clear that the
output model of GD can well learn the feature vector while memorizing nearly nothing from the
noise vectors, which can therefore achieve nearly zero test error.
Experiments. We perform experiments on synthetic data (generated according to Definition 3.1) to
validate our theoretical findings: Adam performs stronger noise memorization than feature learning
while GD performs stronger feature learning than noise memorization, when conducted on the data
distribution constructed in Definition 3.1. We consider both the two-layer CNN model studied in
this paper and a 5-layer CNN model for further justification. Experimental setup and results are
deferred to Appendix A due to the page limit.

6     C ONCLUDING R EMARKS AND F UTURE W ORK
In this paper, we study the generalization of Adam and compare it with gradient descent. We show
that when training neural networks, Adam and GD starting from the same initialization can con-
verge to different global solutions of the training objective with significantly different generalization
errors, even with proper regularization. Our analysis reveals the fundamental difference between
Adam and GD in learning features or noise, and demonstrates that this difference is closely tied to
the nonconvex landscape of neural networks.
We would also like to remark several important research directions. First, our current result is
for two-layer networks. Extending the results to deep networks could be an important next step,
where we will not only look at the input data but also consider the output of each intermediate layer
as “input”. Second, our current data model is motivated by the image data (i.e., sparse feature and
denser noise), where Adam has been observed to perform worse than SGD in terms of generalization.
In fact, our theoretical analysis can lead to an opposite conclusion on the generalization comparison
between Adam and GD if the noise is sparse and the feature is denser. Therefore, it would also
be interesting to explore whether this is the case in other machine learning tasks such as natural
language processing, where Adam is often observed to perform better than SGD.


                                                    9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank the anonymous reviewers and area chair for their helpful comments. YL is supported by
the National Science Foundation CCF-2145703. QG is supported in part by the National Science
Foundation CAREER Award 1906169, IIS-2008981 and the Sloan Research Fellowship.

R EFERENCES
Naman Agarwal, Rohan Anil, Elad Hazan, Tomer Koren, and Cyril Zhang. Revisiting the general-
  ization of adaptive gradient methods. 2019.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. What can ResNet learn efficiently, going beyond kernels? In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Feature purification: How adversarial training performs robust
  deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.10190, 2020a.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding ensemble, knowledge distillation and
  self-distillation in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09816, 2020b.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Yingyu Liang. Learning and generalization in overparameter-
  ized neural networks, going beyond two layers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2019a.
Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, and Zhao Song. A convergence theory for deep learning via over-
  parameterization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 242–252, 2019b.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, and Ruosong Wang. Fine-grained analysis of op-
  timization and generalization for overparameterized two-layer neural networks. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 322–332, 2019a.
Sanjeev Arora, Simon S Du, Wei Hu, Zhiyuan Li, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Ruosong Wang. On ex-
  act computation with an infinitely wide neural net. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, 2019b.
Yu Bai and Jason D Lee. Beyond linearization: On quadratic and higher-order approximation of
  wide neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Lukas Balles and Philipp Hennig. Dissecting adam: The sign, magnitude and variance of stochastic
  gradients. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 404–413. PMLR, 2018.
Jeremy Bernstein, Yu-Xiang Wang, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, and Animashree Anandkumar.
   signsgd: Compressed optimisation for non-convex problems. In International Conference on
   Machine Learning, pp. 560–569. PMLR, 2018.
Yuan Cao, Zixiang Chen, Mikhail Belkin, and Quanquan Gu. Benign overfitting in two-layer con-
  volutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06526, 2022.
Jinghui Chen, Dongruo Zhou, Yiqi Tang, Ziyan Yang, Yuan Cao, and Quanquan Gu. Closing the
   generalization gap of adaptive gradient methods in training deep neural networks. In International
   Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, 2020.
Zixiang Chen, Yuan Cao, Difan Zou, and Quanquan Gu. How much over-parameterization is suf-
  ficient to learn deep relu networks? In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2021.
Zixiang Chen, Yihe Deng, Yue Wu, Quanquan Gu, and Yuanzhi Li. Towards understanding mixture
  of experts in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02813, 2022.
Lenaic Chizat, Edouard Oyallon, and Francis Bach. On lazy training in differentiable programming.
  In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Dami Choi, Christopher J Shallue, Zachary Nado, Jaehoon Lee, Chris J Maddison, and
  George E Dahl. On empirical comparisons of optimizers for deep learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1910.05446, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Alexandre Défossez, Léon Bottou, Francis Bach, and Nicolas Usunier. A simple convergence proof
  of adam and adagrad. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.02395, 2020.

Simon Du, Jason Lee, Haochuan Li, Liwei Wang, and Xiyu Zhai. Gradient descent finds global
  minima of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1675–
  1685, 2019a.

Simon S Du, Xiyu Zhai, Barnabas Poczos, and Aarti Singh. Gradient descent provably optimizes
  over-parameterized neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2019b.

John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
  stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Jul):2121–2159, 2011.

Spencer Frei, Niladri S Chatterji, and Peter Bartlett. Benign overfitting without linearity: Neural
  network classifiers trained by gradient descent for noisy linear data. In Conference on Learning
  Theory, pp. 2668–2703. PMLR, 2022a.

Spencer Frei, Niladri S Chatterji, and Peter L Bartlett. Random feature amplification: Feature
  learning and generalization in neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07626, 2022b.

Geoffrey Hinton, Nitish Srivastava, and Kevin Swersky. Neural networks for machine learning
  lecture 6a overview of mini-batch gradient descent, 2012.

Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and gen-
  eralization in neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 8571–
  8580, 2018.

Ziwei Ji and Matus Telgarsky. Polylogarithmic width suffices for gradient descent to achieve ar-
  bitrarily small test error with shallow relu networks. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2020.

Nitish Shirish Keskar and Richard Socher. Improving generalization performance by switching from
  adam to sgd. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07628, 2017.

Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.

Yuanzhi Li, Tengyu Ma, and Hongyang R Zhang. Learning over-parametrized two-layer neural
  networks beyond ntk. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2613–2682. PMLR, 2020.

Liangchen Luo, Yuanhao Xiong, Yan Liu, and Xu Sun. Adaptive gradient methods with dynamic
  bound of learning rate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09843, 2019.

Stephen Merity, Nitish Shirish Keskar, and Richard Socher. Regularizing and optimizing lstm lan-
  guage models. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Vardan Papyan, Yaniv Romano, and Michael Elad. Convolutional neural networks analyzed via con-
  volutional sparse coding. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18(1):2887–2938, 2017.

Sashank J Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar. On the convergence of adam and beyond. In
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.

Sashank J Reddi, Satyen Kale, and Sanjiv Kumar. On the convergence of adam and beyond. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1904.09237, 2019.

Ruoqi Shen, Sebastien Bubeck, and Suriya Gunasekar. Data augmentation as feature manipulation.
  In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 19773–19808. PMLR, 2022.

Ashia C Wilson, Rebecca Roelofs, Mitchell Stern, Nati Srebro, and Benjamin Recht. The marginal
  value of adaptive gradient methods in machine learning. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, pp. 4151–4161, 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Greg Yang. Scaling limits of wide neural networks with weight sharing: Gaussian process behavior,
  gradient independence, and neural tangent kernel derivation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.04760,
  2019.
Pan Zhou, Jiashi Feng, Chao Ma, Caiming Xiong, Steven Chu Hong Hoi, et al. Towards theoreti-
  cally understanding why sgd generalizes better than adam in deep learning. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
Difan Zou, Yuan Cao, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Gradient descent optimizes over-
  parameterized deep ReLU networks. Machine Learning, Oct 2019.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     E XPERIMENTS

A.1    E XPERIMENT D ETAILS FOR F IGURE 1
The experiments in Figure 1 are performed by running (stochastic gradient) Adam and SGD in
training AlexNet on the CIFAR-10 dataset. Specifically, the first layer of AlexNet is set as: ker-
nel size=11, stride=4, padding=2, in order to match the size of CIFAR-10 image. In terms of the
input data, we use standard random crop and horizontal flip data augmentations. In terms of the
model training, we set the batch size as 64, the epoch number as 100, the regularization parameter
as λ = 5 × 10−4 . Besides, we set the learning rate η = 0.01 for SGD and η = 1 × 10−5 for Adam,
where β1 and β2 are set as their default values in pytorch.
A.2    N UMERICAL E XPERIMENTS ON S YNTHETIC DATA
In this section we perform numerical experiments on the synthetic data generated according to Def-
inition 3.1 to verify our main results. In particular, we set the problem dimension d = 1000,
the training sample size n = 200 (100 positive examples and 100 negative examples), fea-
ture vector v = [1, 0, . . . , 0]> , noise sparsity s = 0.1d = 100, standard deviation of noise
σp = 1/s1/2 = 0.1, feature noise strength α = 0.2, initialization scaling σ0 = 0.01, regularization
parameter λ = 1 × 10−5 .

Two-layer CNN model. We first consider the exact two-layer CNN model studied in the paper.
We set the network width m = 20, activation function σ(z) = max{0, z}3 , total iteration number
T = 1×104 , and the learning rate η = 5×10−5 for Adam (default choices of β1 and β2 in pytorch),
η = 0.02 for GD.
We first report the training error and test error achieved by the solutions found by SGD and Adam in
Table 2, where the test error is calculated on a test dataset of size 104 . It is clear that both Adam and
SGD can achieve zero training error, while they have entirely different results on the test data: SGD
generalizes well and achieve zero test error; Adam generalizes worse than SGD and gives > 0.5 test
error, which verifies our main result (Theorem 4.1).

                                       Algorithm           Adam    SGD
                                     Training error          0      0
                                       Test error          0.884    0

                    Table 2: Training and test errors achieved by GD and Adam.

Moreover, we also calculate the inner products: maxr hw1,r , vi and mini maxr hw1,r , ξi i, repre-
senting feature learning and noise memorization respectively, to verify our key lemmas. Here we
only consider positive examples as the results for negative examples are similar. The results are
reported in Figure 2. For Adam, from Figure 2(a), it can be seen that the algorithm will perform fea-
ture learning in the first few iterations and then entirely forget the feature (but fit feature noise), i.e.,
the feature learning is flipped, which verifies Lemma 5.3. In the meanwhile, the noise memoriza-
tion happens in the entire training process and enjoys much faster rate than feature learning, which
verifies Lemma 5.2. In addition, we can also observe that there are two stages for the increasing
of mini maxr hw1,r , ξi i: in the first stage mini maxr hw1,r , ξi i increases linearly, and in the second
stage its increasing speed gradually slows down and mini maxr hw1,r , ξi i will remain in a constant
order. This verifies Lemma 5.2 and Lemma 5.4. For GD, from Figure 2(b), it can be seen that the
feature learning will dominate the noise memorization: feature learning will increase to a constant
in the first stage and then remain in a constant order in the second stage; noise memorization will
keep in a low level which is nearly the same as that at the initialization. This verifies Lemmas 5.6
and 5.7.

5-Layer CNN model. We further perform numerical simulations for the deep neural network mod-
els. In particular, we consider a 5-layer CNN model: the first layer is exactly the same as the two-
layer CNN model, followed by a 4-layer MLP with ReLU activation. The number of neurons is set


                                                      13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


         1.2                                                        2.0
         1.0
         0.8                                                        1.5
         0.6       Feature Learning: max
                                      r w1, r, v                              Feature Learning: max
                                                                                                 r w1, r, v


                                                            Value
Value

                   Noise Memorization: min max
                                            r w1, r, i
                                                                    1.0       Noise Memorization: min max
                                                                                                       r w1, r, i
         0.4                             i                                                          i
         0.2                                                        0.5
         0.0
         0.2                                                        0.0
               0    2000    4000      6000     8000 10000                 0    2000    4000     6000   8000 10000
                            # Iterations                                               # Iterations
                           (a) Adam                                                    (b) GD
Figure 2: Visualization of the feature learning (maxr hw1,r , vi) and noise memorization
(mini maxr hw1,r , ξi i) for training the two-layer CNN model.


         0.6                                                       1.75
         0.5                                                       1.50
                                                                   1.25
         0.4                                                                  Feature Learning: max
                                                                   1.00                          r w1, r, v
 Value


                                                           Value

         0.3                                                       0.75       Noise Memorization: min
                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                      max
                                                                                                       r w1, r, i

         0.2       Feature Learning: max                           0.50
                                      r w1, r, v
                   Noise Memorization: min max
                                            r w1, r, i
                                                                   0.25
         0.1                             i
                                                                   0.00
               0   2000     4000      6000    8000 10000                  0   2000    4000      6000   8000 10000
                            # Iterations                                              # Iterations
                           (a) Adam                                                   (b) GD
Figure 3: Visualization of the feature learning (maxr hw1,r , vi) and noise memorization
(mini maxr hw1,r , ξi i) for training the 5-layer CNN model.



as m = 20 for all layers. The total iteration number is T = 1×104 , the learning rate is η = 5×10−5
for Adam and η = 0.1 for GD.
We then show the feature learning and noise memorization of the first layer of this neural network
model by calculating the inner products: maxr hw1,r , vi and mini maxr hw1,r , ξi i, where w1,r de-
notes the weights of the r-th neuron in the first layer. The results are shown in Figure 3. It can
be observed that, when applied on the data distribution in Definition 3.1, Adam tends to perform
stronger noise memorization than feature learning, while GD performs stronger feature learning and
nearly negligible noise memorization. Moreover, we also visualize the first layer of the 5-layer CNN
trained by Adam and GD in Figure 4. It can be seen that the CNN model found by Adam is clearly
more “noisy” than that found by GD. This is consistent with our theoretical findings and empirical
observation on the real-world dataset (i.e., Figure 1).

B        E XTENSIONS TO M INI - BATCH S TOCHASTIC G RADIENTS
One natural extension of our paper is proving the separation between mini-batch SGD (without
replacement) and mini-batch Adam, which we believe is not difficult. In particular, let It of size B
be the set of indices of the mini-batch data used in the t-th iteration, the update rule of SGD is


                              (t+1)          (t)     1 X                      (t)
                            wj,r      = wj,r − η ·       ∇wj,r Li (W(t) ) − λwj,r .
                                                     B
                                                         i∈It



                                                           14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           (a) Adam                                                  (b) GD
      Figure 4: Visualization of the first layer of the 5-layer CNN model on the synthetic dataset.

The update rule of mini-batch Adam is

                       (t+1)          (t)           1 X                          (t)
                    mj,r       = β1 mj,r + (1 − β1 ) ·     ∇wj,r Li (W(t) ) + λwj,r ,
                                                    B
                                                      i∈It
                                                   X                                2
                     (t+1)     (t)                1                  (t)       (t)
                    vj,r = β2 vj,r + (1 − β2 ) ·         ∇wj,r Li (W ) + λwj,r ,
                                                  B
                                                               i∈It

and
                                                                        q
                                       (t+1)         (t)          (t)     (t)
                                      wj,r     = wj,r − η · mj,r /       vj,r +  .

Here the bias term is set as   = Θ(λσ
                                   e    0 ). We claim that this parameter is introduced to guarantee
that the regularization term will not dominate the training process when using stochastic gradients
in Adam.
Then we will take a deeper look at the speeds of feature learning and noise learning for mini-batch
                                                       (t)         (t)
SGD and Adam, where we focus on the period that |hwj,r , vi|, |hwj,r , ξi i| = o(1) for all j, i, and r
                                                                         (t)
(i.e., the pattern learning stage). This further implies that |`j,i | = 0.5 ± o(1) for all j, i, and t. Thus
                                                     (t)
in the following, we will assume that all |`j,i | has nearly the same quantity.

Feature Learning. First, according to Definition 3.1, we know that the feature vector v and feature
noise are the same for all data, which implies that the learning pattern of the feature coordinate will
be largely the same as that of full-batch algorithms. In particular, for mini-batch Adam, we can
show that the update of the first coordinate (i.e., feature coordinate) is similar to sign-GD when
using sufficiently small learning rate η = 1/poly(d) since all stochastic gradients ∇Li (W(t) ) have
                                                                        (t)
the same component in this coordinate. Then using the fact that |`j,i |’s are nearly the same for all i,
we have
                                        X n
   (t+1)            (t)                          (t)        (t)                    (t)              (t)
                                             yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi) − ασ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1] .

hwj,r , jvi ∼ hwj,r , jvi + jη · sgn
                                                   i=1
                                                                                              (t)
which is the same as full-batch Adam (see (5.1)). For SGD, using the fact that |`j,i |’s are nearly the
same for all i, we can get that
            (t+1)                            (t)
        hwj,r       , jvi ∼ (1 − ηλ) · hwj,r , j · vi
                                         X n                                  n
                                 η                 (t) 0    (t)
                                                                             X       (t) 0    (t)
                              + ·j·            yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , yi vi) − α     yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , ξi i)
                                 n       i=1                                 i=1
which is also the same as that of GD (see (C.28)).


                                                           15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                               (t)
Noise Memorization. Note that due to the normalization term vj,r in the Adam update, all coor-
dinates will be updated with nearly the same amount. Therefore, we only need to count the number
of coordinates that are updated by full-batch Adam and mini-batch Adam.
Recall that we have shown that using mini-batch gradients will not affect the feature learning. How-
ever, the noise memorization will be slightly different, since in each iteration, full-batch Adam can
update Θ(ns) coordinates while mini-batch Adam can only update Θ(Bs)      e     coordinates. To show
this, we note that for any coordinate k 6= 1, the gradient momentum of full-batch Adam is
                           τ̄
               (t)
                         X
                               τ             1 X                (t−τ )          (t−τ )
             mj,r [k] ∼       β1 (1 − β1 ) ·        ∇wj,r Li (W        )[k] + λwj,r [k] ,
                         τ =0
                                             n
                                                   i∈[n]

while for mini-batch Adam,
                        τ̄
              (t)
                        X                        1 X                             (t−τ )
           mj,r [k] ∼          β1τ (1 − β1 ) ·        ∇wj,r Li (W(t−τ ) )[k] + λwj,r [k] ,
                        τ =0
                                                 B
                                                   i∈It−τ

where we only maintain the recent τ̄ = polylog(n) gradients since for τ ≤ t − τ̄ , the decaying
terms (β1 )τ ≤ (βi )τ̄ becomes negligible. Therefore, by comparing the above two equations and
applying Definition 3.1, it is clear that for full-batch Adam can update all noise coordinates, i.e.,
k ∈ ∪i∈[n] Bi , which is of size Θ(ns). In contrast, mini-batch Adam can only update a subset of
noise coordinates, i.e., k ∈ ∪τ ∈[τ̄ ] ∪i∈[It−τ ] Bi , which is of size τ̄ Bs = Θ(Bs).
                                                                                   e   This further implies
that in each epoch (one pass of the data, Θ(n/B) steps), the noise coordinates in Bi will be updated
by mini-batch Adam in at most τ̄ = Θ(1) e     steps, while within the same amount of iterations, the noise
coordinates in Bi will be updated by full-batch Adam for Θ(n/B) steps, suggesting that mini-batch
Adam admits a slower rate of noise memorization by a Θ(n/B)    e           factor.
For SGD, it is easy to show that the rate of noise memorization will still be nearly the same as that
of GD. In particular, during each training epoch (Θ(n/B) steps), SGD will learn the noise vector ξi
in only one step with the mini-batch gradient B1 ∇Li (W(τ ) ) for some τ in this epoch, while within
the same amount of steps, GD will learn the noise vector ξi in all Θ(n/B) steps but with strength
 1        (τ )
n ∇Li (W       ), giving the same total learning ability. This suggests that SGD admits a nearly the
same rate of noise memorization compared to GD.
Overall, we are able to deliver the following lemmas that characterize the feature learning and noise
memorization of SGD and stochastic gradient Adam in training Stage I.
Lemma B.1 (SGD, Informal). Suppose the training data is generated according to Definition
3.1, then given proper configurations of λ and   and sufficiently small learning rate η, define
  (t)                 (t)              (t)               (t)                             (t )  (t )
Λj = maxr∈[m] hwj,r , j · vi and Γj,i = maxr∈[m] hwj,r , ξi i, for any t0 satisfying Λj 0 , Γj,i0 =
o(1/polylog(n)), we have the following one-epoch update of feature learning and noise memoriza-
tion for SGD

                           (t0 +bn/Bc)     (t0 )        n       (t0 ) q−1
                          Λj           ≥ Λj + η · Θ        · (Λj )
                                                        B
                                                        ηsσp2

                           (t +bn/Bc)      (t )                     (t )
                          Γj 0         ≤ Γj 0 + η · Θ         · (Γj 0 )q−1 .
                                                          B
Lemma B.2 (Stochastic gradient Adam, Informal). Suppose the training data is generated according
                                                                                              n
to Definition 3.1, then given proper configurations of λ and  , for any t0 ≤ T0 with T0 = O
                                                                                          e
                                                                                            ηBsσp
and any i ∈ [n], we have the following one-epoch update of feature learning and noise memorization
   (t +bn/Bc)                   (t )
hwj,r0          , j · vi ≤ hwj,r0 , j · vi + Θ(nη/B),           hwy(ti0,r+bn/Bc) , ξi i = hwy(ti0,r) , ξi i + Θ(ηsσ
                                                                                                              e    p ).


To sum up, we have shown that (1) mini-batch SGD and mini-batch Adam will not change the learn-
ing speed of feature vector v compared to their full-batch counterparts, i.e., Lemma C.3 and (C.31)
(needs to covert to bn/Bc iterations); (2) mini-batch Adam reduces the noise memorization speed
of full-batch Adam by a Θ(n/B)
                          e       factor, while mini-batch SGD has nearly the same noise memo-
rization speed compared to full-batch GD, by comparing to Lemma C.3 and (C.32)). Additionally,


                                                           16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


recall that in our paper, the separation between Adam and GD is characterized by a poly(d) factor:
the speed of feature learning in Adam and GD, and the rate of noise memorization in GD are both in
the order of O(η) (in each step), while the rate of noise memorization in Adam is proportional to the
number of nonzero entries, which is in the order of η · poly(d). Therefore, the separation between
mini-batch SGD and mini-batch Adam in terms of the generalization error      can still hold under a
stronger over-parameterization condition sσp = Θ d1/4 /(npolylog(n)) = ω(n/B) (in contrast,
the over-parameterization condition for full-batch Adam is sσp = ω(1)).

C        P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1: N ONCONVEX C ASE
In the beginning of the proof we first present the following useful lemma.
C.1       P RELIMINARIES
We first recall the magnitude of all parameters:
                                           1/2
                           1              d         2             1            2         1
  d = poly(n), η =              , s=Θ            , σp = Θ                   , σ0 = Θ 1/2 ,
                       poly(n)             n2              s · polylog(n)              d

                                                                     1
  m = polylog(n), α = Θ σp · polylog(n) , λ = O (q−1)/4                            .
                                                         d        n · polylog(n)
Here poly(n) denotes a polynomial function of n with degree of a sufficiently large constant,
poly(n) denotes a polynomial function of log(n) with degree of a sufficiently large constant. Based
on the parameter configuration, we claim that the following equations hold, which will be frequently
used in the subsequent proof.
           q−2                                                           2
                                                                         sσp

           σ0 σp                    1−q q−1                1
                                                                               , η = o λσ0q σpq .

   λ=o              , α = ω (sσp ) σ0          , σ0 = o        ,α = o
              n                                           sσp             n
Lemma C.1 (Non-overlapping support). Let {(xi , yi )}i=1,...,n be the training dataset sampled ac-
cording to Definition 3.1. Moreover, let Bi = supp(ξi )\{1} be the support of xi except the first
coordinate2 . Then with probability at least 1 − n−2 , Bi ∩ Bj = ∅ for all i, j ∈ [n].

Proof of Lemma C.1. For any fixed k ∈ [n] and j ∈ supp(ξk )\{1}, by the model assumption we
have
                                            P{(ξi )j 6= 0} = s/(d − 1),
for all i ∈ [n]\{k}. Therefore by the fact that the data samples are independent, we have
                             P(∃i ∈ [n]\{k} : (ξi )j 6= 0) = 1 − [1 − s/(d − 1)]n .
Applying a union bound over all k ∈ [n] and j ∈ supp(ξk )\{1}, we obtain
 P(∃k ∈ [n], j ∈ supp(ξk )\{1}, i ∈ [n]\{k} : (ξi )j 6= 0) ≤ n · s · {1 − [1 − s/(d − 1)]n }. (C.1)
                                               √
By the data distribution assumption we have s ≤ d/(2n2 ), which clearly implies s/(d−1) ≤ 1/2.
Therefore we have
                      n · s · [1 − (1 − s/d)n ] = n · s · {1 − exp[n log(1 − s/(d − 1))]}
                                                ≤ n · s · [1 − exp(n · 2s/(d − 1))]
                                                ≤ n · s · [1 − exp(n · 4s/d)]
                                                ≤ n · s · (4ns/d)
                                                 = 4n2 s2 /d
                                                 ≤ n−2 ,
where the first inequality follows by the inequalities log(1 − z) ≥ −2z for z ∈ [0, 1/2], the second
inequality follows by s/(d−1) ≥ 2s/d, the third inequality follows by the inequality
                                                                           √         1−exp(−z) ≤
z for z ∈ R, and the last inequality follows by the assumption that s ≤ d/(2n2 ). Plugging the
bound above into (C.1) finishes the proof.

    2
        Recall that all data inputs have nonzero first coordinate by Definition 3.1


                                                           17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.2    P ROOF FOR A DAM
Before moving to the detailed proof, we first state the update rules of feature learning and noise
memorization when the sign gradient is applied.
  (t+1)          (t)
hwj,r , jvi = hwj,r , jvi − η · sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) ) , jv

                                      X n
                 (t)                          (t)        (t)                    (t)              (t)
                                          yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi) − ασ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1] ,

            = hwj,r , jvi + jη · sgn
                                               i=1
                                                                                                                  (C.2)
         (t)                                                                     Fj (W,xi )
                                                                             e
where `j,i := 1yi =j −logitj (F, xi ) and logitj (F, xi ) = P                          Fk (W,xi )   . From (C.2) we can
                                                                         k∈{−1,1} e
observe three terms in the signed gradient. Specifically, the first term represents the gradient over the
feature patch, the second term stems from the feature noise term in the noise patch (see Definition
3.1), and the last term is the gradient of the weight decay regularization. On the other hand, the
memorization of the noise vector ξi can be described by the following update rule,
  hwy(t+1) , ξi i = hwy(t)   , ξi i − η · sgn ∇wyi ,r L(W(t) ) , ξi

      i ,r              i ,r
                                           X     (t)
                                                              0
                  = hwy(t)
                        i ,r
                             , ξ i i + η ·    sgn   ` yi ,i σ   (hw (t)
                                                                         ,
                                                                    yi ,r iξ i)ξ i [k] − nλw (t)
                                                                                             yi ,r [k]   , ξ i [k]
                                        k∈Bi
                                     n
                                     X
                                               (t)
                                           yi `yi ,i σ 0 (hwy(t)   , yi vi) − ασ 0 (hwy(t)   , ξi i) − nλwy(t)

                    − αyi η · sgn                             i ,r                      i ,r                i ,r
                                                                                                                 [1]    .
                                     i=1
                                                                                                                  (C.3)

In this subsection we first provide the following lemma that shows for most of the coordinate (with
slightly large gradient), the Adam update is similar to signGD update (up to some constant factors).
In the remaining proof for Adam, we will largely apply this lemma to get a signGD-like result for
Adam (similar to the technical lemmas in Section 5). Besides, the proofs for all lemmas in Section 5
can be viewed as a simplified version of the proofs for technical lemmas for Adam, thus are omitted
in the paper.
Lemma C.2 (Closeness to SignGD). Recall the update rule of Adam, let W(t) be the t-th iterate of
                                   (t)         (t)
the Adam algorithm. Suppose that hwj,r , vi, hwj,r , ξi i = Θ(1)
                                                            e    for all j ∈ {±1} and r ∈ [m]. Then
         2
if β2 ≥ β1 , we have
        • For all k ∈ [d],
                                                         (t)
                                                     m [k]
                                                     q j,r     ≤ Θ(1).
                                                        (t)
                                                      vj,r [k]

                      / ∪ni=1 Bi (including k = 1) we have either |∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k]| ≤ Θ(η)
        • For every k ∈                                                                 e    or
                                         (t)
                                     m [k]
                                     q j,r     = sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] · Θ(1).

                                        (t)
                                      vj,r [k]

                                                           e ηn−1 sσp |`(t) | ≤ Θ(ηsσ

        • For every k ∈ Bi , we have |∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k]| ≤ Θ            j,i
                                                                                e    p ) or

                                         (t)
                                     m [k]
                                     q j,r     = sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] · Θ(1).

                                        (t)
                                      vj,r [k]

Proof. First recall that the gradient ∇wj,r L(W(t) ) can be calculated as
                            n                                 n
              (t)       1 X (t) 0           (t)
                                                             X    (t)    0   (t)                     (t)
 ∇wj,r L(W ) = −                yi ` σ (hwj,r , yi vi) · v +     `j,i · σ (hwj,r , yi ξi i) · ξi + λwj,r .
                        n i=1 j,i                            i=1



                                                          18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


More specifically, for the first coordinate of ∇wj,r L(W(t) ), we have
                               n                               n
             (t)          1 X (t) 0            (t)
                                                              X       (t)    0   (t)             (t)
 ∇wj,r L(W )[1] = −                yi ` σ (hwj,r , yi vi) − α     yi `j,i · σ (hwj,r , ξi i) + λwj,r [1].
                          n i=1 j,i                           i=1
                                                                                                    (C.4)
For any k ∈ Bi , by Lemma C.1 we know that the gradient over this coordinate only depends on the
training data ξi , therefore, we have
                                               1 (t)        (t)                   (t)
                          ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] = − `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i)ξi [k] + λwj,r [k].                        (C.5)
                                               n
For the remaining coordinates, we have
                                                                             (t)
                                            ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] = λwj,r [k].                                        (C.6)

                                                                     (t)                            (t)
Now let us focus on the moving averaged gradient mj,r and squared gradient vj,r . We first show
that for all k ∈ [d], it holds that
                                                          (t)
                                                     m [k]
                                                     q j,r     ≤ Θ(1).                                            (C.7)
                                                        (t)
                                                      vj,r [k]
                               (t)
By the update rule of mj,r , we have
                               (t)                (t−1)
                             mj,r [k] = β1 mj,r           [k] + (1 − β1 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k]
                                           t
                                           X
                                       =          β1τ (1 − β1 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t−τ ) )[k].
                                           τ =0

Similarly, we also have
                                            t
                                 (t)
                                            X
                               vj,r [k] =          β2τ (1 − β2 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t−τ ) )[k]2 .
                                            τ =0

Then by Cauchy-Schwartz inequality we have
                            t                                                  t
                               [β1τ (1 − β1 )]2
                        X                                                    X
              (t)    2                                       (t−τ )     2           2
            mj,r [k] ≤                          · ∇ wj,r L(W        )[k]   ·      ατ .
                          τ =0
                                      ατ2                                    τ =0

             [β τ (1−β )]2
Let ατ2 = β1τ (1−β12 ) , which forms an exponentially decaying sequence if β2 ≥ β12 . Therefore, we
            2
     Pt
have τ =0 ατ2 = Θ(1) and the above inequality implies that
                                       (t)    2     (t)
                                     mj,r [k] ≤ vj,r [k] · Θ(1),
which proves (C.7).
                                                                                              (t)
Now we are going to prove the main argument of this lemma. Note that mj,r , which is a weighted
average of all historical gradients, whereP
                                          the weights decay exponentially fast, then we can take on
                                            t
a threshold τ̄ = polylog(η −1 ) such that τ =τ̄ β1τ (1 − β1 ) = poly(η
                                                                    1
                                                                       −1 ) . Then for each k ∈ [d] we

have
                   τ̄                                                   t
       (t)
                   X                                                    X
    mj,r [k] =            β1τ (1 − β1 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t−τ ) )[k] +               β1τ (1 − β1 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t−τ ) )[k]
                   τ =0                                                τ =τ̄
                     τ̄
                   X                                                           1
               =          β1τ (1 − β1 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t−τ ) )[k] ±                       ,
                   τ =0
                                                                           poly(η −1 )


                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where in the last equality we use the fact that |∇wj,r L(W(t−τ ) )[k]| = O(1)
                                                                         e    for all k ∈ [d]. Simi-
                                           (t)
larly, we can also have the following on vj,r ,
                                        τ̄
                         (t)
                                        X                                                                        1
                       vj,r [k] =              β2τ (1 − β2 ) · ∇wj,r L(W(t−τ ) )[k]2 ±                                   .
                                        τ =0
                                                                                                             poly(η −1 )

Here we slightly abuse the notation by using the same τ̄ . Then we have
                 (t)         Pτ̄        τ                      (t−τ )            1
               mj,r [k]         τ =0 β1 (1 − β1 ) · ∇wj,r L(W         )[k] ± poly(η −1 )
             q           = qP                                                            .
                  (t)            τ̄      τ                      (t−τ ) )[k]2 ±      1
                vj,r [k]         τ =τ̄ β2 (1 − β2 ) · ∇wj,r L(W                       −1
                                                                               poly(η )

In order to prove the main argument of this lemma, the key is to show that within τ̄ iterations,
the gradient ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] barely changes. In particular, by (C.7), we have the update of each
coordinate in one step is at most Θ(η). This implies that
                                                   (t)                      (τ )
                                               hwj,r , vi − hwj,r , vi ≤ Θ(ητ̄ ),
                                                  (t)                       (τ )
                                            hwj,r , ξi i − hwj,r , ξi i ≤ Θ(ητ̄ sσp ),
                                                         (t)                  (τ )
                                                   |wj,r [k] − wj,r [k]| ≤ Θ(ητ̄ ).
                               (τ )                    (τ )
Then applying the fact that |hwj,r , vi| ≤ Θ(1)
                                           e    and |hwj,r , ξi i| ≤ Θ(1),
                                                                     e     we further have

                         Fj (W(τ ) , xi ) − Fj (W(t) , xi ) ≤ Θ(mητ̄ sσp ) = Θ(ητ̄
                                                                             e     sσp ),

where we use the fact that m = Θ(1)
                               e    and sσp = ω(1). Then it holds that
                                                               (τ )
                                (τ )              eFj (W ,xi )
                               `j,i = P                   Fk (W(τ ) ,xi )
                                               k∈{−1,1} e
                                                                              (t)
                                                                eFj (W              ,xi )+Θ(η
                                                                                          e τ̄ sσp )
                                       ≤            (t) ,x )+Θ(η                                   (t) ,x )−Θ(η
                                           eFj (W         i
                                                             e τ̄ sσp )
                                                                                     + eF−j (W           i
                                                                                                            e τ̄ sσp )

                                                  (t)                 (t)
                                       = sgn(`j,i ) · Θ(|`j,i |),
                                                                                 (τ )       (t)
where we use the fact that Θ(ητ̄
                           e     sσp ) = o(1). Similarly, we can also show that `j,i ≥ sgn(`j,i ) ·
     (t)
Θ(|`j,i |), which further implies
                                                        (τ )                   (t)           (t)
                                                       `j,i = sgn(`j,i ) · Θ(|`j,i |)
                                                (τ )
for all τ ∈ [t − τ̄ , t]. Note that |`j,i | ≤ 1, then it holds that
               (τ )            (τ )                      (t)                 (t)              (τ )
              `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , vi) = sgn(`j,i ) · Θ(|`j,i |) · σ 0 (hwj,r , vi)
                                                  (t)         (t)             (t)             (t)
                                           ≤ sgn(`j,i ) · Θ(|`j,i |) · σ 0 (hwj,r , vi) + Θ(|`j,i |) · Θ(ητ̄
                                                                                                       e     ).
We can also similarly derive the following
                    (τ )       (τ )             (t)         (t)             (t)             (t)
                   `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , vi) ≥ sgn(`j,i ) · Θ(|`j,i |) · σ 0 (hwj,r , vi) − Θ(|`j,i |) · Θ(ητ̄
                                                                                                     e     ),
            (τ )         (τ )                          (t)              (t)                 (t)                  (t)
           `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) ≤ sgn(`j,i ) · Θ(|`j,i |) · σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) + Θ(|`j,i |) · Θ(ητ̄
                                                                                                 e     sσp ),
            (τ )       (τ )               (t)         (t)             (t)               (t)
           `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) ≥ sgn(`j,i ) · Θ(|`j,i |) · σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) − Θ(|`j,i |) · Θ(ητ̄
                                                                                                 e     sσp ).
Combining the above results, applying (C.4), (C.5), and (C.6), we can show that for the first coordi-
nate, we have
                                                           X  n
                 (τ )

                                           (t)
                                                          1        (t)
       ∇wj,r L(W )[1] = Θ ∇wj,r L(W )[1] ± Θ                     |` | · O(ητ̄
                                                                         e    ) ± Θ(λητ̄ );
                                                          n i=1 j,i


                                                                              20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for any k ∈ Bi , we have
                                                          (t)
                      (τ )

                                               (t)
                                                         |`j,i |
        ∇wj,r L(W            )[k] = Θ ∇wj,r L(W )[k] ± Θ         · O(ητ̄
                                                                   e     sσp ) ± Θ(λητ̄ );
                                                           n
and for remaining coordinates, we have

                        ∇wj,r L(W(τ ) )[k] = Θ ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] ± Θ(ληe
                                                                       τ ).
                                                       (t)      (t)
Now we can plug the above results into the formula of mj,r and vj,r . Using the fact that τ̄ = Θ(1),
                                                                                               e
                (t)
λ = o(1), and |`j,i | ≤ 1, we have for all k = 1 or k ∈
                                                      / Bi for any i,
                                 (t)
                               m [k]         ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] ± Θ(η)
                                                                 e
                               q j,r     =                              .
                                  (t)
                                vj,r [k]  Θ |∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k]| ± Θ(η))
                                                                   e

For k ∈ Bi we have
                                                             (t)
                                                    e ηsσp |`j,i | ± Θ(λη)

                   (t)
                  mj,r [k]     ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] ± Θ       n
                                                                         e
                 q          =                              ηsσ |`(t) |           .
                    (t)                                       p j,i
                   vj,r [k]  Θ |∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k]| ± Θ e
                                                               n         ± Θ(λη)
                                                                           e

                                              / Bi for any i, we have either |∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k]| ≤
Then, we can conclude that for all k = 1 or k ∈
Θ(η)
e    or
                                      (t)
                                    m [k]
                                    q j,r     = sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] · Θ(1).

                                       (t)
                                     vj,r [k]

                                                      e ηn−1 sσp |`(t) | + λη or

For any k ∈ Bi , we have either |∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k]| ≤ Θ            j,i

                                      (t)
                                    m [k]
                                    q j,r     = sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[k] · Θ(1).

                                       (t)
                                     vj,r [k]
This completes the proof.


Lemma C.3 (Lemma 5.2, restated). Suppose the training data is generated according to Defini-
tion 3.1, assume λ = o(σ0q−2 σp /n) and η = 1/poly(d), then for any t ≤ T0 with T0 = O
                                                                                     e 1
                                                                                       ηsσp
and any i ∈ [n],
                                        (t+1)                (t)
                                     hwj,r      , j · vi ≤ hwj,r , j · vi + Θ(η),
                                       hwy(t+1)
                                           i ,r
                                                , ξi i = hwy(t)
                                                             i ,r
                                                                  , ξi i + Θ(ηsσ
                                                                           e    p ).


Proof. At the initialization, we have
     (0)                           (0)           e 1/2 σp σ0 + α) = Θ(s
                                                                    e 1/2 σp σ0 ),      (0)
  |hwj,r , vi| = Θ(σ
                 e 0 ),         |hwj,r , ξi i| = Θ(s                                   wj,r [k] = Θ(σ
                                                                                                  e 0 ),
                              (0)
which also imply that |`j,i | = Θ(1). Then recalling that λ = o(σ0q−2 σp /n), α = o(1), s1/2 σp =
O(1),
e     we have
                X n                                n
                         (0) 0    (0)                    (0) 0    (0)              (0)
                                                   X
           sgn       yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , yi vi) − α   yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1]
                  i=1                                       i=1
                           q−1               1/2
                                                 σp σ0 )q−1 ) ± o σ0q−1 σp )

            = sgn j · Θ(nσ
                      e
                          0    ) − j · Θ(αn(s
                                       e
            = sgn(j).


                                                            21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Since v is 1-sparse, then by Lemma C.2, we have
                                             D      q            E
              (1)            (0)               (0)    (0)             (0)
          hwj,r , j · vi ≤ hwj,r , j · vi − η mj,r / vj,r , j · v ≤ hwj,r , j · vi + Θ(η).

Now suppose that the first inequality holds for iterations 0, . . . , t − 1. Then we have
                                       (t)
                                   hwj,r , j · vi ≤ Θ(η · T0 ) ≤ O(σ0 ).
                    (t)
Besides, note that `j,i = 1j=yi −logitj (F (t) , xi ), we have
                                                     (t)
                                             sgn yi `j,i = sgn(j),

where we recall that j ∈ {−1, 1}. Therefore, given that λ = o(σ0q−2 σp /n), α = o(1), s1/2 σp =
                   (t)
O(1),
e     and assume `j,i = Θ(1) (which will be verified later),
                 n
                 X                               n
                       (t) 0    (t)                    (t) 0    (t)              (t)
                                                 X
             sgn   yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , yi vi) − α   yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1]
                    i=1                                 i=1
                             q−1               1/2
                                                   σp σ0 )q−1 ) ± o σ0q−1 σp )

              = sgn j · Θ(nσ
                        e
                             0   ) − j · Θ(αn(s
                                         e
              = sgn(j).
Since v is 1-sparse, then by Lemma C.2, the following inequality naturally holds,
                                            D      q            E
             (t+1)             (t)             (t)     (t)             (t)
         hwj,r , j · vi ≤ hwj,r , j · vi − η mj,r / vj,r , j · v ≤ hwj,r , j · vi + Θ(η).

Additionally, in terms of the memorization of noise, we first consider the iterate in the initialization.
By the condition that η = o(1/d) = o(1/(sσp )) and note that for a sufficiently large fraction of
                                                            −1         (0)
k ∈ Bi (e.g., 0.99), we have |ξi [k]| ≥ Θ(σ
                                         e p ) ≥ Θ(ηn
                                                    e            sσp |`j,i |) and thus

                                     (0)
sgn ∇wyi ,r L(W(0) )[k] = sgn `yi ,i σ 0 (hwy(0)                             (0)

                                               i ,r
                                                    , ξ i i)ξ i [k] − nλw    yi ,r [k]

                                     e (d1/2 σp σ0 )q−1 σp · sgn(ξi [k]) ± o(σ q−1 σp ) = −sgn(ξi [k]).

                             = −sgn Θ                                         0
                                                                                               (C.8)
Therefore, by Lemma C.2 we have the following according to (C.3),
                                                D       q               E
                                                   (0)     (0)
         hwy(1)
             i ,r
                  , ξ i i = hw (0)
                              yi ,r , ξ i i − η  m j,r / v y i ,r , ξ i
                                                      X
                               (0)
                          ≥ hwyi ,r , ξi i + Θ(η) ·      hsgn(ξi [k]), ξi [k]i − O(ηsσp ) − O(ηα)
                                                  k∈Bi

                        = hwy(0)
                              i ,r
                                   , ξi i + Θ(ηsσ
                                            e    p ),

where in the first inequality the term O(ηsσp ) represents the coordinates that |ξi [k]| ≤ O(σp ) (so
that we cannot use the sign information of ∇yi ,r L(W(0) ) but directly bound it by Θ(1)) and the last
inequality is due to the fact that |Bi | ≥ s − 1 and α = o(1). For general t, we will consider the
following induction hypothesis:

                                 hwy(t+1)
                                     i ,r
                                          , ξi i = hwy(t)
                                                       i ,r
                                                            , ξi i + Θ(ηsσ
                                                                     e    p ),                       (C.9)
which has already been verified for t = 0. By Hypothesis (C.9), the following holds at time t,

                   hwy(t)
                       i ,r
                            , ξi i = hwy(0)
                                         i ,r
                                              , ξi i + Θ(tηsσ
                                                       e           e 1/2 σp σ0 + tηsσp ).
                                                             p ) = Θ(s

                                                                     (t)
In the meanwhile, we have the following upper bound for |wj,r [k]|,
      (t)          (t−1)                                         (0)
   |wj,r [k]| ≤ |wj,r      [k]| + η| sign(∇wj,r L(W(t−1) ))| ≤ |wj,r [k]| + tη = Θ(σ
                                                                                 e 0 + tη).         (C.10)


                                                        22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                             1                                          e 1 , we have

Besides, it is also easy to verify that for any t ≤ T0 = Θ
                                                         e
                                                           sσp ηm                                     = Θ sσp η
   (t)            (t)                                             (t)
hwyi ,r , ξi i, hwyi ,r , j · vi < Θ(1/m) and thus |`j,i | = Θ(1). Then similar to (C.8), we have
           sgn ∇wyi ,r L(W(t) )[k]


                         (t) 0     (t)                 (t)
            = sgn `yi ,i σ (hwyi ,r , ξi i)ξi [k] − nλwyi ,r [k]

                               1/2                q−1                     q−2
            = −sgn Θ (s σp σ0 + tηsσp ) σp · sgn(ξi [k]) ± o σ0 σp · (σ0 + tη)
                           e

          = −sgn(ξi [k]).                                                                                         (C.11)
This further implies that
                                                    X
hwy(t+1) , ξi i ≥ hwy(t)                                  hsgn ∇wyi ,r L(W(t) )[k] , ξi [k]i − O(η 2 s2 σp2 ) − O(ηα)

    i ,r              i ,r
                           , ξi i − Θ(η) ·
                                                   k∈Bi

            = hwy(t)
                  i ,r
                       , ξi i + Θ(ηsσ
                                e    p ),
                        2 2 2
where the term −O(η s σp ) is contributed by the gradient coordinates that are smaller than
Θ(ηsσp ). This verifies Hypothesis (C.9) at time t and thus completes the proof.

                                                                                            (t)
From Lemma C.3, note that sσp = ω(1), then it can be seen that hwj,r , j · vi increases much faster
         (t)                                                                  (t)
than hwj,r , j · vi. By looking at the update rule of hwj,r , j · vi (see (C.2)), it will keeps increasing
                                                   (t)                              (t)               (t)
only when, roughly speaking, σ 0 (hwj,r , j · vi) > ασ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i). Since hwj,r , ξi i increases much
                  (t)                                                                                       (t)
faster than hwj,r , j · vi, it can be anticipated after a certain number of iterations, hwj,r , j · vi will
start to decrease. In the following lemma, we provide an upper bound on the iteration number such
that this decreasing occurs.
Lemma C.4 (Lemma C.4, restated).  Suppose the training data is generated according to Defini-
tion 3.1, α ≥ Θ   e (sσp )1−q ∨ σ q−1 and σ0 < O((sσ      e     p)
                                                                  −1
                                                                     ), then for any t ∈ [Tr , T0 ] with
                                      0
               σ0

Tr = O ηsσp α1/(q−1) ≤ T0 ,
        e
                                              (t+1)                     (t)
                                          hwj,r       , j · vi = hwj,r , j · vi − Θ(η).
Moreover, it holds that
                             
                                          e 1

                              −sgn(j) · Ω sσp ,
                                                           k = 1,
                  (T )                       e 1 or ± O(η),
                 wj,r0 [k] =   sgn(ξi [k]) · Ω sσp
                                                      e     k ∈ Bi , with yi = j,
                             
                               ±O(η),
                              e
                                                            otherwise.

Proof. Recall from Lemma C.3 that for any t ≤ T0 we have
                        (t+1)                     (t)                                 (0)
                   hwj,r        , j · vi ≤ hwj,r , j · vi + Θ(η) ≤ hwj,r , j · vi + Θ(tη),
                        hwy(t+1)
                            s ,r
                                 , ξs i = hwy(t)
                                              s ,r
                                                   , ξs i + Θ(ηsσ
                                                            e            (0)
                                                                 p ) ≤ hwys ,r , ξs i + Θ(tηsσp ).
                                                                                        e
                                                         (t)             (0)
Besides, by Lemma C.2 we also have |wj,r [k]| ≤ |wj,r [k]| + O(tη). Then it can be verified that for
                   σ0

some Tr = O e
              ηsσp α1/(q−1)
                              , we have for all i ∈ [n] and t ∈ [Tr , T0 ]
                                                          (t)                     (t)
                     ασ 0 (hwy(t)    , ξi i) ≥ C · σ 0 (hwj,r , j · vi) + λn|wj,r [1]|

                                i ,r

for some constant C. This further implies that
          sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[1]

                   X  n                                   n
                             (t) 0         (t)                     (t) 0   (t)              (t)
                                                         X
           = −sgn        yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , yi vi) − α        yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1]
                             i=1                                        i=1
                                   n
                                             (t)        (t)
                                   X
                                         yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i)

               = −sgn − α
                                   i=1
               = sgn(j),


                                                                  23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                          (t)
where we use the fact that sgn(yi `j,i ) = sgn(j) for all i ∈ [n]. Then by Lemma C.2 and (C.2), we
have for all t ∈ [Tr , T0 ],
     (t+1)                (t)                                                       (t)
  hwj,r , j · vi = hwj,r , j · vi − Θ(η) · sgn(j) · sgn ∇wj,r L(W(t) )[1] = hwj,r , j · vi − Θ(η).


Then at iteration T0 , for the first coordinate we have

        (T0 )         (0)                                                                    1
      wj,r [1] = wj,r [1] + sgn(j) · Θ(Tr η) − sgn(j) · Θ((T0 − Tr )η) ≥ −sgn(j) · Ω    e
                                                                                            sσp
For any k ∈ Bi with yi = j, we have either the coordinate will increase at a rate of Θ(1) or fall into
                                          (T )
0. As a consequence we have either wj,r0 [k] ∈ [−Θ(η),e     Θ(η)]
                                                            e     or

                    (T )         (0)                                          e 1 .
                 wj,r0 [k] = wj,r [k] + sgn(ξi [k]) · Θ(T0 η) ≥ sgn(ξi [k]) · Ω
                                                                                  sσp
For the remaining coordinate, its update will be determined by the regularization term, which will
finally fall into the region around zero since we have T0 η = ω(σ0 ). By Lemma C.2 it is clear that
   (T )
w 0 [k] ∈ [−Θ(η),
  j,r
                 e      Θ(η)].
                        e

                                                              sσ 2
Lemma C.5 (Lemma 5.4, restated). If α = O np and η = o(λ), then let r∗                                                 =
               (t)
arg maxr∈[m] hwyi ,r , ξi i, for any t ≥ T0 , i ∈ [n], j ∈ [2] and r ∈ [m], it holds that
                       (t)
                                                X (t)
                  hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = Θ(1),
                                      e             |wyi ,r∗ [k]| · |ξi [k]| = Θ(1),
                                                                               e
                                                     k∈Bi
                                              (t)                            nα
                             ∀r ∈ [m],      hwj,r , sgn(j) · vi ∈ [−O
                                                                    e             , O(λ−1 η)].
                                                                             sσp2

Proof. The proof will be relying on the following three induction hypothesis:
                                         (t)
                                      hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = Ω(1),
                                                        e                                                        (C.12)
                          X (t+1)
                              |w ∗ [k]| · |ξi [k]| = Θ(1),
                                        yi ,r
                                                        e                                                        (C.13)
                               k∈Bi

                                                           e nα , O(λ−1 η) ,
                                                        h                 i
                                     (t)
                         ∀r ∈ [m], hwj,r , sgn(j) · vi ∈ − O                                                     (C.14)
                                                             sσp2
which we assume they hold for all τ ≤ t and r ∈ [m], i ∈ [n], and j ∈ [2]. It is clear that all
hypothesis hold when t = T0 according to Lemma C.4.

Verifying Hypothesis (C.12). We first verify Hypothesis (C.12). Recall that the update rule for
  (t)
hwyi ,r , ξi i is given as follows,
   hwy(t+1)
       i ,r
            , ξi i
                                     q
                                        (t)
    = hwy(t)
          i ,r
               , ξ i i − η · m(t)
                              yi ,r /  vyi ,r , ξi
    ≥ hwy(t)   , ξi i − Θ(η) · sgn ∇wyi ,r L(W(t) ) , ξi − Θ(η    e 2 s2 σp2 )

          i ,r

                                           (t) 0
                                X
    = hwy(t)
          i ,r
               , ξ i i + Θ(η) ·     sgn  ` yi ,i σ (hw (t)
                                                            ,
                                                       yi ,r iξ i)ξ i [k] − nλw (t)
                                                                               yi ,r [k]  , ξ i [k]
                                 k∈Bi
                           n
                           X                               n
                                 (t) 0    (t)                    (t) 0    (t)              (t)
                                                           X
          − αyi Θ(η) · sgn   yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , yi vi) − α   yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1]
                                  i=1                                 i=1
            e 2 s2 σp2 ).
          − Θ(η                                                                                                  (C.15)
Note that for any a and b we have sgn(a − b) · a ≥ |a| − 2|b|. Then it follows that
X     (t)                                                                    X                                 (t)
                                                                                                    2nλ|wyi ,r [k]|
       sgn `yi ,i σ 0 (hwy(t)
                           i ,r
                                , ξ i i)ξ i [k] − nλw (t)
                                                     yi ,r [k]  , ξ i [k]  ≥        |ξ i [k]| −   (t)            (t)
k∈Bi                                                                         k∈Bi                `yi ,i σ 0 (hwyi , ξi i)

                                                                                                 nλ
                                                                           ≥ Θ(sσ
                                                                             e    p ) −   Θ
                                                                                          e
                                                                                                (t)
                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                               `yi ,i σp


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the last inequality follows from Hypothesis (C.12) and (C.13). Further recall that λ =
o(σ0q−2 σp /n), plugging the above inequality to (C.15) gives

                   (t+1)           (t)                            ηnλ          e 2 s2 σp2 )
                hwyi ,r , ξi i ≥ hwyi ,r , ξi i + Θ(ηsσp ) − Θ (t)
                                                  e          e               − Θ(η
                                                                 `yi ,i σp
                                                                             q−2
                                   (t)                                       ησ0
                               ≥ hwyi ,r , ξi i + Θ(ηsσp ) − Θ(αη) − Θ
                                                  e                      e
                                                                               (t)
                                                                                     .      (C.16)
                                                                              `yi ,i
                          (t)                                      (t)
Then it is clear that hwyi ,r , ξi i will increase by Θ(ηsσ
                                                      e    p ) if `yi ,i is larger than some constant of
                        q−2
order Ω(           e σ0 ). We will first show that as soon as there is a iterate W(τ ) satisfying
        e nλ2 ) = Ω(
          sσp          sσp
                                                             0
 (τ )    e nλ2 for some τ ≤ t, then it must hold that `(τ ) will also be smaller than some constant

`yi ,i ≤ O  sσp                                           yi ,i
                 e nλ2 for all τ 0 ∈ [τ, t + 1]. To prove this, we first note that if `(t) reaches some

in the order of O  sσp                                                                  yi ,i
                          e nλ2 , we have for all r ∈ [m] by (C.16)

constant in the order of O         sσp

                                         hwy(t+1)
                                             i ,r
                                                  , ξi i ≥ hwy(t)
                                                               i ,r
                                                                    , ξi i + Θ(ηsσ
                                                                             e    p ),
                                             (t+1)                    (t)
                                         hw−yi ,r , ξi i ≤ hw−yi ,r , ξi i + O(αη),
                                             (t+1)                        (t)
                                         |hwj,r       , vi| ≤ |hwj,r , vi| + O(η).                                 (C.17)
Therefore, we have
                     (t+1)
 (t+1)      eF−yi (W       ,xi )
`yi ,i = P           Fj (W(t+1) ,xi )
          j∈{−1,1} e
                                                      1
        =           Pm       (t+1)               (t+1)                 (t+1)              (t+1)
          1 + exp    r=1 σ(hwyi ,r , vi) + σ(hwyi ,r , ξi i) − σ(hw−yi ,r , vi) − σ(hw−yi ,r , ξi i)
                                                             1
        ≤           Pm       (t)               (t)                 (t)                (t)
                                                                                                            2
          1 + exp    r=1 σ(hwyi ,r , vi) + σ(hwyi ,r , ξi i) − σ(hw−yi ,r , vi) − σ(hw−yi ,r , ξi i) + Θ(ηsσp )
                                                                                                         e
                                                     1
        ≤           Pm       (t)               (t)                  (t)                (t)
          1 + exp    r=1 σ(hwyi ,r , vi) + σ(hwyi ,r , ξi i) − σ(hw−yi ,r , vi) − σ(hw−yi ,r , ξi i)
            (t)
        = `yi ,i ,
                                                                                                  (t)
where inequality follows from (C.17). Therefore, this implies that as long as `yi ,i is larger than some
             e nλ2 , then the adam algorithm will prevent it from further increasing. Besides, since

constant b = O  sσ       p
                                                    (t+1)            (t)          (t)
mησp2 = o(1), then we must have `yi ,i                      ∈ [0.5`yi ,i , 2`yi ,i ]. As a consequence, we can deduce that
 (t)
`yi ,i cannot be larger than 2b, since otherwise there must exists a iterate W(τ ) with τ ≤ t such that
 (τ )                     (τ +1)     (τ )                                                  (τ )                 (τ )
`yi ,i ∈ [b, 2b] and `yi ,i
                         ≥ `yi ,i , which contradicts the fact that `yi ,i should decreases if `yi ,i ≥ b.
                                  (τ )       e nλ2 for some τ ≤ t, then we have

Therefore, we can claim that if `      ≤b=O yi ,i                   sσp

                                                               0
                                                             (τ )               nλ
                                                            `yi ,i ≤ O
                                                                     e                                             (C.18)
                                                                                sσp2
for all τ 0 ∈ [τ, t + 1]. Then further note that
                                                                    (t)
                       (t+1)       (t)          eF−yi (W ,xi )
                     2`yi ,i   ≥ `yi ,i = P              Fj (W(t) ,xi )
                                              j∈{−1,1} e
                                                 X   m
                                                          σ(hwy(t)                     (t)

                                          ≥ exp −                 i ,r
                                                                       , yi vi) + σ(hw yi ,r , ξ i i)
                                                              r=1

                                          ≥ exp − Θ m max σ(hwy(t)

                                                                i ,r
                                                                     , ξi i) ,                                     (C.19)
                                                                     r∈[m]



                                                                     25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                              (t+1)   e nλ2 =

where in the last inequality we use Hypothesis (C.14). Then by the fact that `yi ,i ≤ O sσp
                                                                    (t+1)
o(1) and m = Θ(1),
                 e      it is clear that exp − Θ m maxr∈[m] σ(hwyi ,r , ξi i) = o(1) so that
             (t+1)
maxr∈[m] hwyi ,r , ξi i = Ω(1).
                           e     This verifies Hypothesis (C.12).

Verifying Hypothesis (C.13). Now we will verify Hypothesis (C.13). First, note that we have
                     (t+1)
already shown that hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = Ω(1)
                                     e      so it holds that
                 X (t+1)                             (t+1)         (t+1)
                     |wyi ,r∗ [k]| · |ξi [k]| + α|wyi ,r∗ [1]| ≥ hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = Ω(1).
                                                                                   e
                     k∈Bi

                                         (t+1)             (t)
By Hypothesis (C.14), we have |wyi ,r∗ [1]| ≤ |wyi ,r∗ [1]|+η = o(1). Besides, since each coordinate
in ξi is a Gaussian random variable, then maxk∈Bi |ξi [k]| = O(σ
                                                              e p ). This immediately implies that
                                 X (t+1)
                                       |w ∗ [k]| · |ξi [k]| = Ω(1).
                                                  yi ,r
                                                              e
                                        k∈Bi

                                                 (t+1)
                                                 P
Then we will prove the upper bound of     k∈Bi |wyi ,r [k]| · |ξi [k]|. Recall that by Lemma C.2, for
                                           e −1 ηsσp `(t) ), we have
any k ∈ Bi such that ∇wyi ,r L(W(t) )[k] ≥ Θ(n          yi ,i

                                                       (t) 0
             wy(t+1)
                i ,r
                     [k] = w (t)
                             yi ,r [k] + Θ(η) · sgn   `yi ,i σ (hw (t)
                                                                   yi ,r , ξ i i)ξ i [k] − nλw (t)
                                                                                               yi ,r [k]   .

                                                           (T0 )                     e 1

Note that by Lemma C.4, for every k ∈ Bi , we have either wyi ,r [k] = sgn(ξi [k]) · Θ sσp
      (T )
        0                                                                                                      (t)
or |wyi ,r [k]| ≤ η. Then during the training process after T0 , we have either sgn(wyi ,r [k]) =
                                     (t)
sgn(ξi [k]) or sgn(ξi [k]) · wyi ,r ≥ −O(η)e        since if for some iteration number t0 that we have
         0
       (t )                                  (t0 −1)
sgn(wyi ,r [k]) = −sgn(ξi [k]) but sgn(wyi ,r [k]) = sgn(ξi [k]), then after τ̄ = O(1)  e     steps (see
the proof of Lemma C.2 for the definition of τ̄ ) in the constant number of steps the gradient will
must be in the same direction of ξi [k], which will push wyi ,r [k] back to zero or become positive
along the direction of ξi [k]. Therefore, based on this property we have the following regarding the
                  (t)
inner product hwyi ,r , ξi i,
                                         X
                 hwy(t)
                      i ,r , ξ i i =       wy(t)
                                              i ,r
                                                   [k] · ξi [k]
                                     k∈Bi ∪{1}
                                        X                                                  X
                                 ≥               |wy(t)
                                                     i ,r
                                                          [k]| · |ξi [k]| − O(η)
                                                                            e    ·               |ξi [k]|
                                     k∈Bi ∪{1}                                       k∈Bi ∪{1}
                                        X
                                 =               |wy(t)
                                                     i ,r
                                                          [k]| · |ξi [k]| − O(ηsσ
                                                                            e    p ),
                                     k∈Bi ∪{1}

                                                                                     (t)
where the second inequality follows from the fact that the entry wyi ,r [k] that has different sign of
                   (t)                               (t)   P                 (t)         (t)
ξi [k] satisfies |wyi ,r [k]| ≤ O(η).e    Then let Bi = j∈Bi ∪{1} wyi ,r [k] · 1(|wyi ,r [k]| ≥ O(η))   e     ·
                                  (T0 )                                           (t)
|ξi [k]|, which satisfies Bi            = Θ(1) by Lemma  C.4. Then assume Bi keeps increasing and
                                          e
reaches some value in the order of Θ log(dnη −1 ) , it holds that according to the inequality above

                    hwy(t)      , ξi i = Θ log(dnη −1 ) − Θ(ηsσ                     −1

                                                                  p ) = Θ log(dnη      ) ,
                                                           e
                           i ,r


where we use the condition that η = O (sσp )−1 . Then by Hypothesis (C.12) and (C.14) we know

          (t)                      (t)                      (t)                           (t)
that |hwj,r , vi| = o(1), hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = Ω(1),
                                              e     and |hw−yi ,r∗ , ξi i| = O(dη)+α|hw
                                                                              e
                                                                                          −yi ,r ∗ , vi| = o(1)
then similar to (C.19), it holds that
                           (t)
       (t)        eF−yi (W ,xi )                                  (t)
                                                          − Θ σ(hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i) ≤ poly(d−1 , n−1 , η).

      `yi ,i = P          Fj (W(t) ,xi )
                                         ≤ exp
                j∈{−1,1} e

Therefore, at this time we have for all k ∈ Bi ,
         (t)
        `yi ,i σh(wy(t)   , ξi i)ξi [k] ≤ poly(d−1 , n−1 , η) · Θ logq−1 (dnη −1 ) · Θ(σ

                                                                                     e p ) ≤ nλη.
                     i ,r


                                                           26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


               (t)
Then for all |wyi ,r [k]| ≥ O(η),
                            e      the sign of the gradient satisfies

                               (t)
                                                    (t) 0     (t)            (t)
            sgn ∇wyi ,r L(W )[k] = −sgn `yi ,i σ (hwyi ,r , ξi i)ξi [k] − nλwyi ,r [k]

                                               = sgn(nλη − wy(t)
                                                              i ,r
                                                                   [k])
                                               = sgn(wy(t)
                                                        i ,r
                                                             [k]).

                                            (t)                       (t)
Then note that |∇wyi ,r L(W(t) )[k]| = Θ(|λwyi ,r [k]|) ≥ Θ n−1 ηsσp `yi ,i + λη , by the update

          (t)
rule of wyi ,r [k] and Lemma C.2, we know the sign gradient will dominate the update process.
                      (t+1)          (t)                     (t)           (t)
Then we have |wyi ,r [k]| = |wyi ,r [k] − Θ(η) · sgn(wyi ,r [k])| ≤ |wyi ,r [k]|, which implies that
   (t)            (t)                                    (t)
 wyi ,r [k] · 1(|wyi ,r [k]| ≥ O(η))
                               e      decreases so that Bi also decreases. Therefore, we can conclude
        (t)
that Bi will not exceed Θ log(dnη −1 ) . Then combining the results for all i ∈ [n] gives


                   (t)                       (t)
          X
                                                                      −1

                 |wyi ,r∗ [k]| · |ξi [k]| ≤ Bi + O(sησ
                                                 e    p ) ≤ Θ log(dnη    ) + O(1) = Θ(1),
                                                                                    e
         k∈Bi


where in the first inequality we again use the condition that η = o(1/d) = o (sσp )−1 . This verifies

                                                       (t)                      (t)
Hypothesis (C.13). Notably, this also implies that hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = maxr∈[m] hwyi ,r , ξi i ≤ Θ(1).
                                                                                               e

Verifying Hypothesis (C.14).             In order to verify Hypothesis (C.14), let us first recall the update
          (t)
rule of hwj,r , vi:

                                                                               (t)
                                                                      *               +
                                  (t+1)        (t)                           mj,r
                                hwj,r , vi = hwj,r , vi − η                  q      ,v .
                                                                                (t)
                                                                               vj,r
                                                                                         q
                                                               (t)                  (t)     (t)
Then by Lemma C.2, we know that if |∇wj,r L(W )[1]| ≤ Θ(η), then |mj,r / vj,r | ≤ Θ(1) and
                                                                 e
otherwise
* (t)        +         n                                   n
   mj,r
                      X
                              (t)        (t)                      (t)        (t)                (t)
                                                          X
  q       , v = −sgn      yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi) − α     yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1] · Θ(1).
      (t)
     vj,r             i=1                                 i=1


                                                                                                                (T )
Without loss of generality we assume j = 1, then by Lemma C.4 we know that w1,r0 [1] =
  e 1 . In the remaining proof, we will show that either w(t+1) [1] ∈ [0, Θ(λ
                                                                          e −1 η)] or w(t+1) [1] ∈

−Ω  sσp                                                   1,r                          1,r
    e nα2 , 0 .

  −O  sσ  p

                         (t+1)         e −1 η)] for all r. Note that in the beginning of this stage,
First we will show that w1,r [1] ∈ [0, Θ(λ
              (T )                                                   (t0 )
we have w1,r0 [1] < 0. In order to make the sign of w1,r [1] flip, we must have, in some iteration
                       (t0 )
t0 ≤ t that satisfies w [1] ∈ [0, Θ(λ
                         1,r
                                  e −1 η)], therefore

                                n                                         n
                     0                     (t0 )      (t0 )                           (t0 )      (t0 )                (t0 )
                                X                                         X
  −n∇w1,r L(W(t ) )[1] =                yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi) − α            yi `j,i σ 0 (hwj,r , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1]
                                i=1                                          i=1
                                         (t0 )   q−2        (t0 )
                               ≤n       wj,r [1]     − λ · wj,r [1] ≤ −Θ(nη)
                                                                       e     ≤ 0,
                                                                                                                  0
where the second inequality holds since η = o(λ(q−1)/(q−2) ). Note that |∇w1,r L(W(t ) )[1]| ≥
Θ(η),
e       then by Lemma C.2 we know that Adam is similar to sign gradient descent and thus
  (t0 +1)        (t0 )                                                     (t+1)
w1,r [1] = w1,r [1] − Θ(η) which starts to decrease. This implies that if w1,r [1] is positive,
                       e −1 η) = o(1).
then it cannot exceed Θ(λ


                                                              27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                           (t+1)                       (t+1)      e nα2 . In this case we have

Then we can prove that if w1,r [1] is negative, then |w1,r [1]| = O sσp
for all t0 ≤ t,
                                       n                                              n
                      (t0 )                       (t0 )      (t0 )                                (t0 )       (t0 )                 (t0 )
                                       X                                              X
  −n∇w(t) L(W                 )[1] =          yi `1,i σ 0 (hw1,r , yi vi) − α               yi `1,i σ 0 (hw1,r , ξi i) − nλw1,r [1]
          1,r
                                       i=1                                            i=1
                                                     (t0 )                          (t0 )                       (t0 )       (t0 )
                                             X                                                        X
                                  ≥−               |`1,i | · Θ(α)
                                                             e    + nλ|w1,r [1]| +                            |`1,i | · |w1,r [1]|q−1 ,
                                         i:yi =1                                                   i:yi =−1
                                                     (t0 )              (t0 )
                                             X
                                  ≥−               |`1,i | · Θ(α)
                                                             e    + nλ|w1,r [1]|,
                                         i:yi =1

where in the inequality we use Hypothesis (C.13) and (C.14) to get that
                      0             X       0                                  0
                hwy(ti ,r) , ξi i ≤   |wy(ti ,r) [k]| · max |ξi [k]| + α|hwy(ti ,r) , vi| = Θ(1).
                                                                                            e
                                                                    k∈Bi
                                         k∈Bi

                                  (t0 )                                   0
                                          e nλ2 , therefore we have if w(t ) [1] is smaller than some

Recall from (C.18) that we have |`j,i | = O sσp                         j,r
                       e nα2 · polylog(d), then

value in the order of −Θ           sσp

                                                             αn2 λ

                                   0                                              nλ · nα
           −n∇w(t) L(W(t ) )[1] ≥ −Θ
                                   e                                     +Θ
                                                                          e                        · polylog(d) ≥ Θ(nη),
                                                                                                                  e
                     1,r                                      sσp2                 sσp2
                                                    (t0 )
which by Lemma C.2 implies that wj,r [1] will increase. Therefore, we can conclude that w(t+1) ∈
    e nα2 , 0 in this case, which verifies Hypothesis (C.14).

  −O    sσp

Lemma C.6 (Lemma 5.5, restated). If the step size satisfies η = O(d−1/2 ), then for any t it holds
that
                L(W(t+1) ) − L(W(t) ) ≤ −ηk∇L(W(t) )k1 + Θ(η       e 2 d).

Proof. Let ∆Fj,i = Fj (W(t+1) , xi ) − Fj (W(t) , xi ). Then regarding the loss function
                            eFyi (W,xi )                              X
            Li (W) = − log P F (W,x ) = −Fyi (W, xi ) + log                eFj (W,xi ) .
                               je
                                    j     i
                                                                        j

It is clear that the function Li (W) is 1-smooth with respect to the vector [F−1 (W, xi ), F1 (W, xi )].
Then based on the definition of ∆Fj,i , we have
                                                              X      ∂Li (W(t) )            X
                  Li (W(t+1) ) − Li (W(t) ) ≤                             (t)
                                                                                  · ∆Fj,i +   (∆Fj,i )2 .                             (C.20)
                                                               j
                                                                    ∂Fj (W , xi )           j

Moreover, note that
                                              m
                                                     (t)                (t)
                                              X
                                        (t)

                               Fj (W , xi ) =    σ(hwj,r , yi vi) + σ(hwj,r , ξi i) .
                                                        r=1
                      (t)                   (t)
By the results that hwj,r , vi ≤ Θ(1)
                                 e    and hwj,r , ξi ≤ Θ(1),
                                                       e     for any η = O(d−1/2 ), we have
          (t+1)            (t)                                           (t+1)              (t)              1/2
      hwj,r       , vi ≤ hwj,r , vi + η ≤ Θ(1),
                                          e                         hwj,r        , ξi i ≤ hwj,r , ξi i + Θ(ηs
                                                                                                         e       ) ≤ Θ(1),
                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                   (t)                       (t)
which implies that the smoothness parameter of the functions σ(hwj,r , yi vi) and σ(hwj,r , ξi i) are at
                                          (t)       (t+1)
most Θ(1)
     e    for any w in the path between w and w           . Then we can apply first Taylor expansion
                                                              j,r           j,r
          (t)                          (t)
on σ(hwj,r , yi vi) and σ(hwj,r , ξi i) and bound the second-order error as follows,
                     (t+1)                          (t)                                     (t)               (t+1)         (t)
                σ(hwj,r, yi vi) − σ(hwj,r , yi vi) − ∇wj,r σ(hwj,r , yi vi), wj,r                                       − wj,r i
                 e kw(t+1) − w(t) k22 = Θ(ηe 2 d),

                ≤Θ   j,r         j,r                                                                                                  (C.21)


                                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where the last inequality is due to Lemma C.2 that
                                                                      (t)     2
                                                                m
                                 (t+1)  (t)
                               [wj,r − wj,r ]2 = η 2            q j,r             ≤ Θ(η 2 d).
                                                                   (t)
                                                                 vj,r         2

Similarly, we can also show that
          (t+1)                   (t)                           (t)                (t+1)        (t)
    σ(hwj,r       , ξi i) − σ(hwj,r , ξi i) − ∇wj,r σ(hwj,r , ξi i), wj,r                  − wj,r i ≤ Θ(η 2 d).   (C.22)
Combining the above bounds on the second-order errors, we have

               ∆Fj,i − h∇W Fj (W(t) , xi ), W(t+1) − W(t) i ≤ Θ(mη
                                                              e    2      e 2 d),
                                                                     d) = Θ(η                                     (C.23)

where the last equation is due to our assumption that m = Θ(1).
                                                          e     Besides, by (C.21) and (C.22) the
convexity property of the function σ(x), we also have
          (t+1)                     (t)                                     (t)             (t+1)      (t)
                                                                                                   e 2 d)
     σ(hwj,r      , yi vi) − σ(hwj,r , yi vi) ≤ | ∇wj,r σ(hwj,r , yi vi), wj,r         − wj,r i| + Θ(η
                                                     e η|σ 0 (hw(t+1) , yi vi)| · kvk1 + Θ(η
                                                                                          e 2 d)

                                                    =Θ          j,r
                                                      e + η 2 d);
                                                    = Θ(η
               (t+1)                    (t)                                 (t)            (t+1)      (t)
                                                                                                  e 2 d)
        σ(hwj,r        , ξi i) − σ(hwj,r , ξi i) ≤ | ∇wj,r σ(hwj,r , ξi i), wj,r      − wj,r i| + Θ(η
                                                     e η|σ 0 (hw(t+1) , ξi i)| · kξk1 + Θ(η
                                                                                        e 2 d)

                                                    =Θ          j,r
                                                                2
                                                    = Θ(ηsσ
                                                      e    p + η d).

These bounds further imply that
                                       e m · (ηsσp + η 2 d) = Θ
                                                              e ηsσp + η 2 d .

                            |∆Fj,i | ≤ Θ                                                                          (C.24)
Now we can plug (C.23) and (C.24) into (C.20) and get
                                            X      ∂Li (W(t) )               X
     Li (W(t+1) ) − Li (W(t) ) ≤                                   · ∆Fj,i +   (∆Fj,i )2
                                              j
                                                  ∂Fj (W(t) , xi )           j
                                            X   ∂Li (W(t) )
                                        ≤             (t) , x )
                                                                · h∇W Fj (W(t) , xi ), W(t+1) − W(t) i
                                           j
                                              ∂F j (W        i

                                               e 2 d) + Θ  e (ηsσp + η 2 d)2

                                             + Θ(η
                                        = h∇Li (W(t) ), W(t+1) − W(t) i + Θ(η  e 2 d),               (C.25)
where in the second inequality we use the fact that Li (W) is 1-Lipschitz with respect to Fj (W, xi )
and the last equation is due to our assumption that σp = O(s−1/2 ) so that Θ((ηsσ
                                                                              e              2 2
                                                                                      p + η d) ) =
e 2 d).
O(η
NowPwe are ready to characterize the behavior on the entire training objective L(W) =
       n
n−1 i=1 Li (W) + λkWk2F . Note that λkWk2F is 2λ-smoothness, where λ = o(1). Then ap-
plying (C.25) for all i ∈ [n] gives
                                       n
                                    1 X
   L(W(t+1) ) − L(W(t) ) =                Li (W(t+1) ) − Li (W(t) ) + λ kW(t+1) k2F − kW(t) k2F

                                    n i=1
                                ≤ h∇L(W(t) ), W(t+1) − W(t) i + Θ(η
                                                                e 2 d),

where the second equation uses the fact that kW(t+1) − W(t) k2F = Θ(η
                                                                  e 2 d). Recall that we have
                                                                 (t)
                                             (t+1)  (t)        mj,r
                                            wj,r − wj,r = −η · q      .
                                                                  (t)
                                                                 vj,r


                                                           29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                         q
                                  (t)      (t)
Then by Lemma C.2, we know that mj,r [k]/ vj,r [k] is close to sign gradient if ∇L(w(t) )[k] is
large. Then we have
                         (t)
        *                     +
                    (t)
                        mj,r
                                ≥ Θ ∇wj,r L(W(t) ) 1 − Θ

          ∇wj,r L(W ), q                                     e d · η − Θ(ns
                                                                         e      · ηsσp )
                          (t)
                         vj,r
                                ≥ Θ ∇wj,r L(W(t) ) 1 − Θ(dη),

                                                             e
where the second and last terms on the R.H.S. of the first inequality are contributed by the small
                       / ∪ni=1 Bi and k ∈ ∪ni=1 Bi respectively, and the last inequality is by the fact
gradient coordinates k ∈
       2
that ns σp = O(d). Therefore, based on this fact (C.25) further leads to
                           L(W(t+1) ) − L(W(t) ) ≤ −ηk∇L(W(t) )k1 + Θ(η
                                                                    e 2 d),
which completes the proof.


Lemma C.7 (Generalization Performance of Adam). Let
                                       W∗ =              argmin           k∇L(W)k1 .
                                                 W∈{W(1) ,...,W(T ) }

Then for all training data, we have
                                     n
                                  1X
                                        1 Fyi (W∗ , xi ) ≤ F−yi (W∗ , xi ) = 0.

                                  n i=1

Moreover, in terms of the test data (x, y) ∼ D, we have
                                                                1
                           P(x,y)∼D Fy (W∗ , x) ≤ F−y (W∗ , x) ≥ .

                                                                2

Proof. By Lemma C.6, we know that the algorithm will converge to a point with very small gradient
(up to O(ηd) in `1 norm). Then in terms of a noise vector ξi , we have
                                X
                                     ∇wyi ,r L(W∗ )[k] ≤ O(ηd).                            (C.26)
                                          k∈Bi

Note that
                        n∇wyi ,r L(W∗ )[k] = `∗yi ,i σ 0 (hwy∗i ,r , ξi i)ξi [k] − nλwy∗i ,r [k],
where `∗yi ,i = 1 − logityi (F ∗ , xi ). Then by triangle inequality and (C.26), we have for any r ∈ [m],
   X                                                    X                          X
         |`∗yi ,i |σ 0 (hwy∗i ,r , ξi i)|ξi [k]| − nλ          |wy∗i ,r [k]| ≤ n          ∇wyi ,r L(W∗ )[k] ≤ O(nηd).
  k∈Bi                                                  k∈Bi                       k∈Bi

Then by Lemma C.5, let r∗ = arg maxr∈[m] hwy∗i ,r , ξi i, we have hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i = Θ(1)        e        and
           ∗                                                                                  ∗
P                                                                                     P
  k∈Bi |wyi ,r ∗ [k]| · |ξi [k]| = Θ(1). Note that |ξi [k]| = O(σp ), we have          k∈Bi |wyi ,r ∗ [k]| ≥
                                        e                                e
Θ(1/σ
e     p ). Then   according       to the inequality above, it holds    that

                                                     X                              nλ
                     |`∗yi ,i | · Θ(sσ
                                  e    p ) ≥ Θ
                                             e   nλ      |w  ∗
                                                             yi ,r [k]| − nηd  ≥ Θ
                                                                                 e     ,
                                                                                    σp
                                                          k∈Bi

where the second inequality is due to our choice of η. This further implies that |`∗yi ,i | = |`∗−yi ,i | =
e nλ2 by combining the above results with (C.18). Then let us move to the gradient with respect

Θ   sσp
to the first coordinate. In particular, since k∇L(W∗ )k1 ≤ O(ηd), we have
                                    n
                                    X                                        n
                                                                             X
    |n∇wj,r L(W∗ )[1]| =                  yi `∗j,i σ 0 (hwj,r
                                                          ∗
                                                              , yi vi) − α         yi `∗j,i σ 0 (hwj,r
                                                                                                   ∗                ∗
                                                                                                       , ξi i) − nλwj,r [1]
                                    i=1                                      i=1
                               ≤ O(nηd).                                                                                 (C.27)


                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then note that sgn(yi `∗j,i ) = sgn(j), it is clear that wj,r   ∗
                                                                   ∗ [1] · j ≤ 0 since otherwise

                               n                                                              2
                                                                                          e αn λ ≥ Ω(nηd),
                              X
|n∇wj,r∗ L(W∗ )[1]| ≥ α           yi `∗j,i σ 0 (hwj,r
                                                  ∗                 0      ∗

                                                      ∗ , ξi i) − σ (hwj,r ∗ , yi vi)   ≥Θ          e
                              i=1
                                                                                               sσp2
                                                                ∗
which contradicts (C.27). Therefore, using the fact that wj,r      ∗ [1] · j ≤ 0, we have

                           Xn                                   X n
|n∇wj,r∗ L(W∗ )[1]| = α         yi `∗j,i σ 0 (hwj,r
                                                ∗
                                                                       yi `∗j,i σ 0 (|wj,r
                                                                                       ∗                 ∗

                                                    ∗ , ξi i) −                            ∗ [1]|) − nλ|wj,r ∗ [1]| .

                              i:yi =j                           i:yi =−j

Then applying (C.27)and using the fact that |`∗yi ,i | = |`∗−yi ,i | = Θ
                                                                       e nλ2

                                                                         sσp           for all i ∈ [n], it is clear
that
                               ∗                      1/(q−1)   nα                nα
                             |wj,r ∗ [1]| ≥ Θ
                                            e    α          ∧ 2 ≥Θ            e         ,
                                                               sσp                sσp2
where the second equality is due to our choice of σp and α. Then combining with Lemma C.5 and
                  ∗
the fact that wj,r   ∗ [1] · j < 0, we have

                                            ∗                     nα
                                          wj,r∗ [1] · j ≤ −Θ  e             .
                                                                  sσp2
Now we are ready to evaluate the training error and test error. In terms of training error, it is clear
that by Lemma C.5, we have hwy∗i ,r∗ , ξi i ≥ Θ(1),   e      hwy∗i ,r , ξi i ≥ −o(1), and |hwy∗i ,r , vi| = o(1),
    ∗
|hw−yi ,r , ξi i| = o(1). Then we have for any training data (xi , yi ),
                                      Xm
                    Fyi (W∗ , xi ) =       σ(hwy∗i ,r , yi vi) + σ(hwy∗i ,r , ξi i) = Θ(1),

                                                                                          e
                                        r=1
                                  m
                                  X
                F−yi (W∗ , xi ) =        ∗                       ∗

                                     σ(hw−y i ,r
                                                 , −yi vi) + σ(hw−yi ,r
                                                                        , ξi i) = o(1),
                                        r=1
which directly implies that the NN model W∗ can correctly classify all training data and thus achieve
zero training error.
In terms of the test data (x, y) where x = [yv, ξ], which is generated according to Definition 3.1.
                                        ∗
Note that for each neural, its weight wj,r  can be decomposed into two parts: the first coordinate
and the rest d − 1 coordinates. As previously discussed, for any j ∈ [2] and r = r∗ , we have
            ∗         e nα/(sσp2 ) and sgn(j) · w∗ [1] ≤ Θ(λ e −1 η) for r 6= r∗ . Therefore, using

sgn(j) · wj,r [1] ≤ −Θ                              j,r
              e nα/(sσp2 ) = ω(λ−1 η) and Lemma C.5, given the test data (x, y), we have

the fact that Θ
                                       Xm
                                ∗                ∗                ∗

                         Fy (W , x) =       σ(hwy,r  , yvi) + σ(hwy,r , ξi)
                                                r=1
                                                 m                  q
                                                X        nα
                                              ≤     Θ α · 2 + ζy,r
                                                    e                  ,
                                                r=1
                                                         sσp        +
                                                m
                                                X
                        F−y (W∗ , x)) =                ∗                 ∗

                                                   σ(hw−y,r , yvi) + σ(hw−y,r , ξi)
                                                r=1
                                             ∗           q              q
                                      ≥Θ e |w−y,r  ∗ [1]| + [ζ−y,r ∗ ]+
                                                   q
                                              nα                     q
                                      ≥Θ               +   [ζ −y,r + ,
                                                                  ∗ ]
                                              sσp2 +
where the random variables ζy,r and ζy,r are symmetric and independent of v. Besides, note that
α = o(1), it can be clearly shown that α · nα/(sσp2 )   nα/(sσp2 ). Therefore, if the random
                                                                       ∗
noise ζy,r and ζ−y,r are dominated by the feature noise term hw−y,r         ∗ , yvi, we can directly get that

       ∗                 ∗
Fy (W , x) ≤ F−y (W , x)) (recall that m = Θ(1)),e        which implies that the model has been biased
by the feature noise and the true feature vector in the test dataset will not give any “positive” effect
to the classification. Also note that ζy and ζ−y are also independent of v, which implies that if the
random noise dominates the feature noise term, the model W∗ will give at least 0.5 error on test data.
In sum, we can conclude that with probability at least 1/2 it holds that Fy (W∗ , x) ≤ F−y (W∗ , x),
which implies that the output of Adam achieves 1/2 test error.


                                                          31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C.3      P ROOF FOR G RADIENT D ESCENT
Recall the feature learning and noise memorization of gradient descent can be formulated by
       (t+1)                               (t)
  hwj,r       , j · vi = (1 − ηλ) · hwj,r , j · vi
                                        X  n                                        n
                                η                    (t) 0      (t)
                                                                                   X          (t) 0       (t)
                             + ·j·              yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , yi vi) − α             yi `j,i σ (hwj,r , ξi i) ,
                                n        i=1                                       i=1
                                                           η X (t) 0
       hwy(t+1)
             ,r  , ξ i i = (1 − ηλ) · hw (t)
                                         y  ,r , ξ i i +     ·        `yi ,i σ (hwy(t)
                                                                                    i ,r
                                                                                         , ξi i) · ξi [k]2
           i                              i
                                                           n
                                                               k∈Bi
                                       X   n                                     n
                                ηα                       0
                                                                                X
                                                                                                 0
                             +     · α          `(t)
                                                 yi ,s σ   (hw (t)
                                                                    ,
                                                               yi ,r sξ i)   −      y   ` (t)
                                                                                      s yi ,s  σ   (hw (t)
                                                                                                            ,
                                                                                                       yi ,r sy vi)  . (C.28)
                                 n       s=1                                    s=1

Then similar to the analysis for Adam, we decompose the gradient descent process into multiple
stages and characterize the algorithmic behaviors separately. The following lemma characterizes the
first training stage, i.e., the stage where all outputs Fj (W(t) , xi ) remain in the constant level for all
j and i.
Lemma C.8. [Lemma 5.6, restated] Suppose the training data is generated according to Definition
                                       (t)                 (t+1)           (t)                 (t)
3.1 and λ = o(σ0q−2 σp /n). Let Λj = maxr∈[m] hwj,r , j · vi, Γj,i = maxr∈[m] hwj,r , ξi i, and
 (t)                     (t)                                                      (t)
Γj = maxi:yi =j Γj,i . Then let Tj be the iteration number that Λj reaches Θ(1/m), we have
                                           e 2−q /η) for all j ∈ {−1, 1}.
                                      Tj = Θ(σ 0
                                                                                             (t)
Moreover, let T0 = minj∈{±1} {Tj }, then for all t ≤ T0 it holds that Γj                             e 0 ) for all j ∈
                                                                                                   = O(σ
{−1, 1}.

We first provide the following useful lemma.
Lemma C.9. Let {xt , yt }t=1,... be two positive sequences that satisfy
                                                 xt+1 ≥ xt + η · Axtq−1 ,
                                                  yt+1 ≤ yt + η · Bytq−1 ,
for some A = Θ(1) and B = o(1). Then for any q ≥ 3 and suppose y0 = O(x0 ) and η < O(x0 ),
we have for every C ∈ [x0 , O(1)], let Tx be the first iteration such that xt ≥ C, then we have
Tx η = Θ(x2−q
          0   ) and
                                                       yTx ≤ O(x0 ).

Proof. By Claim C.20 in Allen-Zhu & Li (2020b), we have Tx η = Θ(x2−q
                                                                  0   ). Then we will show
                                                         yt ≤ 2x0
for all t ≤ Tx . In particular, let Tx η = C 0 x2−q
                                                0   for some absolute constant C 0 and assume
C 0 B2q−1 < 1 (this is true since B = o(1)), we first made the following induction hypothesis
on yt for all t ≤ Ta ,
                                                 yt ≤ y0 + tηB 0 (2x0 )q−1 .
Note that for any t ≤ T0 , this hypothesis clearly implies that
                      yt ≤ y0 + Tx ηB 0 2q−1 x0q−1 ≤ x0 + CB2q−1 x2−q
                                                                  0   · xq−1
                                                                         0   ≤ 2x0 .
Then we are able to verify the hypothesis at time t + 1 based on the recursive upper bound of yt , i.e.,
                                      yt+1 ≤ yt + η · Bytq−1
                                            ≤ y0 + tηB(2x0 )q−1 + η · Bytq−1
                                            ≤ y0 + (t + 1)ηB(2x0 )q−1 .
Therefore, we can conclude that yt ≤ 2x0 for all t ≤ Tx . This completes the proof.


                                                             32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now we are ready to complete the proof of Lemma C.8.

                                                                (0)         e 0 ) and |hw(0) , ξi i| =
Proof of Lemma C.8. Note that at the initialization, we have |hwj,r , vi| = Θ(σ          j,r
e 1/2 σp σ0 ). Then based on the parameter scaling summarized in Appendix C.1, we have
Θ(s
                                                 m
                                                        (0)                (0)
                                                 X
                          Fj (W(0) , xi ) =

                                                    σ(hwj,r , yi vi) + σ(hwj,r , ξi i) = o(1)
                                                 r=1

for all j ∈ {−1, 1}. Then we have
                              (                         (0)                           (0)
                                                                                                )
                            (0)               eFj (W ,xi )     eF−1 (W ,xi )
                          |`j,i | ≥ min      P F (W(0) ,x ) , P F (W(0) ,x )                        = Θ(1).
                                              je                je
                                                   +1      i         j      i



                                                                       (t)
Then we will consider the training period where |`j,i | = Θ(1) for all j, i, and t. Besides, note that
         (t)                                                          (t−1)
sgn(yi `j,i ) = j. Therefore, let r∗ = arg maxr hwj,r                         , j · vi, (C.28) implies that
               (t)        (t−1)
          Λj = hwj,r∗ , j · vi
                                         (t−1)
                     = (1 − ηλ) · hwj,r∗ , j · vi
                                X   n                                 n
                            η            (t−1) 0     (t−1)
                                                                     X     (t−1) 0        (t−1)
                         + ·           |`j,i |σ (hwj,r∗ , yi vi) − α     |`j,i |σ (hwj,r∗ , ξi i)
                            n     i=1                                i=1
                                      (t−1)                       (t−1)                     (t−1)
                     ≥ (1 − ηλ) · hwj,r∗ , j · vi + Θ(η) · σ 0 (hwj,r∗ , j · vi) − ασ 0 (Γj

                                                                                                 )
                                  (t−1)            (t−1) q−1                 (t−1) q−1
                     ≥ (1 − ηλ)Λj        + η · Θ (Λj     )     − η · Θ α(Γj       )      .            (C.29)
                                           (t)
Similarly, let r∗ = arg maxr hwyi ,r , ξi i, we also have the following according to (C.28)
  (t)            (t)
Γyi ,i = hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i
                                                                                       n
                                                ηsσp2                        ηα2
                                                                                    X
                    (t−1)                                         0  (t−1)                       (t−1)
        ≤ (1 − ηλ)hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i + Θ
                                    e                         · σ (hwyi ,r∗ , ξi i) + Θ
                                                                                    ·     σ 0 (hwyi ,r∗ , ξs i)
                                                 n                            n       s=1
                                         (t−1) q−1
                                                   !             n
                              ηsσp2 Γyi ,i
                                                             2 X
               (t−1)                                        ηα              q−1
        ≤ Γyi ,i + Θ
                   e                                    +Θ     ·   Γy(t−1)
                                                                      i ,s
                                                                                  .
                                     n                       n s=1
                                   (t)                      (t)
Then by our definition of Γj = maxi∈[n] Γj,i , we further get the following for all j ∈ {−1, 1},

                         ηsσp2 + nηα2                                    ηsσp2

     (t)    (t−1)                        (t−1)  q−1        (t−1)                   (t−1)  q−1
   Γj ≤ Γj        +Θ e                · Γj             = Γj       +Θ           · Γj             ,
                               n                                          n
                                                                                              (C.30)
                                                      e p2 /n).
where the last equation is by our assumption that α = O(sσ
Then we will prove the main argument for general t, which is based on the following two induction
hypotheses
                            (t)   (t−1)              (t−1) q−1
                          Λj ≥ Λj        + η · Θ (Λj      )      ,                         (C.31)
                                               ηsσp2

                            (t)   (t−1)                   (t−1)  q−1
                          Γj ≤ Γj       +Θ            · Γj             .                   (C.32)
                                                 n
Note that when t = 0, we have already verified these two hypotheses in (C.29) and (C.30), where
                                               (0)  q−2
we use the fact that λ = o(σ0q−2 σp /n) ≤ Λj            and α = o(1). Suppose that (C.29) and (C.30)
hold for iterations τ ≤ t. At time t + 1, for all τ ≤ t, we have
                                                        (τ )                 (τ )
                                                       Γj      ≤ O(Λj ),


                                                                  33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  (t)                           (t)                                       (t)
as sσ 2 /n = o(1) and Λj increases faster than Γj . Besides, we can also show that λΓj ≤
   (t)  q−1                                                 (t)
 Γj         , which has been verified at time t = 0, since Γj keeps increasing. Therefore, we have
                                    (t)      (t)  q−1          (t)  q−1
                                 λΓj ≤ Γj             ≤ O Λj              ,
and hence (C.29) implies
                     (t+1)                   (t)          (t)              (t)
                                  ≥ (1 − ηλ)Λj + η · Θ (Λj )q−1 − η · Θ α(Γj )q−1

                   Λj
                                      (t)        (t)
                                  ≥ Λj + η · Θ (Λj )q−1 ,


which verifies Hypothesis (C.31) at t + 1. Additionally, (C.30) implies
                                                  ηsσp2

                              (t+1)      (t)                 (t)  q−1
                            Γj       ≤ Γj + Θ            · Γj          ,
                                                    n
                                                                             (t)
which verifies Hypothesis (C.32) at t + 1. Then by Lemma C.9, we have that Λj = O(1) e      for
                   (0)
               e (Λ )2−q /η = Θ(σ      2−q                                            (t+1)
all t ≤ T0 = Θ          j
                                  e        /η). Moreover, Lemma C.9 also shows that Γ
                                                0                                            =        j
     (0)
O(Λj ) = O(σ
         e 0 ). This completes the proof.
                                                           (t)
Lemma C.10. For all i ∈ [n] and t ≤ T−yi , it holds that hw−yi ,r , ξi i ≤ Θ(α).
                                                                           e

Proof. First of all, for j ∈ {±1}, by the definition of Tj , we have
                                                 (t)
                                               hwj,r , j · vi ≤ Θ(1).
                                                                e
                                                                                              (t)
Moreover, with the same proof as Lemma C.8, it is clear that −hwj,r , j · vi is decreasing in t for
                                        (0)
t ≤ Tj . Therefore, by the fact that |hw , vi| ≤ Θ(1),
                                              j,r
                                                 e     we have
                                                     (t)
                                                |hwj,r , vi| ≤ Θ(1)
                                                               e                                          (C.33)
for all t ≤ Tj .
Now by the update form of GD, we have for any k ∈ Bi ,
     (t+1)                            (t)                  η X (t)           (t)
   w−yi ,r [k] · ξi [k] = (1 − ηλ) · w−yi ,r [k] · ξi [k] + · `−yi ,i σ 0 (hw−yi ,r , ξi i) · ξi [k]2 .
                                                           n
                                                                           k∈Bi
            (t)             (t)                                            (t)
Note that `−yi ,i σ 0 (hw−yi ,r , ξi i) < 0, which implies that w−yi ,r [k] · ξi [k] is decreasing in t. There-
fore, for all r and i, we have
                          (t)                (t)
                                                                 X (t)
                        hw−yi ,r , ξi i = w−yi ,r [1] · ξi [1] +  w−yi ,r [k]ξi [k]
                                                                      k∈Bi
                                            (t)                                   (0)
                                                                      X
                                         ≤ w−yi ,r [1] · ξi [1] +            w−yi ,r [k]ξi [k]
                                                                      k∈Bi

                                               (t)                                      (0)
                                                                           X
                                         ≤ |w−yi ,r [1] · ξi [1]| +               w−yi ,r [k]ξi [k]
                                                                           k∈Bi
                                                                 1/2
                                         ≤ Θ(α)
                                           e    + Θ(σ
                                                  e 0 σp s             )
                                         = Θ(α),
                                           e
where the third inequality follows by (C.33). This completes the proof.

                                                        (t)
Note that for different j, the iteration numbers when Λj reaches Θ(1/m)
                                                                     e         are different. Without
loss of generality, we can assume T1 ≤ T−1 . Lemma C.8 has provided a clear understanding about
       (t)                                                                            (t)
how Λj varies within the iteration range [0, Tj ]. However, it remains unclear how Γ1 varies within
                                                                                                (t)
the iteration range [T1 , T−1 ] since in this period we no longer have |`j,i | = Θ(1) and the effect of
gradient descent on the feature learning (i.e., increase of hwj,r , j · vi) becomes weaker. In the
                                                     (t)
following lemma we give a characterization of Λ1 for every t ∈ [T1 , T−1 ].


                                                           34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma C.11 (Stage I of GD: part II). Without loss of generality assuming T1 < T−1 . Then it holds
      (t)
that Λ1 = Θ(1)
          e    for all t ∈ [T1 , T−1 ].

                                                                                                                     (t)
Proof. Recall from (C.29) that we have the following general lower bound for the increase of Λj
                                               X  n                                    n
   (t+1)                  (t)             η              (t) 0       (t)
                                                                                     X     (t) 0       (t)
 Λj      ≥ (1 − ηλ) · hwj,r∗ , j · vi + ·              |`j,i |σ (hwj,r∗ , yi vi) − α     |`j,i |σ (hwj,r∗ , ξi i)
                                          n      i=1                                 i=1
                                  X
                      (t)        η               (t)        (t)  q−1                (t)           q−1
         ≥ (1 − ηλ)Λj + Θ             ·        |`j,i | · Λj           − Θ(αη) · Γj ∨ Θ(α) e           , (C.34)
                                 n      i:y =j
                                             i

                                                                                                       (t)
where the last inequality is by Lemma C.10. Note that by Lemma C.8, we have Γj = O(σ     e 0 ) for
all t ≤ T−1 and . Then the above inequality leads to
                                              X
                 (t+1)             (t)       η              (t)      (t)  q−1
               Λj      ≥ (1 − ηλ)Λj + Θ          ·        |`j,i | · Λj        − Θ(αq η),   (C.35)
                                             n     i:y =j         i


where we use the fact that α = ω(σ0 ). The the remaining proof consists of two parts: (1) proving
 (t)                             (t)
Λj ≥ Θ(1/m) = Θ(1) e    and (2) Λj ≤ Θ(log(1/λ)).
Without loss of generality we consider j = 1. Regarding the first part, we first note that Lemma C.8
                (T )                                                (t)
implies that Λ1 1 ≥ Θ(1/m). Then we consider the case when Λ1 ≤ Θ(log(1/α)/m), it holds
that for all yi = 1,
                      (t)
 (t)      eF−1 (W ,xi )
`1,i = P           Fj (W(t) ,xi )
        j∈{−1,1} e
             X  m                                            m                                      !
                             (t)              (t)           X       (t)                (t)
    = exp Θ           σ(hw−1,r , yi vi) + σ(hw−1,r , ξi i) −    σ(hw1,r , yi vi) + σ(hw1,r , ξi i)
                   r=1                                                     r=1
                     (t)
    ≥ exp      − Θ(mΛ1 )
    ≥ exp(−Θ(log(1/α)))
    = Θ(α).
      e
                                   (t)
Then (C.35) implies that if Γ1 ≤ Θ(log(1/σ0 )/m), we have
           (t+1)                   (t)                 (t)                   (t)                 (t)         (t)
          Λ1       ≥ (1 − ηλ)Λ1 + Θ(ηα) · Λ1 − Θ(αq η) ≥ Λ1 + Θ(ηα) · Λ1 ≥ Λ1 ,
                                                                                   (t)
where the second inequality is due to λ = o(α). This implies that Λ1 will keep increases in this
                                    (t)
case so that it is impossible that Λ1 ≤ Θ(1/m), which completes the proof of the first part.
For the second part, (C.28) implies that
                                                                 X
                         (t+1)                   (t)          η            (t)      (t)  q−1
                      Λ1         ≤ (1 − ηλ)Λ1 + Θ               ·        |`1,i | · Λ1        .                     (C.36)
                                                              n   i:y =1
                                                                       i

                             (t)
Consider the case when Γ1 ≥ Θ(log(d)), then for all yi = 1,
                      (t)
 (t)      eF−1 (W ,xi )
`1,i = P           Fj (W(t) ,xi )
        j∈{−1,1} e
             X  m                                            m                                      !
                             (t)              (t)           X       (t)                (t)
    = exp Θ           σ(hw−1,r , yi vi) + σ(hw−1,r , ξi i) −    σ(hw1,r , yi vi) + σ(hw1,r , ξi i)
                  r=1                                                      r=1
                    (t)
    ≤ exp      − Θ(Λ1 )
    ≤ exp(−Θ(log(1/λ))
    = Θ(poly(λ)).
      e


                                                             35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then (C.36) further implies that

                  (t+1)            (t)                η         (t)  q−1
                 Λ1     ≤ (1 − ηλ)Λ1 + Θ                     · Λ1
                                                   poly(d)

                                    (t)     (t)                     (t)  q−2      (t)
                                 ≤ Λ1 − Θ ηΛ1 · λ − poly(λ) · Λ1               ≤ Λ1 ,

                           (t)                                                               (t)
which implies that Λ1 will decrease. As a result, we can conclude that λ1 will not exceed
Θ(log(1/λ)), this completes the proof of the second part.



                                                                                 (t)               (t)
Lemma C.12 (Lemma 5.7, restated). If η ≤ O(σ0 ), it holds that Λj                      = Θ(1)
                                                                                         e    and Γj     = O(σ
                                                                                                           e 0)
for all t ∈ [T−1 , T ].


Proof. We will prove the desired argument based on the following three induction hypothesis:
                                               X                           n
                 (t+1)                (t) e η          (t)     e q η) · 1      (t)
                                                                          X
               Λj          ≥ (1 − λη)Λj + Θ          |`j,i | − Θ(α           |` |,                        (C.37)
                                            n i:y =j                    n i=1 j,r
                                                                i

                     (t)
                    Γj = O(σ
                         e 0 ),                                                                           (C.38)
                     (t)
                  Λj = Θ(1).
                       e                                                                                  (C.39)

In terms of Hypothesis (C.37), we can apply Hypothesis (C.38) and (C.39) to (C.34) and get that
                              X                                                        n
 (t+1)                 (t) η              (t)     (t)  q−1            (t)      q−1 1 X      (t)
Λj       ≥ (1 − ηλ)Λj + Θ    ·         |`j,i | · Λj        − Θ(αη) · Γj ∨ Θ(α)
                                                                          e       ·       |`j,r |
                           n   i:yi =j
                                                                                    n i=1
                              X                              n
                    (t) e η             (t)     e q η) · 1       (t)
                                                            X
         ≥ (1 − λη)Λj + Θ            |`j,i | − Θ(α             |` |.
                           n i:y =j                       n i=1 j,r
                                            i



where the last inequality we use the fact that α ≥ σ0 . This verifies Hypothesis (C.37).
In order to verify Hypothesis (C.38), we have the following according to (C.37),
                                           "             X  n                        n
                                                                                             #
        X        (t+1)
                                    X        (t)        η        (t)       q      1 X    (t)
               Λj      ≥ (1 − λη)           Λj + Θ  e          |` | − Θ(α
                                                                       e     η) ·      |` |
                                                        n i=1 j,i                 n i=1 j,r
     j∈{−1,1}                     j∈{−1,1}
                                           "             X  n
                                                                     #
                                    X        (t)        η        (t)
                       = (1 − λη)           Λj + Θ  e          |` | ,
                                                        n i=1 j,i
                                         j∈{−1,1}


where the last equality holds since α = o(1). Recursively applying the above inequality from T−1
to t gives
                                                                        t−TX −1 −1
                                                   "                                         n
                                                                                                            #
     X       (t)
                                          X          (T )            η                      X     (t−1−τ )
            Λj ≥ (1 − λη)t−T−1                      Λj −1 + Θ
                                                            e          ·          (1 − λη)τ
                                                                                                |`j,i      | .
                                                                     n     τ =0             i=1
 j∈{−1,1}                               j∈{−1,1}


Then by Hypothesis (C.39) we have
                                   t−TX −1 −1           n
                                η                      X     (t−1−τ )
                             Θ
                             e    ·          (1 − λη)τ     |`j,i      | ≤ Θ(1).
                                                                          e
                                n     τ =0             i=1



                                                           36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now let us look at the rate of memorizing noises. By (C.28) and use the fact that α2 ≤ O(sσp2 /n),
we have
                                             ηsσp2
                                                     X
                (t)              (t−1)                                   (t−1)  q−1
              Γj ≤ (1 − ηλ)Γj          +Θe           ·     |`j,i | · Γj
                                              n        i=1
                                                 2 q−1   X
                                             ηsσp σ0

                                 (t−1)
                    ≤ (1 − ηλ)Γj       +Θe                 ·       |`j,i |
                                                 n           i=1
                                                                t−T−1 −1
                                         ηsσp2 σ0q−1                                     n

                              (T )                                                               (t−1−τ )
                                                                  X                      X
                           ≤ Γj −1 + Θ
                                     e                      ·            (1 − λη)τ             |`j,i         |
                                               n                  τ =0                   i=1
                            e σ0 + sσ 2 σ q−1

                           ≤Θ        p 0

                           ≤ Θ(σ
                             e 0 ),

which verifies Hypothesis (C.38).
Given Hypothesis (C.37) and (C.38), the verification of (C.39) is straightforward by applying the
same proof technique of Lemma C.11 and thus we omit it here.
Lemma C.13 (Lemma 5.8, restated). If the step size satisfies, then for any t ≥ T−1 it holds that
                                                     η
                     L(W(t+1) ) − L(W(t) ) ≤ − k∇L(W(t) )k2F .
                                                     2

Proof. The proof of this lemma is similar to that of Lemma C.6, which is basically relying the
smoothness property of the loss function L(W) given certain constraints on the inner products
hwj,r , vi and hwj,r , ξi i.
Let ∆Fj,i = Fj (W(t+1) , xi ) − Fj (W(t) , xi ), we can get the following Taylor expansion on the
loss function Li (W(t+1) ),
                                                  X    ∂Li (W(t) )               X
                Li (W(t+1) ) − Li (W(t) ) ≤                            · ∆Fj,i +   (∆Fj,i )2 .                         (C.40)
                                                  j
                                                      ∂Fj (W(t) , xi )           j

                                               (t)                    (t)
In particular, by Lemma C.12, we know that hwj,r , yi vi ≤ Θ(1)
                                                           e    and hwj,r , ξi i ≤ Θ(σ
                                                                                    e 0 ) ≤ Θ(1).
                                                                                               e
                                                                             (t+1)
Then similar to (C.21), we can apply first-order Taylor expansion to Fj (W         , xi ), which re-
                                                                                  (t+1)
quires to characterize the second-order error of the Taylor expansions on σ(hwj,r , yi vi) and
     (t+1)
σ(hwj,r      , ξi i),
                        (t+1)               (t)                                (t)             (t+1)             (t)
             σ(hwj,r, yi vi) − σ(hwj,r , yi vi) − ∇wj,r σ(hwj,r , yi vi), wj,r                         − wj,r i
              e kw(t+1) − w(t) k2 = Θ(η e 2 k∇w L(W(t) )k2 ),

             ≤Θ   j,r         j,r 2               j,r        2
                        (t+1)            (t)                             (t)             (t+1)         (t)
             σ(hwj,r , ξi i) − σ(hwj,r , ξi i) − ∇wj,r σ(hwj,r , ξi i), wj,r                     − wj,r i
                   (t+1)       (t)
             ≤Θ
              e kw
                   j,r     − wj,r k22 = Θ(η
                                          e 2 k∇w L(W(t) )k2 ).
                                                  j,r            2                                                     (C.41)

Then combining the above bounds for every r ∈ [m], we can get the following bound for ∆Fj,i
                                                            X
                           (t)        (t+1)     (t)         2                   (t) 2
       ∆Fj,i − h∇W Fj (W , xi ), W          −W i ≤Θ η   e            k∇wj,r L(W )k2
                                                                                     r∈[m]
                                                                      e η 2 k∇L(W(t) )k2F .

                                                                     =Θ                                                (C.42)
                           (t)                    (t)
Moreover, since hwj,r , yi vi ≤ Θ(1)
                                e     and hwj,r , ξi i ≤ Θ(1)
                                                          e     and σ(·) is convex, then we have
     (t+1)                  (t)                         (t+1)                 (t)                (t+1)  (t)
|σ(hwj,r , yi vi) − σ(hwj,r , yi vi)| ≤ max |σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi)|, |σ 0 (hwj,r , yi vi)| · |hv, wj,r − wj,r i|


                                        e kw(t+1) − w(t) k2 .

                                      ≤Θ      j,r           j,r



                                                        37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similarly we also have
                             (t+1)                 (t)            e kw(t+1) − w(t) k2 .

                     |σ(hwj,r        , ξi i) − σ(hwj,r , ξi i)| ≤ Θ   j,r      j,r

Combining the above inequalities for every r ∈ [m], we have
                X                         2
      2                 (t+1)       (t)         e mη 2 k∇L(W(t) )k2F = Θ
                                                                       e η 2 k∇L(W(t) )k2F .

∆Fj,i ≤ Θ  e         kwj,r − wj,r k2          ≤Θ
                   r∈[m]
                                                                                                    (C.43)
Now we can plug (C.42) and (C.43) into (C.40), which gives
                                      X      ∂Li (W(t) )            X
   Li (W(t+1) ) − Li (W(t) ) ≤                    (t)
                                                          · ∆Fj,i +   (∆Fj,i )2
                                       j
                                            ∂Fj (W , xi )           j

                                  = h∇Li (W(t) ), W(t+1) − W(t) i + Θ(η
                                                                    e 2 k∇L(W(t) )k2F ).            (C.44)
Taking sum over i ∈ [n] and applying the smoothness property of the regularization function
λkWk2F , we can get
                                      n
                                   1 X
   L(W(t+1) ) − L(W(t) ) =               Li (W(t+1) ) − Li (W(t) ) + λ kW(t+1) k2F − kW(t) k2F

                                   n i=1
                                 ≤ h∇L(W(t) ), W(t+1) − W(t) i + Θ(η
                                                                 e 2 k∇L(W(t) )k2F )
                                         e 2 ) · k∇L(W(t) )k2

                                 = − η − Θ(η                  F
                                     η        (t) 2
                                 ≤ − k∇L(W )kF ,
                                     2
                                                                                       e 2 ) ≥ η/2.
where the last inequality is due to our choice of step size η = o(1) so that gives η − Θ(η
This completes the proof.
Lemma C.14 (Generalization Performance of GD). Let
                                 W∗ = arg              min            k∇L(W(t) )kF .
                                                 {W(1) ,...,W(T ) }

Then for all training data, we have
                                 n
                              1X
                                    1 Fyi (W∗ , xi ) ≤ F−yi (W∗ , xi ) = 0.

                              n i=1

Moreover, in terms of the test data (x, y) ∼ D, we have
                          P(x,y)∼D Fy (W∗ , x) ≤ F−y (W∗ , x) = o(1).



Proof. By Lemma C.12 it is clear that all training data can be correctly classified so that the training
error is zero. Besides, for test data (x, y) with x = [yv> , ξ > ]> , it is clear that with high probability
   ∗                          ∗
hwy,r  , yvi = Θ(1)
                e    and [hwy,r  , ξi]+ ≤ O(σ
                                            e 0 ), then
                                           m
                                           X
                     Fy (W∗ , x) =                ∗                ∗

                                              σ(hwy,r , yvi) + σ(hwy,r , ξi) ≥ Ω(1).
                                                                               e
                                           r=1
                                                              ∗                    ∗
If j = −y, we have with probability at least 1 − 1/poly(n), hw−y,r , yvi ≤ 0 and [w−y,r , ξi]+ ≤
O(α),
 e     which leads to
                           m
                           X
       F−y (W∗ , x) =             ∗                 ∗                 q     e q ) = o(1).

                              σ(hw−y,r , yvi) + σ(hw−y,r , ξi) ≤ O(mα
                                                                 e      ) = O(α
                           r=1

This implies that GD can also achieve nearly at most 1/poly(n) test error. This completes the
proof.


                                                           38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2: C ONVEX C ASE
Theorem D.1 (Convex setting, restated). Assume the model is over-parameterized. Then for
any convex and smooth training objective with positive regularization parameter λ, suppose we
run Adam and gradient descent for T = poly(n)  η     iterations, then with probability at least
      −1                            ∗            ∗                        ∗
1 − n , the obtained parameters WAdam and WGD satisfy that k∇L(WAdam           )k1 ≤ T1η and
         ∗    2    1
k∇L(WAdam )k2 ≤ T η respectively. Moreover, it holds that:
       • Training errors are the same:
                   n                                   n
                1X              ∗
                                                    1X              ∗

                      1 sgn F (WAdam , xi ) 6= yi =       1 sgn F (WGD , xi ) 6= yi .
                n i=1                               n i=1

       • Test errors are nearly the same:
                                   ∗                                  ∗

            P(x,y)∼D sgn F (WAdam      , xi ) 6= y = P(x,y)∼D sgn F (WGD , x) 6= y ± o(1).

Proof. The proof is straightforward by applying the same proof technique used for Lemmas C.6
and C.13, where we only need to use the smoothness property of the loss function. Then it is clear
that both Adam and GD can provably find a point with a sufficiently small gradient. Note that
the training objective becomes strongly convex when adding weight decay regularization, implying
that the entire training objective only has one stationary point, i.e., point with a sufficiently small
gradient. This further implies that the points found by Adam and GD must be exactly the same and
thus GD and Adam must have nearly the same training and test performance.
Besides, when the problem is sufficiently over-parameterized, with proper regularization (feasibly
small), we can still guarantee zero training errors.

E    D ISCUSSION ON THE DATA M ODELS IN W ILSON ET AL . (2017); R EDDI
     ET AL . (2018)



Data model in Wilson et al. (2017). In particular, given the binary label yi ∈ {−1, 1}, the feature
vector xi is set as
                             
                             yi , j = 1
                             
                              1, j = 2, 3
                             
                    xi [j] =
                             
                             1, j = 4 + 5(i − 1), . . . , 4 + 5(i − 1) + 2(1 − yi )
                             
                              0, otherwise.

Data model in Reddi et al. (2018). In particular, Reddi et al. (2018) considers a one-dimensional
optimization objective. Besides, in each iteration of Adam, the stochastic gradient is taken based on
the function ft (x) defined as follows:

                                              Cx, t mod 3 = 1
                                   ft (x) =
                                              −x, otherwise.
Then it can be seen that in these two prior works, each coordinate of the feature vector (or the
objective function) is hard coded. In contrast, our data model allows randomness in the data gen-
eration process. This implies that our theory can hold for the data points generated from a certain
distribution, while these prior works can only cover one particular data or optimization objective.


                                                  39
