Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L EARNING THE P OSITIONS IN C OUNT S KETCH
 Yi Li ∗                                          Honghao Lin, Simin Liu
 Nanyang Technological University                 Carnegie Mellon University
 yili@ntu.edu.sg                                  {honghaol, siminliu}@andrew.cmu.edu

 Ali Vakilian                                               David P. Woodruff
 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago                  Carnegie Mellon University
 vakilian@ttic.edu                                          dwoodruf@andrew.cmu.edu



                                                A BSTRACT

             We consider sketching algorithms which first compress data by multiplication with
             a random sketch matrix, and then apply the sketch to quickly solve an optimization
             problem, e.g., low-rank approximation and regression. In the learning-based sketch-
             ing paradigm proposed by Indyk, Vakilian, and Yuan (2019), the sketch matrix is
             found by choosing a random sparse matrix, e.g., CountSketch, and then the values
             of its non-zero entries are updated by running gradient descent on a training data
             set. Despite the growing body of work on this paradigm, a noticeable omission is
             that the locations of the non-zero entries of previous algorithms were fixed, and
             only their values were learned. In this work, we propose the first learning-based al-
             gorithms that also optimize the locations of the non-zero entries. Our first proposed
             algorithm is based on a greedy algorithm. However, one drawback of the greedy
             algorithm is its slower training time. We fix this issue and propose approaches
             for learning a sketching matrix for both low-rank approximation and Hessian ap-
             proximation for second order optimization. The latter is helpful for a range of
             constrained optimization problems, such as LASSO and matrix estimation with a
             nuclear norm constraint. Both approaches achieve good accuracy with a fast run-
             ning time. Moreover, our experiments suggest that our algorithm can still reduce the
             error significantly even if we only have a very limited number of training matrices.


1       I NTRODUCTION

The work of (Indyk et al., 2019) investigated learning-based sketching algorithms for low-rank
approximation. A sketching algorithm is a method of constructing approximate solutions for opti-
mization problems via summarizing the data. In particular, linear sketching algorithms compress
data by multiplication with a sparse “sketch matrix” and then use just the compressed data to find
an approximate solution. Generally, this technique results in much faster or more space-efficient
algorithms for a fixed approximation error. The pioneering work of Indyk et al. (2019) shows it is
possible to learn sketch matrices for low-rank approximation (LRA) with better average performance
than classical sketches.
In this model, we assume inputs come from an unknown distribution and learn a sketch matrix with
strong expected performance over the distribution. This distributional assumption is often realistic –
there are many situations where a sketching algorithm is applied to a large batch of related data. For
example, genomics researchers might sketch DNA from different individuals, which is known to
exhibit strong commonalities. The high-performance computing industry also uses sketching, e.g.,
researchers at NVIDIA have created standard implementations of sketching algorithms for CUDA, a
widely used GPU library. They investigated the (classical) sketched singular value decomposition
(SVD), but found that the solutions were not accurate enough across a spectrum of inputs (Chien &
Bernabeu, 2019). This is precisely the issue addressed by the learned sketch paradigm where we
optimize for “good” average performance across a range of inputs.
    ∗
        All authors contributed equally.


                                                      1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


While promising results have been shown using previous learned sketching techniques, notable gaps
remain. In particular, all previous methods work by initializing the sketching matrix with a random
sparse matrix, e.g., each column of the sketching matrix has a single non-zero value chosen at a
uniformly random position. Then, the values of the non-zero entries are updated by running gradient
descent on a training data set, or via other methods. However, the locations of the non-zero entries
are held fixed throughout the entire training process.
Clearly this is sub-optimal. Indeed, suppose the input matrix A is an n × d matrix with first d rows
equal to the d × d identity matrix, and remaining rows equal to 0. A random sketching matrix S with a
single non-zero per column is known to require m = Ω(d2 ) rows in order for S ·A to preserve the rank
of A (Nelson & Nguyên, 2014); this follows by a birthday paradox argument. On the other hand, it is
clear that if S is a d × n matrix with first d rows equal to the identity matrix, then ∥S · Ax∥2 = ∥Ax∥2
for all vectors x, and so S preserves not only the rank of A but all important spectral properties. A
random matrix would be very unlikely to choose the non-zero entries in the first d columns of S so
perfectly, whereas an algorithm trained to optimize the locations of the non-zero entries would notice
and correct for this. This is precisely the gap in our understanding that we seek to fill.

Learned CountSketch Paradigm of Indyk et al. (2019). Throughout the paper, we assume our
          R
data A ∈ n×d is sampled from an unknown distribution D. Specifically, we have a training set
Tr = {A1 , . . . , AN } ∈ D. The generic form of our optimization problems is minX f (A, X), where
     R
A ∈ n×d is the input matrix. For a given optimization problem and a set S of sketching matrices,
define ALG(S, A) to be the output of the classical sketching algorithm resulting from using S; this
uses the sketching matrices in S to map the given input A and construct an approximate solution X̂.
We remark that the number of sketches used by an algorithm can vary and in its simplest case, S is a
single sketch, but in more complicated sketching approaches we may need to apply sketching more
than once—hence S may also denote a set of more than one sketching matrix.
The learned sketch framework has two parts: (1) offline sketch learning and (2) “online” sketching
(i.e., applying the learned sketch and some sketching algorithm to possibly unseen data). In offline
sketch learning, the goal is to construct a CountSketch matrix (abbreviated as CS matrix) with the
minimum expected error for the problem of interest. Formally, that is,
   arg minCS S EA∈Tr f (A, ALG(S, A)) − f (A, X ∗ ) = arg minCS S EA∈Tr f (A, ALG(S, A)),
where X ∗ denotes the optimal solution. Moreover, the minimum is taken over all possible construc-
tions of CS. We remark that when ALG needs more than one CS to be learned (e.g., in the sketching
algorithm we consider for LRA), we optimize each CS independently using a surrogate loss function.
In the second part of the learned sketch paradigm, we take the sketch from part one and use it within a
sketching algorithm. This learned sketch and sketching algorithm can be applied, again and again, to
different inputs. Finally, we augment the sketching algorithm to provide worst-case guarantees when
used with learned sketches. The goal is to have good performance on A ∈ D while the worst-case
performance on A ̸∈ D remains comparable to the guarantees of classical sketches. We remark
that the learned matrix S is trained offline only once using the training data. Hence, no additional
computational cost is incurred when solving the optimization problem on the test data.

Our Results. In this work, in addition to learning the values of the non-zero entries, we learn the
locations of the non-zero entries. Namely, we propose three algorithms that learn the locations of the
non-zero entries in CountSketch. Our first algorithm (Section 4) is based on a greedy search. The
empirical result shows that this approach can achieve a good performance. Further, we show that
the greedy algorithm is provably beneficial for LRA when inputs follow a certain input distribution
(Section F). However, one drawback of the greedy algorithm is its much slower training time. We
then fix this issue and propose two specific approaches for optimizing the positions for the sketches
for low-rank approximation and second-order optimization, which run much faster than all previous
algorithms while achieving better performance.
For low-rank approximation, our approach is based on first sampling a small set of rows based on
their ridge leverage scores, assigning each of these sampled rows to a unique hash bucket, and then
placing each non-sampled remaining row in the hash bucket containing the sampled row for which it
is most similar to, i.e., for which it has the largest dot product with. We also show that the worst-case
guarantee of this approach is strictly better than that of the classical Count-Sketch (see Section 5).


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


For sketch-based second-order optimization where we focus on the case that n ≫ d, we observe
that the actual property of the sketch matrix we need is the subspace embedding property. We next
optimize this property of the sketch matrix. We provably show that the sketch matrix S needs fewer
rows, with optimized positions of the non-zero entries, when the input matrix A has a small number
of rows with a heavy leverage score. More precisely, while CountSketch takes O(d2 /(δϵ2 )) rows
with failure probability δ, in our construction, S requires only O((d polylog(1/ϵ) + log(1/δ))/ϵ2 )
rows if A has at most d polylog(1/ϵ)/ϵ2 rows with leverage score at least ϵ/d. This is a quadratic
improvement in d and an exponential improvement in δ. In practice, it is not necessary to calculate the
leverage scores. Instead, we show in our experiments that the indices of the rows of heavy leverage
score can be learned and the induced S is still accurate. We also consider a new learning objective,
that is, we directly optimize the subspace embedding property of the sketching matrix instead of
optimizing the error in the objective function of the optimization problem in hand. This demonstrates
a significant advantage over non-learned sketches, and has a fast training time (Section 6).
We show strong empirical results for real-world datasets. For low-rank approximation, our methods
reduce the errors by 70% than classical sketches under the same sketch size, while we reduce the
errors by 30% than previous learning-based sketches. For second-order optimization, we show that
the convergence rate can be reduced by 87% over the non-learned CountSketch for the LASSO
problem on a real-world dataset. We also evaluate our approaches in the few-shot learning setting
where we only have a limited amount of training data (Indyk et al., 2021). We show our approach
reduces the error significantly even if we only have one training matrix (Sections 7 and 8). This
approach clearly runs faster than all previous methods.


Additional Related Work. In the last few years, there has been much work on leveraging machine
learning techniques to improve classical algorithms. We only mention a few examples here which
are based on learned sketches. One related body of work is data-dependent dimensionality reduction,
such as an approach for pair-wise/multi-wise similarity preservation for indexing big data (Wang
et al., 2017), learned sketching for streaming problems (Indyk et al., 2019; Aamand et al., 2019;
Jiang et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2020; Eden et al., 2021; Indyk et al., 2021), learned algorithms for
nearest neighbor search (Dong et al., 2020), and a method for learning linear projections for general
applications (Hegde et al., 2015). While we also learn linear embeddings, our embeddings are
optimized for the specific application of low rank approximation. In fact, one of our central challenges
is that the theory and practice of learned sketches generally needs to be tailored to each application.
Our work builds off of (Indyk et al., 2019), which introduced gradient descent optimization for LRA,
but a major difference is that we also optimize the locations of the non-zero entries.



2   P RELIMINARIES

Notation. Denote the canonical basis vectors of Rn by e1 , . . . , en . Suppose that A has singular
value decomposition (SVD) A = U ΣV ⊤ . Define [A]k = Uk Σk Vk⊤ to be the optimal rank-k
approximation to A, computed by the truncated SVD. Also, define the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse
of A to be A† = V Σ−1 U ⊤ , where Σ−1 is constructed by inverting the non-zero diagonal entries. Let
row(A) and col(A) be the row space and the column space of A, respectively.
                                 R
CountSketch. We define SC ∈ m×n as a classical CountSketch (abbreviated as CS). It is a sparse
matrix with one nonzero entry from {±1} per column. The position and value of this nonzero entry
are chosen uniformly at random. CountSketch matrices can be succinctly represented by two vectors.
                          R
We define p ∈ [m]n , v ∈ n as the positions and values of the nonzero entries, respectively. Further,
we let CS(p, v) be the CountSketch constructed from vectors p and v.
Below we define the objective function f (·, ·) and a classical sketching algorithm ALG(S, A) for
each individual problem.
Low-rank approximation (LRA). In LRA, we find a rank-k approximation of our data that mini-
mizes the Frobenius norm of the approximation error. For A ∈ Rn×d , minrank-k B fLRA (A, B) =
                     2
minrank-k X ∥A − B∥F . Usually, instead of outputting the a whole B ∈ Rn×d , the algorithm outputs
                  n×k
two factors Y ∈ R      and X ∈ Rk×d such that B = Y X for efficiency.


                                                   3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Indyk et al. (2019) considered Algorithm 1, which only compresses one side of the input matrix
A. However, in practice often both dimensions of the matrix A are large. Hence, in this work we
consider Algorithm 2 that compresses both sides of A.
Constrained regression. Given a vector b ∈ Rn , a matrix A ∈ Rn×d (n ≫ d) and a convex set C,
we want to find x to minimize the squared error
                                                                           2
                          minx∈C fREG ([A b], X) = minx∈C ∥Ax − b∥2 .                              (2.1)

Iterative Hessian Sketch. The Iterative Hessian Sketching (IHS) method (Pilanci & Wainwright,
2016) solves the constrained least-squares problem by iteratively performing the update

                                  1                  2       ⊤
               xt+1 = arg min       ∥St+1 A(x − xt )∥2 − ⟨A (b − Axt ), x − xt ⟩ ,      (2.2)
                         x∈C      2
where St+1 is a sketching matrix. It is not difficult to see that for the unsketched version (St+1 is the
identity matrix) of (2.2), the optimal solution xt+1 coincides with the optimal solution to the original
constrained regression problem (2.1). The IHS approximates the Hessian A⊤ A by a sketched version
(St+1 A)⊤ (St+1 A) to improve runtime, as St+1 A typically has very few rows.
Algorithm 1 Rank-k approximation of A using Learning-Based Algorithms in the Few-Shot
a sketch S (see (Clarkson & Woodruff, 2009, Setting. Recently, Indyk et al. (2021) studied
Sec. 4.1.1))                                            learning-based algorithms for LRA in the setting
                n×d            m×n                      where we have access to limited data or comput-
Input: A ∈ R        ,S ∈R                               ing resources. We provide a brief explanation
 1: U, Σ, V ⊤ ← C OMPACT SVD(SA)                   ▷ of learning-based algorithms in the Few-Shot
    {r = rank(SA), U ∈ Rm×r , V ∈ Rd×r }                setting in Appendix A.3.
 2: Return: [AV ]k V ⊤
                                                        Leverage Scores and Ridge Leverage Scores.
Algorithm 2 ALGLRA (S KETCH -L OW R ANK) Sar- Given a matrix A, the leverage score of the i-th
los (2006); Clarkson & Woodruff (2017); Avron row ai of A is defined to be τi := ai (A⊤ A)† a⊤ ,
                                                                                                       i
et al. (2017).                                          which is the squared ℓ2 -norm of the i-th row
Input: A ∈ Rn×d , S ∈ RmS ×n , R ∈ RmR ×d , of U , where A = U ΣV T is the singular value
     V ∈ RmV ×n , W ∈ RmW ×d                            decomposition of A. Given a regularization pa-
                                        ⊤

 1: UC [TC TC′ ] ← V AR⊤ ,
                                      T D U ⊤ ← rameter λ, the ridge leverage score of the i-th
                                      TD′⊤      D       row ai of A is defined to be τi := ai (A⊤ A +
     SAW ⊤ with UC , UD orthogonal                      λI)† a⊤i . Our learning-based algorithms em-
                  ⊤     ′   ′
 2: G ← V AW , ZL ZR ← [UC GU       ⊤
                                            ]           ploys  the ridge leverage score sampling tech-
                                          D−1k          nique  proposed   in (Cohen et al., 2017), which
              ′ −1 ⊤                     T Z′
 3: ZL ← ZL     (TD )         0 , ZR ← C R              shows that sampling proportional to ridge lever-
                                              0
                                                        age scores gives a good solution to LRA.
 4: Z ← ZL ZR
                 ⊤
 5: return: AR ZSA in form Pn×k , Qk×d



3    D ESCRIPTION OF O UR A PPROACH
We describe our contributions to the learning-based sketching paradigm which, as mentioned, is to
learn the locations of the non-zero values in the sketch matrix. To learn a CountSketch for the given
training data set, we locally optimize the following in two stages:
                                   minS EA∈D [f (A, ALG(S, A))] .                                  (3.1)
(1) compute the positions of the non-zero entries, then (2) fix the positions and optimize their values.
Stage 1: Optimizing Positions. In Section 4, we provide a greedy search algorithm for this stage, as
our starting point. In Section 5 and 6, we provide our specific approaches for optimizing the positions
for the sketches for low-rank approximation and second-order optimization.
Stage 2: Optimizing Values. This stage is similar to the approach of Indyk et al. (2019). However,
instead of the power method, we use an automatic differentiation package, PyTorch (Paszke et al.,
2019), and we pass it our objective minv∈Rn EA∈D [f (A, ALG(CS(p, v), A))], implemented as a
chain of differentiable operations. It will automatically compute the gradient using the chain rule. We


                                                   4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


also consider new approaches to optimize the values for LRA (proposed in Indyk et al. (2021), see
Appendix A.3 for details) and second-order optimization (proposed in Section 6).
Worst-Cases Guarantees. In Appendix D, we show that both of our approaches for the above
two problems can perform no worse than a classical sketching matrix when A does not follow the
distribution D. In particular, for LRA, we show that the sketch monotonicity property holds for the
time-optimal sketching algorithm for low rank approximation. For second-order optimization, we
propose an algorithm which runs in input-sparsity time and can test for and use the better of a random
sketch and a learned sketch.


4    S KETCH L EARNING : G REEDY S EARCH

When S is a CountSketch, computing SA Algorithm 3 P OSITION OPTIMIZATION : G REEDY
amounts to hashing the n rows of A into the S EARCH
m ≪ n rows of SA. The optimization is a Input: f, ALG, Tr = {A , ..., A                       n×d
                                                                                1     N ∈ R        };
combinatorial optimization problem with an em-          sketch dimension m
pirical risk minimization (ERM) objective. The 1: initialize S = m×n
naïve solution is to compute the objective value
                                                                   L     O
                                 n                  2: for i = 1 to n do
of the exponentially many (m ) possible place- 3:
                                                                       X
                                                          j ← arg min      f (A, ALG(SL ± ej e⊤
                                                                                              i , A))
ments, but this is clearly intractable. Instead, we             j∈[m] A∈Tr
iteratively construct a full placement in a greedy
fashion. We start with S as a zero matrix. Then, 4:       SL ← SL ± (ej e⊤  i )
we iterate through the columns of S in an order     5:  end for
determined by the algorithm, adding a nonzero 6: return p for SL = CS(p, v)
entry to each. The best position in each column
is the one that minimizes Eq. (3.1) if an entry were to be added there. For each column, we evaluate
Eq. (3.1) O(m) times, once for each prospective half-built sketch.
While this greedy strategy is simple to state, additional tactics are required for each problem to make
it more tractable. Usually the objective evaluation (Algorithm 3, line 3) is too slow, so we must
leverage our insight into their sketching algorithms to pick a proxy objective. Note that we can reuse
these proxies for value optimization, since they may make gradient computation faster too.
Proxy objective for LRA. For the two-sided sketching algorithm, we can assume that the two factors
X, Y has the form Y = AR⊤ Ỹ and X = X̃SA, where S and R are both CS matrices, so we optimize
the positions in both S and R. We cannot use f (A, ALG(S, R, A)) as our objective because then we
would have to consider combinations of placements between S and R. To find a proxy, we note that a
prerequisite for good performance is for row(SA) and col(AR⊤ ) to both contain a good rank-k ap-
proximation to A (see proof of Lemma C.5). Thus, we can decouple the optimization of S and R. The
                                          2
proxy objective for S is [AV ]k V ⊤ − A F where SA = U ΣV ⊤ . In this expression, X̂ = [AV ]k V ⊤
is the best rank-k approximation to A in row(SA). The proxy objective for R is defined analogously.
In Appendix F, we show the greedy algorithm is provably beneficial for LRA when inputs follow the
spiked covariance or the Zipfian distribution. Despite the good empirical performance we present in
Section 7, one drawback is its much slower training time. Also, for the iterative sketching method
for second-order optimization, it is non-trivial to find a proxy objective because the input of the i-th
iteration depends on the solution to the (i − 1)-th iteration, for which the greedy approach sometimes
does not give a good solution. In the next section, we will propose our specific approach for optimizing
the positions of the sketches for low-rank approximation and second-order optimization, both of
which achieve a very high accuracy and can finish in a very short amount of time.

5    S KETCH L EARNING : L OW-R ANK A PPROXIMATION

Now we present a conceptually new algorithm which runs much faster and empirically achieves
similar error bounds as the greedy search approach. Moreover, we show that this algorithm has
strictly better guarantees than the classical Count-Sketch.
To achieve this, we need a more careful analysis. To provide some intuition, if rank(SA) = k and
                                                                             2
SA = U ΣV ⊤ , then the rank-k approximation cost is exactly AV V ⊤ − A F , the projection cost


                                                   5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


onto col(V ). Minimizing it is equivalent to maximizing the sum of squared projection coefficients:
                       2               X         2
                                                     X                           X X
arg min A − AV V ⊤ F = arg min             (∥Ai ∥2 −     ⟨Ai , vj ⟩2 ) = arg max        ⟨Ai , vj ⟩2 .
    S                               S                                             S
                                         i∈[n]           j∈[k]                        i∈[n] j∈[k]
As mentioned, computing SA actually amounts to hashing the n rows of A to the m rows of SA.
Hence, intuitively, if we can put similar rows into the same bucket, we may get a smaller error.
Algorithm 4 Position optimization: Inner Product     Our algorithm is given in Algorithm 4.
Input: A ∈ R    n×d
                      : average of Tr; sketch dim. m Suppose that we want to form matrix S with
 1: initialize S1 , S2 =   O m×n                     m rows. At the beginning of the algorithm,
                                                     we  sample m rows according to the ridge
 2: Sample a set C = {C1 · · · Cm } of rows using
    ridge leverage score sampling (see Section 2). leverage scores of A. By the property of the
 3: for i = 1 to n do                                ridge leverage score, the subspace spanned
 4:
                                   Cp       Ai
       pi , vi ← arg max ⟨ ∥Cp ∥2 , v ∥Ai ∥2 ⟩       by this set of sampled rows contains an
                   p∈[m],v∈{±1}                      approximately optimal solution to the low rank
 5:    S1 [pi , i] ← vi                              approximation problem. Hence, we map these
 6: end for                                          rows to separate “buckets” of SA. Then, we
 7: for i = 1 to m do                                need to decide the locations of the remaining
 8:    Ii ← {j | pj = i}                             rows (i.e., the non-sampled rows). Ideally, we
 9:    A(i) ← restriction of A to rows in Ii         want similar rows to be mapped into the same
10:    ui ← the top left singular vector of A(i)     bucket. To achieve this, we use the m sampled
11:    S1 [i, Ii ] ← ui ⊤                            rows as reference points and assign each (non-
12: end for                                          sampled) row Ai to the p-th bucket in SA if
13: for i = 1 to m do                                the normalized row Ai and Cp have the largest
14:    q ← index such that C is the q -th row of A inner product (among all possible buckets).
        i                       i        i
15:   S2 [i, qi ] ← 1                                      Once the locations of the non-zero entries are
16: end for                                                fixed, the next step is to determine the values
17: return S1 or [ SS2 ]
                      1
                                                           of these entries. We follow the same idea pro-
                                                           posed in (Indyk et al., 2021): for each block
                                                           A(i) , one natural approach is to choose the unit
vector si ∈ R|Ii | that preserves as much of the Frobenius norm of A(i) as possible, i.e., to maximize
       (i) 2
  s⊤
   i A     2
             . Hence, we set si to be the top left singular vector of A(i) . In our experiments, we observe
that this step reduces the error of downstream value optimizations performed by SGD.
To obtain a worst-case guarantee, we show that w.h.p., the row span of the sampled rows Ci is a good
subspace. We set the matrix S2 to be the sampling matrix that samples Ci . The final output of our
algorithm is the vertical concatenation of S1 and S2 . Here S1 performs well empirically, while S2
has a worst-case guarantee for any input. Combining Lemma E.2 and the sketch monotonicity for
low rank approximation in Section D, we get that O(k log k + k/ϵ) rows is enough for a (1 ± ϵ)-
approximation for the input matrix A induced by Tr, which is better than the Ω(k 2 ) rows required of
a non-learned Count-Sketch, even if its non-zero values have been further improved by the previous
learning-based algorithms in (Indyk et al., 2019; 2021). As a result, under the assumption of the input
data, we may expect that S will still be good for the test data. We defer the proof to Appendix E.1.
In Appendix A, we shall show that the assumptions we make in Theorem 5.1 are reasonable. We
also provide an empirical comparison between Algorithm 4 and some of its variants, as well as
some adaptive sketching methods on the training sample. The evaluation result shows that only our
algorithm has a significant improvement for the test data, which suggests that both ridge leverage
score sampling and row bucketing are essential.
Theorem 5.1. Let S ∈ R2m×n be given by concatenating the sketching matrices S1 , S2 computed by
Algorithm 4 with input A induced by Tr and let B ∈ Rn×d . Then with probability at least 1 − δ, we
                                          2                       2
have minrank-k X:row(X)⊆row(SB) ∥B − X∥F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥B − Bk ∥F if one of the following holds:.
1. m = O(β · (k log k + k/ϵ)), δ = 0.1, and τi (B) ≥ β1 τi (A) for all i ∈ [n].
2. m = O(k log k + k/ϵ), δ = 0.1 + 1.1β, and the total variation distance dtv (p, q) ≤ β, where
   p, q are sampling probabilities defined as pi = Pτiτ(A)
                                                        i (A)
                                                              and qi = Pτiτ(B)
                                                                            i (B)
                                                                                  .
                                                         i                    i


Time Complexity. As mentioned, an advantage of our second approach is that it significantly reduces
the training time. We now discuss the training times of different algorithms. For the value-learning


                                                     6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


algorithms in (Indyk et al., 2019), each iteration requires computing a differentiable SVD to perform
gradient descent, hence the runtime is at least Ω(nit · T ), where nit is the number of iterations
(usually set > 500) and T is the time to compute an SVD. For the greedy algorithm, there are m
choices for each column, hence the runtime is at least Ω(mn · T ). For our second approach, the most
complicated step is to compute the ridge leverage scores of A and then the SVD of each submatrix.
Hence, the total runtime is at most O(T ). We note that the time complexities discussed here are
all for training time. There is no additional runtime cost for the test data.


6   S KETCH L EARNING : S ECOND -O RDER O PTIMIZATION

In this section, we consider optimizing the sketch matrix in the context of second-order methods. The
key observation is that for many sketching-based second-order methods, the crucial property of the
sketching matrix is the so-called subspace embedding property: for a matrix A ∈ Rn×d , we say a
matrix S ∈ Rm×n is a (1 ± ϵ)-subspace embedding for the column space of A if (1 − ϵ) ∥Ax∥2 ≤
∥SAx∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥Ax∥2 for all x ∈ Rd . For example, consider the iterative Hessian sketch,
which performs the update (2.2) to compute {xt }t . Pilanci & Wainwright (2016) showed that if
S1 , . . . , St+1 are (1 + O(ρ))-subspace embeddings of A, then ∥A(xt − x∗ )∥2 ≤ ρt ∥Ax∗ ∥2 . Thus,
if Si is a good subspace embedding of A and we will have a good convergence guarantee. Therefore,
unlike (Indyk et al., 2019), which treats the training objective in a black-box manner, we shall
optimize the subspace embedding property of the matrix A.
Optimizing positions. We consider the case that A has a few rows of large leverage score, as well as
access to an oracle which reveals a superset of the indices of such rows. Formally, let τi (A) be the
leverage score of the i-th row of A and I ∗ = {i : τi (A) ≥ ν} be the set of rows with large leverage
score. Suppose that a superset I ⊇ I ∗ is known to the algorithm. In the experiments we train an
oracle to predict such rows. We can maintain all rows in I explicitly and apply a Count-Sketch to the
remaining rows, i.e., the rows in [n] \ I. Up to permutation of the rows, we can write

                                        AI                   I 0
                                A=              and S =               ,                          (6.1)
                                        AI c                 0 S′

where S ′ is a random Count-Sketch matrix of m rows. Clearly S has a single non-zero entry per
column. We have the following theorem, whose proof is postponed to Section E.2. Intuitively, the
proof for Count-Sketch in (Clarkson & Woodruff, 2017) handles rows of large leverage score and
rows of small leverage score separately. The rows of large leverage score are to be perfectly hashed
while the rows of small leverage score will concentrate in the sketch by the Hanson-Wright inequality.
Theorem 6.1. Let ν = ϵ/d. Suppose that m = O((d/ϵ2 )(polylog(1/ϵ) + log(1/δ))), δ ∈ (0, 1/m]
and d = Ω((1/ϵ) polylog(1/ϵ) log2 (1/δ)). Then, there exists a distribution on S of the form in (6.1)
                                                   2        2           2
with m + |I| rows such that Pr ∀x ∈ col(A), | ∥Sx∥2 − ∥x∥2 | > ϵ ∥x∥2 ≤ δ. In particular, when
δ = 1/m, the sketching matrix S has O((d/ϵ2 ) polylog(d/ϵ)) rows.

Hence, if there happen to be at most d polylog(1/ϵ)/ϵ2 rows of leverage score at least ϵ/d, the
overall sketch length for embedding colsp(A) can be reduced to O((d polylog(1/ϵ) + log(1/δ))/ϵ2 ),
a quadratic improvement in d and an exponential improvement in δ over the original sketch length
of O(d2 /(ϵ2 δ)) for Count-Sketch. In the worst case there could be O(d2 /ϵ) such rows, though
empirically we do not observe this. In Section 8, we shall show it is possible to learn the indices of
the heavy rows for real-world data.
Optimizing values. When we fix the positions of the non-zero entries, we aim to optimize the values
by
P gradient descent. Rather than the previous black-box way in (Indyk et al., 2019) that minimizes
   i f (A, ALG(S,
            P A)), we propose the following objective loss function for the learning algorithm
L(S, A) = Ai ∈A ∥(Ai Ri )⊤ Ai Ri − I∥F , over all the training data, where Ri comes from the QR
decomposition of SAi = Qi Ri−1 . The intuition for this loss function is given by the lemma below,
whose proof is deferred to Section E.3.
Lemma 6.2. Suppose that ϵ ∈ (0, 12 ), S ∈ Rm×n , A ∈ Rn×d of full column rank, and SA = QR
is the QR-decomposition of SA. If ∥(AR−1 )⊤ AR−1 − I∥op ≤ ϵ, then S is a (1 ± ϵ)-subspace
embedding of col(A).


                                                  7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma 6.2 implies that if the loss function over Atrain is small and the distribution of Atest is similar
to Atrain , it is reasonable to expect that S is a good subspace embedding of Atest . Here we use the
Frobenius norm rather than operator norm in the loss function because it will make the optimization
problem easier to solve, and our empirical results also show that the performance of the Frobenius
norm is better than that of the operator norm.


7       E XPERIMENTS : L OW-R ANK A PPROXIMATION

In this section, we evaluate the empirical performance of our learning-based approach for LRA on
three datasets. For each, we fix the sketch size and compare the approximation error ∥A − X∥F −
∥A − Ak ∥F averaged over 10 trials. In order to make position optimization more efficient, in line 3
of Algorithm 3), instead of computing many rank-1 SVD updates, we use formulas for fast rank-1
SVD updates (Brand, 2006). For the greedy method, we used several Nvidia GeForce GTX 1080 Ti
machines. For the maximum inner product method, the experiments are conducted on a laptop with a
1.90GHz CPU and 16GB RAM.
Datasets. We use the three datasets from (Indyk et al., 2019): (1, 2) Friends, Logo (image):
frames from a short video of the TV show Friends and of a logo being painted; (3) Hyper (image):
hyperspectral images from natural scenes. Additional details are in Table A.1.
Baselines. We compare our approach to the following baselines. Classical CS: a random Count-
Sketch. IVY19: a sparse sketch with learned values, and random positions for the non-zero entries.
Ours (greedy): a sparse sketch where both the values and positions of the non-zero entries are
learned. The positions are learned by Algorithm 3. The values are learned similarly to (Indyk et al.,
2019). Ours (inner product): a sparse sketch where both the values and the positions of the non-zero
entries are learned. The positions are learned by S1 in Algorithm 4. IVY19 and greedy algorithm use
the full training set and our Algorithm 4 takes the input as the average over the entire training matrix.
We also give a sensitivity analysis for our algorithm, where we compare our algorithm with the
following variants: Only row sampling (perform projection by ridge leverage score sampling), ℓ2
sampling (Replace leverage score sampling with ℓ2 -norm row sampling and maintain the same
downstream step), and Randomly Grouping (Use ridge leverage score sampling but randomly
distribute the remaining rows). The result shows none of these variants outperforms non-learned
sketching. We defer the results of this part to Appendix A.1.
Result Summary. Our empirical results are provided in Table 7.1 for both Algorithm 2 and Algo-
rithm 1, where the errors take an average over 10 trials. We use the average of all training matrices
from Tr, as the input to the algorithm 4. We note that all the steps of our training algorithms are
done on the training data. Hence, no additional computational cost is incurred for the sketching
algorithm on the test data. Experimental parameters (i.e., learning rate for gradient descent) can be
found in Appendix G. For both sketching algorithms, Ours are always the best of the four sketches.
It is significantly better than Classical CS, obtaining improvements of around 70%. It also obtains a
roughly 30% improvement over IVY19.
                                       Wall-Clock Times. The offline learning runtime is in Ta-
                           Offline learning   Online solving
    Ours (inner product)          5               0.166
    Ours (greedy)
                                       ble 7.2, which is the time to train a sketch on Atrain . We
                            6300 (1.75h)          0.172
    IVY19                    193 (3min)can see that although the greedy method will take much
                                                  0.168
    Classical CS                  ✗               0.166
                                       longer (1h 45min), our second approach is much faster (5
                                       seconds) than the previous algorithm in (Indyk et al., 2019)
Table 7.2: Runtime (in seconds) of LRA (3 min) and can still achieve a similar error as the greedy
on Logo with k = 30, m = 60

                   k, m, Sketch                  Logo     Friends   Hyper       k, m, Sketch                   Logo    Friends   Hyper
                  20, 40, Classical CS           2.371    4.073     6.344       20, 40, Classical CS           0.930   1.542     2.971
                  20, 40, IVY19                  0.687    1.048     3.764       20, 40, IVY19                  0.255   0.723     1.273
                  20, 40, Ours (greedy)          0.500    0.899     2.497       20, 40, Ours (greedy)          0.196   0.407     0.784
                  20, 40, Ours (inner product)   0.532    0.733     2.975       20, 40, Ours (inner product)   0.205   0.407     1.223
                  30, 60, Class CS               1.642    2.683     5.390       30, 60, Classical CS           0.650   1.0575    2.315
                  30, 60, IVY19                  0.734    1.077     3.748       30, 60, IVY19                  0.290   0.713     1.274
                  30, 60, Ours (greedy)          0.492    0.794     2.492       30, 60, Ours(greedy)           0.197   0.406     0.717
                  30, 60, Ours (inner product)   0.436    0.733     2.409       30, 60, Ours(inner product)    0.201   0.340     0.943


                 Table 7.1: Test errors for LRA. (Left: two-side sketch. Right: one-side sketch)


                                                                            8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        2                                                                     2                                                                             2                             learned(value-only)
                                                                                                                                                                                                          count-sketch
                                                                                              0                                                                             0                             learned(position and value)
                        0
                                                                                              2                                                                             2



        log_10(error)


                                                                              log_10(error)


                                                                                                                                                            log_10(error)
                        2
                                                                                              4                                                                             4
                        4                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                              6
                        6     learned(value-only)                                                         learned(value-only)                                               8
                              count-sketch                                                    8           count-sketch
                              learned(position and value)                                                 learned(position and value)                                       10
                        8                                                                     10
                            0.05        0.10         0.15       0.20   0.25                        0.05          0.10       0.15       0.20   0.25   0.30                        0.05   0.10    0.15       0.20      0.25        0.30
                                               runtime(seconds)                                                           runtime(seconds)                                                     runtime(seconds)


                                                              Figure 7.1: Test error of LASSO in Electric dataset.


                                         algorithm. The reason is that Algorithm 4 only needs to
compute the ridge leverage scores on the training matrix once, which is actually much cheaper than
IVY19 which needs to compute a differentiable SVD many times during gradient descent.
In Section A.4, we also study the performance of our approach in the few-shot learning setting, which
has been studied in Indyk et al. (2021).


8             E XPERIMENTS : S ECOND -O RDER O PTIMIZATION

In this section, we consider the IHS on the following instance of LASSO regression:
                                                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                       x∗ = arg min∥x∥1 ≤λ f (x) = arg min∥x∥1 ≤λ 12 ∥Ax − b∥2 ,                                                                                                                        (8.1)

where λ is a parameter. We also study the performance of the sketches on the matrix estimation with
a nuclear norm constraint problem, the fast regression solver (van den Brand et al. (2021)), as well
as the use of sketches for first-order methods. The results can be found in Appendix B. All of our
experiments are conducted on a laptop with a 1.90GHz CPU and 16GB RAM. The offline training is
done separately using a single GPU. The details of the implementation are deferred to Appendix G.
Dataset. We use the Electric1 dataset of residential electric load measurements. Each row of the
matrix corresponds to a different residence. Matrix columns are consecutive measurements at different
times. Here Ai ∈ R370×9 , bi ∈ R370×1 , and |(A, b)train | = 320, |(A, b)test | = 80. We set λ = 15.
Experiment Setting. We compare the learned sketch against the classical Count-Sketch2 . We choose
m = 6d, 8d, 10d and consider the error f (x) − f (x∗ ). For the heavy-row Count-Sketch, we allocate
30% of the sketch space to the rows of the heavy row candidates. For this dataset, each row represents
a specific residence and hence there is a strong pattern of the distribution of the heavy rows. We select
the heavy rows according to the number of times each row is heavy in the training data. We give a
detailed discussion about this in Appendix B.1. We highlight that it is still possible to recognize the
pattern of the rows even if the row orders of the test data are permuted. We also consider optimizing
the non-zero values after identifying the heavy rows, using our new approach in Section 6.
Results. We plot in Figures 7.1 the mean errors on a logarithmic scale. The average offline training
time is 3.67s to find a superset of the heavy rows over the training data and 66s to optimize the
values when m = 10d, which are both faster than the runtime of Indyk et al. (2019) with the same
parameters. Note that the learned matrix S is trained offline only once using the training data. Hence,
no additional computational cost is incurred when solving the optimization problem on the test data.
We see all methods display linear convergence, that is, letting ek denote the error in the k-th iteration,
we have ek ≈ ρk e1 for some convergence rate ρ. A smaller convergence rate implies a faster
convergence. We calculate an estimated rate of convergence ρ = (ek /e1 )1/k with k = 7. We can see
both sketches, especially the sketch that optimizes both the positions and values, show significant
improvements. When the sketch size is small (6d), this sketch has a convergence rate that is just
13.2% of that of the classical Count-Sketch, and when the sketch size is large (10d), this sketch has a
smaller convergence rate that is just 12.1%.

    1
        https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/ElectricityLoadDiagrams20112014
    2
   The framework of Indyk et al. (2019) does not apply to the iterative sketching methods in a straightforward
manner, so here we only compare with the classical CountSketch. For more details, please refer to Section B.


                                                                                                                               9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Yi Li would like to thank for the partial support from the Singapore Ministry of Education under Tier
1 grant RG75/21. Honghao Lin and David Woodruff were supported in part by an Office of Naval
Research (ONR) grant N00014-18-1-2562. Ali Vakilian was supported by NSF award CCF-1934843.

R EFERENCES
Anders Aamand, Piotr Indyk, and Ali Vakilian. (learned) frequency estimation algorithms under
  zipfian distribution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.05198, 2019.
Akshay Agrawal, Brandon Amos, Shane T. Barratt, Stephen P. Boyd, Steven Diamond, and J. Zico
  Kolter. Differentiable convex optimization layers. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, pp. 9558–9570, 2019.
Haim Avron, Kenneth L. Clarkson, and David P. Woodruff. Sharper bounds for regularized data fitting.
  In Approximation, Randomization, and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques,
  (APPROX/RANDOM), pp. 27:1–27:22, 2017.
Jean Bourgain, Sjoerd Dirksen, and Jelani Nelson. Toward a unified theory of sparse dimensionality
  reduction in Euclidean space. Geometric and Functional Analysis, pp. 1009–1088, 2015.
Matthew Brand. Fast low-rank modifications of the thin singular value decomposition. Linear
 Algebra and its Applications, 415.1, 2006.
Lung-Sheng Chien and Samuel Rodriguez Bernabeu. Fast singular value decomposition on gpu.
  NVIDIA presentation at GPU Technology Conference, 2019. URL https://developer.
  download.nvidia.com/video/gputechconf/gtc/2019/presentation/
  s9226-fast-singular-value-decomposition-on-gpus-v2.pdf.
Kenneth L Clarkson and David P Woodruff. Numerical linear algebra in the streaming model. In
  Proceedings of the forty-first annual symposium on Theory of computing (STOC), pp. 205–214,
  2009.
Kenneth L Clarkson and David P Woodruff. Low-rank approximation and regression in input sparsity
  time. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 63(6):54, 2017.
Edith Cohen, Ofir Geri, and Rasmus Pagh. Composable sketches for functions of frequencies: Beyond
  the worst case. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2057–2067. PMLR, 2020.
Michael B. Cohen, Cameron Musco, and Christopher Musco. Input sparsity time low-rank approxi-
 mation via ridge leverage score sampling. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM
 Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, (SODA), pp. 1758–1777, 2017.
Graham Cormode and Charlie Dickens. Iterative hessian sketch in input sparsity time. In Proceedings
  of 33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Vancouver, Canada,
  2019.
Yihe Dong, Piotr Indyk, Ilya Razenshteyn, and Tal Wagner. Learning sublinear-time indexing for
  nearest neighbor search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Talya Eden, Piotr Indyk, Shyam Narayanan, Ronitt Rubinfeld, Sandeep Silwal, and Tal Wagner.
  Learning-based support estimation in sublinear time. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2021.
Chinmay Hegde, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan, Wotao Yin, and Richard G. Baraniuk. Numax: A
  convex approach for learning near-isometric linear embeddings. In IEEE Transactions on Signal
  Processing, pp. 6109–6121, 2015.
Piotr Indyk, Ali Vakilian, and Yang Yuan. Learning-based low-rank approximations. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 7400–7410, 2019.
Piotr Indyk, Tal Wagner, and David Woodruff. Few-shot data-driven algorithms for low rank
  approximation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34, 2021.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Tanqiu Jiang, Yi Li, Honghao Lin, Yisong Ruan, and David P. Woodruff. Learning-augmented data
  stream algorithms. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
Xiangrui Meng and Michael W Mahoney. Low-distortion subspace embeddings in input-sparsity
  time and applications to robust linear regression. In Proceedings of the forty-fifth annual ACM
  symposium on Theory of computing, pp. 91–100, 2013.
Jelani Nelson and Huy L Nguyên. Osnap: Faster numerical linear algebra algorithms via sparser
   subspace embeddings. In Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2013 IEEE 54th Annual
  Symposium on, pp. 117–126, 2013.
Jelani Nelson and Huy L. Nguyên. Lower bounds for oblivious subspace embeddings. In Automata,
   Languages, and Programming - 41st International Colloquium (ICALP), pp. 883–894, 2014.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, and
 Trevor Killeen. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. 2019.
Mert Pilanci and Martin J. Wainwright. Iterative Hessian sketch: Fast and accurate solution approxi-
 mation for constrained least-squares. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 17:53:1–53:38, 2016.
Tamas Sarlos. Improved approximation algorithms for large matrices via random projections. In 47th
  Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pp. 143–152, 2006.
Jan van den Brand, Binghui Peng, Zhao Song, and Omri Weinstein. Training (overparametrized)
  neural networks in near-linear time. In James R. Lee (ed.), 12th Innovations in Theoretical
  Computer Science Conference, ITCS, volume 185, pp. 63:1–63:15, 2021.
Roman Vershynin. Introduction to the non-asymptotic analysis of random matrices. In Yonina C.
  Eldar and Gitta Kutyniok (eds.), Compressed Sensing: Theory and Applications, pp. 210–268.
  Cambridge University Press, 2012. doi: 10.1017/CBO9780511794308.006.
Jingdong Wang, Ting Zhang, Nicu Sebe, and Heng Tao ShenWang. A survey on learning to hash. In
   IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 769–790, 2017.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A                          A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS : L OW-R ANK A PPROXIMATION

The details (data dimension, Ntrain , etc.) are presented in Table A.1.
                        Name       Type        Dimension       Ntrain Ntest
                        Friends Image 5760 × 1080 400                   100
                        Logo       Image 5760 × 1080 400                100
                        Hyper      Image 1024 × 768            400      100

                                                                                    Table A.1: Data set descriptions

A.1                              S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS OF A LGORITHM 4
                                                                Sketch                                                           Logo            Friends                                         Hyper
                                                                Ours(inner product)                                              0.311           0.470                                           1.232
                                                                ℓ2 Sampling                                                      0.698           0.935                                           1.293
                                                                Only Ridge                                                       0.994           1.493                                           4.155
                                                                Randomly Grouping                                                0.659           1.069                                           2.070

Table A.2: Sensitivity analysis for our approach (using Algorithm 1 from Indyk et al. (2019) with
one sketch)

In this section we explore how sensitive the performance of our Algorithm 4 is to the ridge leverage
score sampling and maximum inner product grouping process. We consider the following baselines:

                                     • ℓ2 norm sampling: we sample the rows according to their squared length instead of doing
                                       ridge leverage score sampling.
                                     • Only ridge leverage score sampling: the subspace spanned by only the sampled rows from
                                       ridge leverage score sampling.
                                     • Randomly grouping: we put the sampled rows into different buckets as before, but randomly
                                       divide the non-sampled rows into buckets.

The results are shown in Table A.2. Here we set k = 30, m = 60 as an example. To show the
difference of the initialization method more clearly, we compare the error using the one-sided
sketching Algorithm 1 and do not further optimize the non-zeros values. From the table we can
see both that ridge leverage score sampling and the downstream grouping process are necessary,
otherwise the error will be similar or even worse than that of the classical Count-Sketch.

A.2                              T OTAL VARIATION D ISTANCE

As we have shown in Theorem 5.1, if the total variation distance between the row sampling probability
distributions p and q is O(1), we have a worst-case guarantee of O(k log k + k/ϵ), which is strictly
better than the Ω(k 2 ) lower bound for the random CountSketch, even when its non-zero values have
been optimized. We now study the total variation distance between the train and test matrix in our
dataset. The result is shown in Figure A.1. From the figure we can see that for all the three dataset, the
total variation distance is bounded by a constant, which suggests that the assumptions are reasonable
for real-world data.

                               1.0                                                                              1.0                                                                        1.0
                                                                      Tv distance                                                                Tv distance                                                                Tv distance
                               0.8                                                                              0.8                                                                        0.8
    Total Variation Distance


                                                                                     Total Variation Distance


                                                                                                                                                                Total Variation Distance


                               0.6                                                                              0.6                                                                        0.6

                               0.4                                                                              0.4                                                                        0.4

                               0.2                                                                              0.2                                                                        0.2

                               0.0                                                                              0.0                                                                        0.0
                                      0   20   40          60    80           100                                     0   20   40          60   80        100                                    0   20   40           60   80
                                               Test Matrix #                                                                   Test Matrix #                                                              Test Matrix #


Figure A.1: Total variation distance between train and test matrices. left: Logo, middle: friend, right:
Hyper.


                                                                                                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3    L EARNING -BASED A LGORITHMS FOR L OW-R ANK A PPROXIMATION IN THE F EW-S HOT
       S ETTING

In this section, we will give a brief explanation of the two algorithms proposed in Indyk et al. (2021).
Both algorithms aim to optimize the non-zero values of a Count-Sketch matrix under fixed locations
of the non-zero entries.

One-shot closed-form algorithm. Given a sparsity pattern of a Count-Sketch matrix S ∈ Rm×n ,
it partitions the rows of A into m blocks A(1) , ..., A(m) as follows: let Ii = {j : Sij = 1}. The
block A(i) ∈ R|Ii |×d is the sub-matrix of A that contains the rows whose indices are in Ii . The goal
here is for each block A(i) , to choose a (non-sparse) one-dimensional sketching vector si ∈ R|Ii | .
The first approach is to set si to be the top left singular vector of A(i) , which is the algorithm
1Shot2Vec. Another approach is to set si to be a left singular vector of A(i) chosen randomly and
proportional to its squared singular value. The main advantage of the latter approach over the previous
one is that it endows the algorithm with provable guarantees on the LRA error. The 1Shot2Vec
algorithm combines both ways, obtaining the benefits of both approaches. The advantage of these
two algorithms is that they extract a sketching matrix by an analytic computation, requiring neither
GPU access nor auto-gradient functionality.

Few-shot SGD algorithm.        In this algorithm, the authors propose a new loss function for LRA,
namely,
                                                                 2
                                   min E       Uk⊤ S ⊤ SU − I0 F ,
                                   CS S A∈Tr
where A = U ΣV ⊤ is the SVD-decomposition of A and Uk ∈ Rn×k denotes the submatrix of U that
contains its first k columns. I0 ∈ Rk×d denotes the result of augmenting the identity matrix of order
k with d − k additional zero columns on the right. This loss function is motivated by the analysis of
prior LRA algorithms that use random sketching matrices. It is faster to compute and differentiate
than the previous empirical loss in Indyk et al. (2019). In the experiments the authors also show that
this loss function can achieve a smaller error in a shorter amount of time, using a small number of
randomly sampled training matrices, though the final error will be larger than that of the previous
algorithm in Indyk et al. (2019) if we allow a longer training time and access to the whole training set
Tr.

A.4    E XPERIMENTS : LRA IN THE FEW- SHOT SETTING

In the rest of this section, we study the performance of our second approach in the few-shot learning
setting. We first consider the case where we only have one training matrix randomly sampled from Tr.
Here, we compare our method with the 1Shot2Vec method proposed in (Indyk et al., 2021) in the same
setting (k = 10, m = 40) as in their empirical evaluation. The result is shown in Table A.3. Compared
to 1Shot2Vec, our method reduces the error by around 50%, and has an even slightly faster runtime.
Indyk et al. (2021) also proposed a FewShotSGD algorithm which further improves the non-zero
values of the sketches after different initialization methods. We compare the performance of this
approach for different initialization methods: in all initialization methods, we only use one training
matrix and we use three training matrices for the FewShotSGD step. The results are shown in
Table A.4. We report the minimum error of 50 iterations of the FewShotSGD because we aim to
compare the computational efficiency for different methods. From the table we see that our approach
plus the FewShotSGD method can achieve a much smaller error, with around a 50% improvement
upon (Indyk et al., 2021). Moreover, even without further optimization by FewShotSGD, our
initialization method for learning the non-zero locations in CountSketch obtains a smaller error than
other methods (even when they are optimized with 1ShotSGD or FewShotSGD learning).

B     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS : S ECOND -O RDER O PTIMIZATION
As we mentioned in Section 8, despite the number of problems that learned sketches have been
applied to, they have not been applied to convex optimization, or say, iterative sketching algorithms in
general. To demonstrate the difficulty, we consider the Iterative Hessian Sketch (IHS) as an example.
In that scheme, suppose that we have k iterations of the algorithm. Then we need k independent


                                                  13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       Algorithm         Dataset   Few-shot Error   Training Time
                          Logo         0.331
                                                                           Sketch                       Logo    Friends   Hyper
      Classical CS       Friends       0.524             ✗
                                                                           Ours (Initialization only)   0.065   0.139     0.535
                         Hyper         1.082
                                                                           Ours + FewShotSGD            0.048   0.125     0.443
                          Logo         0.171           5.682
                                                                           1Shot1Vec only               0.171   0.306     0.795
       1shot2Vec         Friends       0.306           5.680
                         Hyper         0.795           1.054
                                                                           1Shot1Vec + FewShot SGD      0.104   0.229     0.636
                                                                           Classical CS                 0.331   0.524     1.082
                          Logo         0.065           4.515
  Ours (inner product)   Friends       0.139           4.773
                                                                           Classical CS + FewShot SGD   0.173   0.279     0.771
                         Hyper         0.535           0.623             Table A.4: Test errors for LRA in the few-
Table A.3: Test errors and training times for LRA                        shot setting (using Alg. 1 from Indyk et al.
in the one-shot setting (using Alg. 1 with one                           (2019) with one sketch)
sketch)


sketching matrices (otherwise the solution may diverge). A natural way is to follow the method
in (Indyk et al., 2019), which is to minimize the following quantity
                                          min       E f (A, ALG(S1 , ..., Sk , A)) ,
                                        S1 ,...Sk A∈D

where the minimization is taken over k Count-Sketch matrices S1 , . . . , Sk . In this case, however,
calculating the gradient with respect to S1 would involve all iterations and in each iteration we need to
solve a constrained optimization problem. Hence, it would be difficult and intractable to compute the
gradients. An alternative way is to train k sketching matrices sequentially, that is, learn the sketching
matrix for the i-th iteration using a local loss function for the i-th iteration, and then using the learned
matrix in the i-th iteration to generate the training data for the (i + 1)-st iteration. However, the
empirical results suggest that it works for the first iteration only, because in this case the training data
for the (i + 1)-st iteration depends on the solution to the i-th iteration and may become farther away
from the test data in later iterations. The core problem here is that the method proposed in Indyk et al.
(2019) treats the training process in a black-box way, which is difficult to extend to iterative methods.

B.1    T HE D ISTRIBUTION OF THE H EAVY ROWS

In our experiments, we hypothesize that in real-world data there may be an underlying pattern which
can help us identify the heavy rows. In the Electric dataset, each row of the matrix corresponds to a
specific residence and the heavy rows are concentrated on some specific rows.
To exemplify this, we study the heavy leverage score rows distribution over the Electric dataset. For a
row i ∈ [370], let fi denote the number of times that row i is heavy out of 320 training data points
from the Electric dataset, where we say row i is heavy if ℓi ≥ 5d/n. Below we list all 74 pairs (i, fi )
with fi > 0.
(195,320), (278,320), (361,320), (207,317), (227,285), (240,284), (219,270), (275,232), (156,214),
(322,213), (193,196), (190,192), (160,191), (350,181), (63,176), (42,168), (162,148), (356,129),
(363,110), (362,105), (338,95), (215,94), (234,93), (289,81), (97,80), (146,70), (102,67), (98,58),
(48,57), (349,53), (165,46), (101,41), (352,40), (293,34), (344,29), (268,21), (206,20), (217,20),
(327,20), (340,19), (230,18), (359,18), (297,14), (357,14), (161,13), (245,10), (100,8), (85,6), (212,6),
(313,6), (129,5), (130,5), (366,5), (103,4), (204,4), (246,4), (306,4), (138,3), (199,3), (222,3), (360,3),
(87,2), (154,2), (209,2), (123,1), (189,1), (208,1), (214,1), (221,1), (224,1), (228,1), (309,1), (337,1),
(343,1)
Observe that the heavy rows are concentrated on a set of specific row indices. There are only 30 rows
i with fi ≥ 50. We view this as strong evidence for our hypothesis.

Heavy Rows Distribution Under Permutation. We note that even though the order of the rows has
been changed, we can still recognize the patterns of the rows. We continue to use the Electric dataset
as an example. To address the concern that a permutation may break the sketch, we can measure the
similarity between vectors, that is, after processing the training data, we can instead test similarity
on the rows of the test matrix and use this to select the heavy rows, rather than an index which may
simply be permuted. To illustrate this method, we use the following example on the Electric dataset,
using locality sensitive hashing.
After processing the training data, we obtain a set I of indices of heavy rows. For each i ∈ I,
we pick q = 3 independent standard Gaussian vectors g1 , g2 , g3 ∈ Rd , and compute f (ri ) =


                                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(g1T ri , g2T ri , g3T ri ) ∈ R3 , where ri takes an average of the i-th rows over all training sets. Let A
be the test matrix. For each i ∈ I, let ji = argminj ∥f (Aj ) − f (ri )∥2 . We take the ji -th row to
be a heavy row in our learned sketch. This method only needs an additional O(1) passes over the
entries of A and hence, the extra time cost is negligible. To test the performance of the method, we
randomly pick a matrix from the test set and permute its rows. The result shows that when k is small,
we can roughly recover 70% of the top-k heavy rows, and we plot below the regression error using
the learned Count-Sketch matrix generated this way, where we set m = 90 and k = 0.3m = 27. We
can see that the learned method still obtains a significant improvement.

                                            2
                                                                                  count-sketch
                                                                                  learned(position-only)
                                            0

                                            2
                            log_10(error)

                                            4

                                            6

                                            8

                                                1       2      3           4       5        6         7
                                                                   iteration round

                         Figure B.1: Test error of LASSO on Electric dataset

B.2    M ATRIX N ORM E STIMATION WITH A N UCLEAR N ORM C ONSTRAINT

In many applications, for the problem
                                                                                                2
                                                    X ∗ := arg min ∥AX − B∥F ,
                                                            X∈Rd1 ×d2

it is reasonable to model the matrix X ∗ as having low rank. Similar to ℓ1 -minimization for com-
pressive sensing, a standard relaxation of the rank constraint is to minimize the nuclear norm of X,
                     Pmin{d ,d }
defined as ∥X∥∗ := j=1 1 2 σj (X), where σj (X) is the j-th largest singular value of X.
Hence, the matrix estimation problem we consider here is
                                                                          2
                       X ∗ := arg min ∥AX − B∥F                                  such that           ∥X∥∗ ≤ ρ,
                                            X∈Rd1 ×d2

where ρ > 0 is a user-defined radius as a regularization parameter.
We conduct Iterative Hessian Sketch (IHS) experiments on the following dataset:
   • Tunnel3 : The data set is a time series of gas concentrations measured by eight sensors in a
     wind tunnel. Each (A, B) corresponds to a different data collection trial. Ai ∈ R13530×5 , B i ∈
     R13530×6 , |(A, B)|train = 144, |(A, B)|test = 36. In our nuclear norm constraint, we set
     ρ = 10.
Experiment Setting: We choose m = 7d, 10d for the Tunnel dataset. We consider the error
1            2   1       ∗      2
2 ∥AX − B∥2 − 2 ∥AX − B∥2 . The leverage scores of this dataset are very uniform. Hence, for
this experiment we only consider optimizing the values of the non-zero entries.
Results of Our Experiments: We plot on a logarithmic scale the mean errors of the dataset in
Figures B.2. We can see that when m = 7d, the gradient-based sketch, based on the first 6 iterations,
has a rate of convergence that is 48% of the random sketch, and when m = 10d, the gradient-based
sketch has a rate of convergence that is 29% of the random sketch.

B.3    FAST R EGRESSION S OLVER

Consider an unconstrained convex optimization problem minx f (x), where f is smooth and strongly
convex, and its Hessian ∇2 f is Lipschitz continuous. This problem can be solved by Newton’s
  3
    https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Gas+sensor+array+exposed+to+
turbulent+gas+mixtures


                                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                              3
                                                                       Ours(learned CS)                                                                      2                                                      Ours(learned CS)
                              2                                        Count-sketch                                                                                                                                 Count-sketch
                              1                                                                                                                              0
              log_10(error)   0


                                                                                                                                             log_10(error)
                              1                                                                                                                              2
                              2                                                                                                                              4
                              3
                              4                                                                                                                              6
                              5                                                                                                                              8
                                  2        4              6                8                          10                                                          1   2             3       4        5      6       7      8      9
                                               iteration round                                                                                                                               iteration round

    Figure B.2: Test error of matrix estimation with a nuclear norm constraint on the Tunnel dataset

        1.4                                                                                    1.4                                          Gaussian(eta = 1)                 1.4
                                                                                                                                            Gaussian(eta = 0.2)
        1.2                                                                                    1.2                                          sparse-JL(eta = 1)                1.2
                                                                                                                                            sparse-JL(eta = 0.2)
        1.0                                         Gaussian(eta = 1)                          1.0                                          Ours(learned CS)                  1.0                                          Gaussian(eta = 1)
                                                    Gaussian(eta = 0.2)                                                                                                                                                    Gaussian(eta = 0.2)
        0.8                                                                                    0.8                                                                            0.8
error


                                                    sparse-JL(eta = 1)
                                                                                    error


                                                                                                                                                                      error
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sparse-JL(eta = 1)
        0.6                                         sparse-JL(eta = 0.2)                                                                                                                                                   sparse-JL(eta = 0.2)
                                                    Ours(learned CS)                           0.6                                                                            0.6                                          Ours(learned CS)
        0.4                                                                                    0.4                                                                            0.4
        0.2                                                                                    0.2                                                                            0.2
        0.0                                                                                    0.0                                                                            0.0
                    1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00                                     1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00                                       1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 2.00 2.25 2.50 2.75 3.00
                                     iteration round                                                                  iteration round                                                                    iteration round


                                  Figure B.3: Test error of the subroutine in fast regression on Electric dataset.
                                                                                               4                                                Gaussian
                                                                                               3                                                Sparse-JL
                                                                                                                                                Ours(learned CS)
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               1
                                                                               log_10(error)


                                                                                               0
                                                                                               1
                                                                                               2
                                                                                               3
                                                                                               4
                                                                                                        2     4     6           8      10           12           14
                                                                                                                        iteration round


                                               Figure B.4: Test error of fast regression on Electric dataset


method, which iteratively performs the update
                                      xt+1 = xt − arg min (∇2 f (xt )1/2 )⊤ (∇2 f (xt )1/2 )z − ∇f (xt )                                                                                                            ,                     (B.1)
                                                                           z                                                                                                                                    2

provided it is given a good initial point x0 . In each step, it requires solving a regression problem of
the form minz A⊤ Az − y 2 , which, with access to A, can be solved with a fast regression solver
in (van den Brand et al., 2021). The regression solver first computes a preconditioner R via a QR
decomposition such that SAR has orthonormal columns, where S is a sketching matrix, then solves
ẑ = arg minz′ (AR)⊤ (AR)z ′ − y 2 by gradient descent and returns Rẑ in the end. Here, the point
of sketching is that the QR decomposition of SA can be computed much more efficiently than the
QR decomposition of A, since S has only a small number of rows.
In this section, We consider the unconstrained least squares problem minx f (x) with f (x) =
1           2
2 ∥Ax − b∥2 using the Electric dataset, using the above fast regression solver.

Training: Note that ∇2 f (x) = A⊤ A, independent of x. In the t-th round of Newton’s method, by
                                                                  2
(B.1), we need to solve a regression problem minz A⊤ Az − y 2 with y = ∇f (xt ). Hence, we can
use the same methods in the preceding subsection to optimize the learned sketch Si . For a general
problem where ∇2 f (x) depends on x, one can take xt to be the solution obtained from the learned
sketch St to generate A and y for the (t + 1)-st round, train a learned sketch St+1 , and repeat this
process.
Experiment Setting: For the Electric dataset, we set m = 10d = 90. We observe that the classical
Count-Sketch matrix makes the solution diverge terribly in this setting. To make a clearer comparison,
we consider the following sketch matrix:

                              • Gaussian sketch: S = √1m G, where G ∈ Rm×n with i.i.d. N (0, 1) entries.


                                                                                                                          16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       • Sparse Johnson-Lindenstrauss Transform (SJLT): S is the vertical concatenation of s inde-
         pendent Count-Sketch matrices, each of dimension m/s × n.
We note that the above sketching matrices require more time to compute SA but need fewer rows to
be a subspace embedding than the classical Count-Sketch matrix.
For the step length η in gradient descent, we set η = 1 in all iterations of the learned sketches. For
classical random sketches, we set η in the following two ways: (a) η = 1 in all iterations and (b)
η = 1 in the first iteration and η = 0.2 in all subsequent iterations.
                                                                                              2
Experimental Results: We examine the accuracy of the subproblem minz A⊤ Az − y 2 and define
the error to be A⊤ ARzt − y 2 / ∥y∥2 . We consider the subproblems in the first three iterations of
the global Newton method. The results are plotted in Figure B.3. Note that Count-Sketch causes a
terrible divergence of the subroutine and is thus omitted in the plots. Still, we observe that in setting
(a) of η, the other two classical sketches cause the subroutine to diverge. In setting (b) of η, the other
two classical sketches lead to convergence but their error is significantly larger than that of the learned
sketches, in each of the first three calls to the subroutine. The error of the learned sketch is less than
0.01 in all iterations of all three subroutine calls, in both settings (a) and (b) of η.
We also plot a figure on the convergence of the global Newton method. Here, for each subroutine, we
only run one iteration, and plot the error of the original least squares problem. The result is shown
in Figure B.4, which clearly displays a significantly faster decay with learned sketches. The rate of
convergence using heavy-rows sketches is 80.6% of that using Gaussian or sparse JL sketches.

B.4    F IRST-O RDER O PTIMIZATION

In this section, we study the use of the sketch in first-order methods. Particularly, let QR−1 = SA
be the QR-decomposition for SA, where S is a sketch matrix. We use R as an (approximate) pre-
conditioner and use gradient descent to solve the problem min ∥ARx − b∥2 . Here we use the Electric
dataset where A is 370 × 9 and we set S to have 90 rows. The result is shown in the following
table, where the time includes the time to compute R. We can see that if we use a learned sketch
matrix, the error converges very fast when we set the learning rate to be 1 and 0.1, while the classical
Count-Sketch will lead to divergence.
                Iteration                         1          10         100       500
                Error (learned, lr = 1)         2.73       1.5e-7
                Error (learned, lr = 0.1)       4056         605      4.04e-6
                Error (learned, lr = 0.01)      4897        4085        667      0.217
                Error (random, lr = 1)
                                                N.A         N.A         N.A       N.A
                Error (random, lr = 0.1)
                Error (random, lr = 0.01)       4881        3790        685       1.52
                Time                          0.00048 0.00068 0.0029 0.0013

                              Table B.1: Test Error for Gradient Descent

C     P RELIMINARIES : T HEOREMS AND A DDITIONAL A LGORITHMS
In this section, we provide the full description of the time-optimal sketching algorithm for LRA in
Algorithm 2. We also provide several definitions and lemmas that are used in the proofs of our results
for LRA.
Definition C.1 (Affine Embedding). Given a pair of matrices A and B, a matrix S is an affine
                                                                   2                        2
ϵ-embedding if for all X of the appropriate shape, ∥S(AX − B)∥F = (1 ± ϵ) ∥AX − B∥F .
Lemma C.2 (Clarkson & Woodruff (2017); Lemma 40). Let A be an n × d matrix and let S ∈
        2                                                                    2                 2
RO(1/ϵ )×n be a CountSketch matrix. Then with constant probability, ∥SA∥F = (1 ± ϵ) ∥A∥F .
The following result is shown in Clarkson & Woodruff (2017) and sharpened with Nelson & Nguyên
(2013); Meng & Mahoney (2013).
Lemma C.3. Given matrices A, B with n rows, a CountSketch with O(rank(A)2 /ϵ2 ) rows is an
affine ϵ-embedding matrix with constant probability. Moreover, the matrix product SA can be
computed in O(nnz(A)) time, where nnz(A) denotes the number of non-zero entries of matrix A.


                                                    17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                                     ′
Lemma C.4 (Sarlos (2006); Clarkson & Woodruff (2017)). Suppose that A ∈ Rn×d and B ∈ Rn×d .
                                                 2
                                                                                        2
Let S ∈ Rm×n be a CountSketch with m = rank(A)
                                             ϵ2    . Let X̃ = arg minrank-k X ∥SAX − SB∥F .
Then,
                                            2
                                                                                           2
1. With constant probability, AX̃ − B           ≤ (1 + ϵ) minrank-k X ∥AX − B∥F . In other words, in
                                            F
   O(nnz(A) + nnz(B) + m(d + d′ )) time, we can reduce the problem to a smaller (multi-response
   regression) problem with m rows whose optimal solution is a (1 + ϵ)-approximate solution to the
   original instance.

2. The (1 + ϵ)-approximate solution X̃ can be computed in time O(nnz(A) + nnz(B) + mdd′ +
   min(m2 d, md2 )).

Now we turn our attention to the time-optimal sketching algorithm for LRA. The next lemma is
known, though we include it for completeness Avron et al. (2017):
Lemma C.5. Suppose that S ∈ RmS ×n and R ∈ RmR ×d are sparse affine ϵ-embedding matrices
for (Ak , A) and ((SA)⊤ , A⊤ ), respectively. Then,
                                                          2                        2
                         min         AR⊤ XSA − A F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥Ak − A∥F
                       rank-k X


Proof. Consider the following multiple-response regression problem:
                                                                  2
                                          min ∥Ak X − A∥F .                                                      (C.1)
                                         rank-k X
                                                                                                   2                 2
Note that since X = Ik is a feasible solution to Eq. (C.1), minrank-k X ∥Ak X − A∥F = ∥Ak − A∥F .
Let S ∈ RmS ×n be a sketching matrix that satisfies the condition of Lemma C.4 (Item 1) for A := Ak
                                                                                   2
and B := A. By the normal equations, the rank-k minimizer of ∥SAk X − SA∥F is (SAk )+ SA.
Hence,
                                                     2                         2
                          Ak (SAk )+ SA − A F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥Ak − A∥F ,                                              (C.2)
which in particular shows that a (1 + ϵ)-approximate rank-k approximation of A exists in the row
space of SA. In other words,
                                                     2                        2
                           min ∥XSA − A∥F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥Ak − A∥F .                                                  (C.3)
                         rank-k X

Next, let R ∈ RmR ×d be a sketching matrix which satisfies the condition of Lemma C.4 (Item 1)
                                                                                            2
for A := (SA)⊤ and B := A⊤ . Let Y denote the rank-k minimizer of R(SA)⊤ X ⊤ − RA⊤ F .
Hence,
                          2                                           2
        (SA)⊤ Y ⊤ − A⊤ F ≤ (1 + ϵ) min ∥XSA − A∥F                             ▷ Lemma C.4 (Item 1)
                                          rank-k X
                                                              2
                                  ≤ (1 + O(ϵ)) ∥Ak − A∥F                      ▷ Eq. (C.3)                        (C.4)
Note that by the normal equations, again rowsp(Y ⊤ ) ⊆ rowsp(RA⊤ ) and we can write Y = AR⊤ Z
where rank(Z) = k. Thus,
                              2                           2                            2
  min      AR⊤ XSA − A F ≤ AR⊤ ZSA − A F = (SA)⊤ Y ⊤ − A⊤ F                                            ▷ Y = AR⊤ Z
rank-k X
                                                                                           2
                                                              ≤ (1 + O(ϵ)) ∥Ak − A∥F                   ▷ Eq. (C.4)

                                                                          ′                    ′                ′
Lemma C.6 (Avron et al. (2017); Lemma 27). For C ∈ Rp×m , D ∈ Rm×p , G ∈ Rp×p , the
following problem
                                                                  2
                                           min ∥CZD − G∥F                                                        (C.5)
                                         rank-k Z

can be solved in O(pm′ rC + p′ mrD + pp′ (rD + rC )) time, where rC = rank(C) ≤ min{m′ , p}
and rD = rank(D) ≤ min{m, p′ }.


                                                     18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Lemma C.7. Let S ∈ RmS ×d , R ∈ RmR ×d be CountSketch (CS) matrices such that
                                                  2                      2
                        min      AR⊤ XSA − A F ≤ (1 + γ) ∥Ak − A∥F .                          (C.6)
                      rank-k X

           m2
            R ×n                 m2
                                  S ×d
Let V ∈ R β2     , and W ∈ R β2     be CS matrices. Then, Algorithm 2 gives a (1 + O(β + γ))-
                                 m4S    m4    m2 m2 (m +m )
approximation in time nnz(A) + O( β 2 + β 2R + S R β 4S R + k(nmS + dmR )) with constant
probability.

Proof. The approximation guarantee follows from Eq. (C.6) and the fact that V and W are affine
β-embedding matrices of AR⊤ and SA, respectively (see Lemma C.3).
The algorithm first computes C = V AR⊤ , D = SAW ⊤ , G = V AW ⊤ which can be done in
time O(nnz(A)). As an example, we bound the time to compute C = V AR. Note that since
V is a CS, V A can be computed in O(nnz(A)) time and the number of non-zero entries in the
resulting matrix is at most nnz(A). Hence, since R is a CS as well, C can be computed in time
O(nnz(A) + nnz(V A)) = O(nnz(A)). Then, it takes an extra O((m3S + m3R + m2S m2R )/β 2 ) time
to store C, D and G in matrix form. Next, as we showed in Lemma C.6, the time to compute Z in
                   m4     m4    m2 m2 (m +m )
Algorithm 2 is O( β 2S + β 2R + S R β 4S R ). Finally, it takes O(nnz(A) + k(nmS + dmR ))
time to compute Q = AR⊤ ZL and P = ZR SA and to return the solution in the form of Pn×k Qk×d .
Hence, the total runtime is
                              m4S   m4R   m2S m2R (mS + mR )
              O(nnz(A) +          +     +                    + k(nmS + dmR ))
                              β2    β2             β4



D     ATTAINING W ORST-C ASE G UARANTEES
D.1   L OW-R ANK A PPROXIMATION

We shall provide the following two methods to achieve worst case guarantees: MixedSketch—whose
guarantee is via the sketch monotonicity property, and approximate comparison method (a.k.a.
ApproxCheck), which just approximately evaluates the cost of two solutions and takes the better
one. These methods asymptotically achieve the same worst-case guarantee. However, for any input
matrix A and any pair of sketches S, T , the performance of the MixedSketch method on (A, S, T ) is
never worse than the performance of its corresponding ApproxCheck method on (A, S, T ), and can
be much better.                   √ √
Remark D.1. Let A = diag(2, 2, 2, 2), and suppose the goal is to find a rank-2 approximation
of A. Consider two sketches S and T such that SA and T A capture span(e1 , e3 ) and span(e2 , e4 ),
respectively. Then for both SA and T A, the best solution in the subspace of one of these two spaces
                                    2                       2                2
is a ( 32 )-approximation: ∥A − A2 ∥F = 4 and ∥A − PSA ∥F = ∥A − PT A ∥F = 6 where PSA and
PT A respectively denote the best approximation of A in the space spanned by SA and T A.
However, if we find the best rank-2 approximation of A, Z, inside the span of the union of SA and
                     2
T A, then ∥A − Z∥F = 4. Since ApproxCheck just chooses the better of SA and T A by evaluating
their costs, it misses out on the opportunity to do as well as MixedSketch.
Here, we show the sketch monotonicity property for LRA.
                         R
Theorem D.2. Let A ∈ n×d be an input matrix, V and W be η-affine embeddings, and S1 ∈
R mS ×n
               R
        , R1 ∈ mR ×n be arbitrary matrices. Consider arbitrary extensions to S1 , R1 : S, R (e.g.,
S is a concatenation of S1 with an arbitrary matrix with the same number of columns). Then,
                                 2                                                 2
 A − ALGLRA ((S, R, V, W ), A)) F ≤ (1 + η)2 ∥A − ALGLRA ((S1 , R1 , V, W ), A)∥F

                                                      2                                        2
Proof. We have A − ALGLRA ((S, R, V, W ), A) F ≤ (1 + η) minrank-k X ARXSA − A F =
                                             2
(1 + η) minrank-k X:X∈row(SA)∩col(AR) ∥X − A∥F , which is in turn at most (1 +
                                             2                                            2
η) minrank-k X:X∈row(S1 A)∩col(AR1 ) ∥X − A∥F = (1 + η) minrank-k X ∥AR1 XS1 A − A∥F ≤ (1 +


                                                 19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                           2
η)2 ∥A − ALGLRA ((S1 , R1 , V, W ), A)∥F , where we use the fact the V, W are affine η-embeddings

(Definition C.1), as well as the fact that (col(AR1 ) ∩ row(S1 A)) ⊆ col(AR) ∩ row(SA) .

ApproxCheck for LRA. We give the pseudocode for the ApproxCheck method and prove that the
runtime of this method for LRA is of the same order as the classical time-optimal sketching algorithm
of LRA.
Algorithm 5 LRA A PPROX C HECK
Input: learned sketches SL , RL , VL , WL ; classical sketches SC , RC , VC , WC ; β; A ∈ n×d  R
 1: PL , QL ← ALGLRA (SL , RL , VL , WL , A), PC QC ← ALGLRA (SC , RC , VC , WC , A)
                    2                  2
 2: Let S ∈ RO(1/β )×n , R ∈ RO(1/β )×d be classical CountSketch matrices
                                  2                                   2
 3: ∆L ← S (PL QL − A) R⊤ F , ∆C ← S (PC QC − A) R⊤ F
 4: if ∆L ≤ ∆C then
 5:    return PL QL
 6: end if
 7: return PC QC
                                                                                               k
Theorem D.3. Assume we have data A ∈ Rn×d , learned sketches SL ∈ Rpoly( ϵ )×n , RL ∈
       k                   k                        k
Rpoly( ϵ )×d , VL ∈ Rpoly( ϵ )×n , WL ∈ Rpoly( ϵ )×d which attain a (1 + O(γ))-approximation,
classical sketches of the same size, SC , RC , VC , WC , which attain a (1 + O(ϵ))-approximation,
and a tradeoff parameter β. Then, Algorithm 5 attains a (1 + β + min(γ, ϵ))-approximation in
                                    4
O(nnz(A) + (n + d) poly( kϵ ) + βk 4 · poly( kϵ )) time.

Proof. Let (PL , QL ), (PC , QC ) be the approximate rank-k approximations of A in factored form
using (SL , RL ) and (SO , RO ). Then, clearly,
                                 2                  2                                      2
             min(∥PL QL − A∥F , ∥PC QC − A∥F ) = (1 + O(min(ϵ, γ))) ∥Ak − A∥F                       (D.1)

Let ΓL = PL QL − A, ΓC = PC QC − A and ΓM = arg min(∥SΓL R∥F , ∥SΓC R∥F ). Then,
                  2                            2
           ∥ΓM ∥F ≤ (1 + O(β)) ∥SΓM R∥F                                     ▷ by Lemma C.2
                                              2        2
                      ≤ (1 + O(β)) · min(∥ΓL ∥F , ∥ΓC ∥F )
                                                          2
                      ≤ (1 + O(β + min(ϵ, γ))) ∥Ak − A∥F                    ▷ by Eq. (D.1)

Runtime analysis. By Lemma C.7, Algorithm 2 computes PL , QL and PC , QC in time O(nnz(A) +
k16 (β 2 +ϵ2 )     3         2

   ϵ24 β 4     + kϵ2 (n + dk                                                                   k
                           ϵ4 )). Next, once we have PL , QL and PC , QC , it takes O(nnz(A) + β 4 ) time
to compute ∆L and ∆C .
                  k 16 (β 2 + ϵ2 ) k 3       dk 2     k                           k4         k
  O(nnz(A) +            24  4
                                  +   2
                                        (n +    4
                                                  ) +   4
                                                          ) = O(nnz(A) + (n + d +   4
                                                                                      ) poly( )).
                       ϵ β          ϵ         ϵ       β                           β          ϵ


To interpret the above theorem, note that when ϵ ≫ k(n + d)−4 , we can set β −4 = O(k(n + d)−4 )
so that Algorithm 5 has the same asymptotic runtime as the best (1 + ϵ)-approximation algorithm for
LRA with the classical CountSketch. Moreover, Algorithm 5 is a (1 + o(ϵ))-approximation when
the learned sketch outperforms classical sketches, γ = o(ϵ). On the other hand, when the learned
sketches perform poorly, γ = Ω(ϵ), the worst-case guarantee of Algorithm 5 remains (1 + O(ϵ)).

D.2    S ECOND -O RDER O PTIMIZATION

For the sketches for second-order optimization, the monotonicity property does not hold. Below we
provide an input-sparsity algorithm which can test for and use the better of a random sketch and a
learned sketch. Our theorem is as follows.
Theorem D.4. Let ϵ ∈ (0, 0.09) be a constant and S1 a learned Count-Sketch matrix. Suppose that A
is of full rank. There is an algorithm whose output is a solution x̂ which, with probability at least 0.98,
                                           Z2 (S1 )
satisfies that ∥A(x̂ − x∗ )∥2 ≤ O min Z             , ϵ ∥Ax∗ ∥2 , where x∗ = arg minx∈C ∥Ax − b∥2 is

                                            1 (S1 )

the least-squares solution. Furthermore, the algorithm runs in O(nnz(A) log( 1ϵ ) + poly( dϵ )) time.


                                                   20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 6 Solver for (D.2)
 1: S1 ← learned sketch, S2 ← random sketch with Θ(d2 /ϵ2 ) rows
 2: (Ẑi,1 , Ẑi,2 ) ← E STIMATE(Si , A), i = 1, 2
 3: i∗ ← arg mini=1,2 (Ẑi,2 /Ẑi,1 )
 4: x̂ ← solution of (D.2) with S = Si∗
 5: return x̂
 6: function E STIMATE(S, A)
 7: T ← sparse (1 ± η)-subspace embedding matrix for d-dimensional subspaces
 8: (Q, R) ← QR(T A)
 9: Ẑ1 ← σmin (SAR−1 )
10: Ẑ2 ← (1 ± η)-approximation to (SAR−1 )⊤ (SAR−1 ) − I op
11: return (Ẑ1 , Ẑ2 )


Consider the minimization problem

                                            1      2     ⊤
                                  min         ∥SAx∥2 − ⟨A y, x⟩ ,                               (D.2)
                                  x∈C       2
which is used as a subroutine for the IHS (cf. (2.2)). We note that in this subroutine if we let
x ← x − xi−1 , b ← b − Axi−1 , C ← C − xi−1 , we would get the guarantee of the i-th iteration of
the original IHS. To analyze the performance of the learned sketch, we define the following quantities
(corresponding exactly to the unconstrained case in (Pilanci & Wainwright, 2016))
                                                                    2
                                 Z1 (S) =           inf         ∥Sv∥2 ,
                                              v∈colsp(A)∩Sn−1

                          Z2 (S) =            sup         u, (S ⊤ S − In )v .
                                     u,v∈colsp(A)∩Sn−1

When S is a (1 + ϵ)-subspace embedding of colsp(A), we have Z1 (S) ≥ 1 − ϵ and Z2 (S) ≤ 2ϵ.
For a general sketching matrix S, the following is the approximation guarantee of Ẑ1 and Ẑ2 , which
are estimates of Z1 (S) and Z2 (S), respectively. The main idea is that AR−1 is well-conditioned,
where R is as calculated in Algorithm 6.
Lemma D.5. Suppose that η ∈ (0, 13 ) is a small constant, A is of full rank and S has poly(d/η)
rows. The function E STIMATE(S, A) returns in O((nnz(A) log η1 + poly( ηd )) time Ẑ1 , Ẑ2 which with
probability at least 0.99 satisfy that Z1+η
                                         1 (S)
                                               ≤ Ẑ1 ≤ Z1−η
                                                         1 (S)      Z2 (S)
                                                               and (1+η)                 Z2 (S)
                                                                         2 − 3η ≤ Ẑ2 ≤ (1−η)2 + 3η.


Proof. Suppose that AR−1 = U W , where U ∈ Rn×d has orthonormal columns, which form an
orthonormal basis of the column space of A. Since T is a subspace embedding of the column space
of A with probability 0.99, it holds for all x ∈ Rd that
                         1                                    1
                             T AR−1 x 2 ≤ AR−1 x 2 ≤               T AR−1 x 2 .
                       1+η                                  1−η
Since
                                    T AR−1 x 2 = ∥Qx∥2 = ∥x∥2
and
                                 ∥W x∥2 = ∥U W x∥2 = AR−1 x 2                             (D.3)
we have that
                            1                          1
                                 ∥x∥2 ≤ ∥W x∥2 ≤           ∥x∥2 , x ∈ Rd .                (D.4)
                           1+η                       1−η
It is easy to see that
                                                              ∥SU W y∥2
                            Z1 (S) = min ∥SU x∥2 = min                  ,
                                      x∈Sd−1             y̸=0   ∥W y∥2
and thus,
                                ∥SU W y∥2                           ∥SU W y∥2
                     min(1 − η)               ≤ Z1 (S) ≤ min(1 + η)            .
                      y̸=0         ∥y∥2                  y̸=0          ∥y∥2

                                                    21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recall that SU W = SAR−1 . We see that
                     (1 − η)σmin (SAR−1 ) ≤ Z1 (S) ≤ (1 + η)σmin (SAR−1 ).

By definition,
                                    Z2 (S) = U T (S ⊤ S − In )U op .
It follows from (D.4) that
   (1 − η)2 W T U T (S T S − In )U W op ≤ Z2 (S) ≤ (1 + η)2 W T U T (S T S − In )U W op .
and from (D.4), (D.3) and Lemma 5.36 of Vershynin (2012) that
                                     (AR−1 )⊤ (AR−1 ) − I op ≤ 3η.
Since
                   W T U T (S T S − In )U W op = (AR−1 )⊤ (S T S − In )AR−1 op
and
                      (AR−1 )⊤ S T SAR−1 − I op − (AR−1 )⊤ (AR−1 ) − I op
                  ≤ (AR−1 )⊤ (S T S − In )AR−1 op
                  ≤ (AR−1 )⊤ S T SAR−1 − I op + (AR−1 )⊤ (AR−1 ) − I op ,
it follows that
                           (1 − η)2 (SAR−1 )⊤ SAR−1 − I op − 3(1 − η)2 η
                       ≤ Z2 (S)
                       ≤ (1 + η)2 (SAR−1 )⊤ SAR−1 − I op + 3(1 + η)2 η.

We have so far proved the correctness of the approximation and we next analyze the runtime below.
Since S and T are sparse, computing SA and T A takes O(nnz(A)) time. The QR decomposition
of T A, which is a matrix of size poly(d/η) × d, can be computed in poly(d/η) time. The matrix
SAR−1 can be computed in poly(d) time. Since it has size poly(d/η) × d, its smallest singular
value can be computed in poly(d/η) time. To approximate Z2 (S), we can use the power method to
estimate (SAR−1 )T SAR−1 − I op up to a (1 ± η)-factor in O((nnz(A) + poly(d/η)) log(1/η))
time.

Now we are ready to prove Theorem D.4.

Proof of Theorem D.4. In Lemma D.5, we have with probability at least 0.99 that
                                 1
                     Ẑ2       (1+ϵ)2 Z2 (S) − 3ϵ    1 − ϵ Z2 (S) 3ϵ(1 − ϵ)
                           ≥        1             ≥                 −        .
                     Ẑ1           1−ϵ Z 1 (S)      (1 + ϵ)2 Z1 (S)   Z1 (S)
and similarly,
                                 1
                     Ẑ2       (1−ϵ)2 Z2 (S) + 3ϵ    1 + ϵ Z2 (S) 3ϵ(1 + ϵ)
                           ≤        1             ≤                 +        .
                     Ẑ1           1+ϵ Z1 (S)
                                                    (1 − ϵ)2 Z1 (S)   Z1 (S)
Note that since S2 is an ϵ-subspace embedding with probability at least 0.99, we have that Z1 (S2 ) ≥
1 − ϵ and Z2 (S2 )/Z1 (S2 ) ≤ 2.2ϵ. Consider Z1 (S1 ).
First, we consider the case where Z1 (S1 ) < 1/2. Observe that Z2 (S) ≥ 1 − Z1 (S). We have in
this case Zb1,2 /Zb1,1 > 1/5 ≥ 2.2ϵ ≥ Z2 (S2 )/Z1 (S2 ). In this case our algorithm will choose S2
correctly.
Next, assume that Z1 (S1 ) ≥ 1/2. Now we have with probability at least 0.98 that
                             Z2 (Si )        Zbi,2            Z2 (Si )
                  (1 − 3ϵ)            − 3ϵ ≤       ≤ (1 + 4ϵ)          + 4ϵ,   i = 1, 2.
                             Z1 (Si )        Zbi,1            Z1 (Si )

                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Therefore, when Z2 (S1 )/Z1 (S1 ) ≤ c1 Z2 (S2 )/Z1 (S2 ) for some small absolute constant c1 > 0, we
will have Z      b1,1 < Zb2,2 /Zb2,1 , and our algorithm will choose S1 correctly. If Z2 (S1 )/Z1 (S1 ) ≥
           b1,2 /Z
C1 ϵ for some absolute constant C1 > 0, our algorithm will choose S2 correctly. In the remaining
case, both ratios Z2 (S2 )/Z1 (S2 ) and Z2 (S1 )/Z1 (S1 ) are at most max{C2 , 3}ϵ, and the guarantee
of the theorem holds automatically.
The correctness of our claim then follows from Proposition 1 of Pilanci & Wainwright (2016), together
with the fact that S2 is a random subspace embedding. The runtime follows from Lemma D.5 and
Theorem 2.2 of Cormode & Dickens (2019).

E     S KETCH L EARNING : O MITTED P ROOFS
E.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 5.1

We need the following lemmas for the ridge leverage score sampling in (Cohen et al., 2017).
                                                                2                     P
Lemma E.1 ((Cohen et al., 2017, Lemma 4)). Let λ = ∥A − Ak ∥F /k. Then we have i τi (A) ≤
2k.
                                                                           2
Lemma E.2 ((Cohen et al., 2017, Theorem 7)). Let λ = ∥A − AP           k ∥F /k and τ̃i ≥ τi (A) be an
overestimate to the i-th ridge leverage score of A. Let pi = τ̃i / i τ̃i . If C is a matrix that is
constructed by sampling t = O((log k + log(1/δ)
                                                     P
                                               ϵ  ) · i τ̃i ) rows of A, each set to ai with probability
pi , then with probability at least 1 − δ we have
                                                         2                      2
                               min            ∥A − X∥F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥A − Ak ∥F .
                     rank-k X:row(X)⊆row(C)


Recall that the sketch monotonicity for low-rank approximation says that concatenating two sketching
matrices S1 and S2 will not increase the error compared to the single sketch matrix S1 or S2 , Now
matter how S1 and S2 are constructed. (see Section D.1 and Section 4 in (Indyk et al., 2019))

Proof. We first consider the first condition. From the condition that τi (B) ≥ β1 τi (A) we know that if
we sample m = O(β · (k log k + k/ϵ)) rows according to τi (A). The actual probability that the i-th
row of B gets sampled is
                1 − (1 − τi (A))m = O(m · τi (A)) = O ((k log k + k/ϵ) · τi (B)) .
      P
From i τi (B) ≤ 2k and Lemma E.2 (recall the sketch monotonicity property for LRA), we have
that with probability at least 9/10, S2 is a matrix such that
                                                             2                      2
                               min              ∥B − X∥F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥B − Bk ∥F .
                    rank-k X:row(X)⊆row(S2 B)

Hence, since S = [ SS12 ], from the the sketch monotonicity property for LRA we have that
                                                         2                      2
                              min             ∥B − X∥F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥B − Bk ∥F .
                    rank-k X:row(X)⊆row(SB)

Now we consider the second condition. Suppose that {Xi }i≤m and {Yi }i≤m are a sequence of
m = O(k log k + k/ϵ) samples from [n] according to the sampling probability distribution p and q,
where pi = Pτiτ(A)     and qi = Pτiτ(B)     . Let S be the set of index i such that Xi ̸= Yi . From the
               i i (A)              i i (B)
property of the total variation distance, we get that
                                     Pr [Xi ̸= Yi ] ≤ dtv (p, q) = β ,
and                                          X
                                  E[|S|] =        Pr [Xi ̸= Yi ] ≤ βm.
                                              i

From Markov’s inequality we get that with probability at least 1 − 1.1β, |S| ≤ 1/(1.1β) · βm = 10
                                                                                               11 m.
Let T be the set of index i such that Xi = Yi . We have that with probability at least 1 − 1.1β,
|T | ≥ m − 10
           11 m = Ω(k log k + k/ϵ). Because that {Yi }i∈T is i.i.d samples according to q and the


                                                    23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


actual sample we take is {Xi }i∈T . From Lemma E.2 we get that with probability at least 9/10, the
row space of BT satisfies
                                                                   2                        2
                               min                  ∥B − X∥F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥B − Bk ∥F .
                     rank-k X:row(X)⊆row(BT )

Similarly, from the the sketch monotonicity property we have that with probability at least 0.9 − 1.1β
                                                                   2                        2
                               min                  ∥B − X∥F ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥B − Bk ∥F .
                     rank-k X:row(X)⊆row(SB)


E.2   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 6.1

First we prove the following lemma.
Lemma E.3. Let δ ∈ (0, 1/m]. It holds with probability at least 1 − δ that
                                                            2           2           2
                                        sup     ∥Sx∥2 − ∥x∥2 ≤ ϵ ∥x∥2 ,
                                 x∈colsp(A)

provided that
                    m ≳ ϵ−2 ((d + log m) min{log2 (d/ϵ), log2 m} + d log(1/δ)),
                  1 ≳ ϵ−2 ν((log m) min{log2 (d/ϵ), log2 m} + log(1/δ)) log(1/δ).

Proof. We shall adapt the proof of Theorem 5 in (Bourgain et al., 2015) to our setting. Let T
                                                                                          2
denote the unit sphere in colsp(A) and set the sparsity parameter s = 1. Observe that ∥Sx∥2 =
     2           2
∥xI ∥2 + ∥SxI c ∥2 , and so it suffices to show that
                                     n                          o
                                                2          2
                                  Pr ∥S ′ xI c ∥2 − ∥xI c ∥2 > ϵ ≤ δ

for x ∈ T . We make the following definition, as in (2.6) of (Bourgain et al., 2015):
                                                    m X
                                                    X
                                        Aδ,x :=                  δij xj ei ⊗ ej ,
                                                    i=1 j∈I c

                                                        2               2
and thus, S ′ xI c = Aδ,x σ. Also by E ∥S ′ xI c ∥2 = ∥xI c ∥2 , one has
                                    2               2                        2              2
                     sup ∥S ′ xI c ∥2 − ∥xI c ∥2 = sup ∥Aδ,x σ∥2 − E ∥Aδ,x σ∥2 .                 (E.1)
                    x∈T                                     x∈T

Now, in (2.7) of (Bourgain et al., 2015) we instead define a semi-norm
                                                               1/2
                                                   X
                                  ∥x∥δ = max           δij x2j  .
                                               1≤i≤m
                                                                j∈I c

Then (2.8) continues to hold, and (2.9) as well as (2.10) continue to hold if the supremum in the
left-hand side is replaced with the left-hand side of (E.1). At the beginning of Theorem 5, we define
U (i) to be U , but each row j ∈ I c is multiplied by δij and each row j ∈ I is zeroed out. Then we
have in the first step of (4.5) that
                                              d                     2
                                 X            X                                     2
                                        δij         gk ⟨fk , ej ⟩       ≤ U (i) g       ,
                                                                                    2
                                j∈I c         k=1


    √ of equality. One can verify that the rest of (4.5) goes through. It remains true that ∥·∥δ ≤
instead
(1/ s) ∥·∥2 , and thus (4.6) holds. One can verify
                                               Pn that the
                                                        Prest of the proof of Theorem 5 in (Bourgain
et al., 2015) continues to hold if we replace j=1 with j∈I c and max1≤j≤n with maxj∈I c , noting
that                          X                 2   s X                   s
                            E       δij ∥PE ej ∥2 =        ⟨PE ej , ej ⟩ ≤ d
                                  c
                                                    m    c
                                                                          m
                              j∈I                                j∈I


                                                            24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


and
                                                         X                             1
                                E(U (i) )∗ U (i) =                 (E δij )uj u∗j ⪯      .
                                                                                       m
                                                         j∈I c

Thus, the symmetrization inequalities on

                            X                     2
                                                                           X
                                    δij ∥PE ej ∥2               and               δij uj u∗j
                            j∈I c                                         j∈I c
                                                      Lp
                                                       δ                                       Lp
                                                                                                δ

                                                                                                2
continue to hold. The result then follows, observing that maxj∈I c ∥PE ej ∥ ≤ ν.


The subspace embedding guarantee now follows as a corollary.
Theorem 6.1. Let ν = ϵ/d. Suppose that m = Ω((d/ϵ2 )(polylog(1/ϵ) + log(1/δ))), δ ∈ (0, 1/m)
and d = Ω((1/ϵ) polylog(1/ϵ) log2 (1/δ)). Then, there exists a distribution on S with m + |I| rows
such that              n                                              o
                                                                2         2               2
                         Pr ∀x ∈ colsp(A), ∥Sx∥2 − ∥x∥2 > ϵ ∥x∥2 ≤ δ.


Proof. One can verify that the two conditions in Lemma E.3 are satisfied if

                                        d           d       1
                                 m ≳ 2 polylog( ) + log         ,
                                       ϵ            ϵ       δ

                                 1        1            d        1
                             d≳       log      polylog( ) + log      .
                                  ϵ       δ            ϵ        δ
The last condition is satisfied if

                                         1              2 1                  1
                                      d≳          log               polylog     .
                                         ϵ                 δ                 ϵ

E.3    P ROOF OF L EMMA 6.2

Proof. On the one hand, since Q = SAR is an orthogonal matrix, we have

                                       ∥x∥2 = ∥Qx∥2 = ∥SARx∥2 .                                           (E.2)

On the other hand, the assumption implies that
                                                                                      2
                                     (ARx)T (ARx) − xT x 2 ≤ ϵ ∥x∥2 ,

that is,
                                              2                      2                    2
                               (1 − ϵ) ∥x∥2 ≤ ∥ARx∥2 ≤ (1 + ϵ) ∥x∥2 .                                     (E.3)
Combining both (E.2) and (E.3) leads to
  √                                      √
      1 − ϵ ∥SARx∥2 ≤ ∥ARx∥2 ≤               1 + ϵ ∥SARx∥2 ,
                                                                                                    ∀x ∈ Rd .

Equivalently, it can be written as
                      1                            1
                     √     ∥SAy∥2 ≤ ∥Ay∥2 ≤ √           ∥SAy∥2 , ∀y ∈ Rd .
                     1+ϵ                          1−ϵ
                                                √                    √
The claimed
       √
            result follows from the fact that 1/ 1 + ϵ ≥ 1 − ϵ and 1/ 1 − ϵ ≤ 1 + ϵ whenever
ϵ ∈ (0, 5−1
         2 ].


                                                               25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F    L OCATION O PTIMIZATION IN C OUNT S KETCH : G REEDY S EARCH

While the position optimization idea is simple, one particularly interesting aspect is that it is provably
better than a random placement in some scenarios (Theorem. F.1). Specifically, it is provably
beneficial for LRA when inputs follow the spiked covariance model or Zipfian distributions, which
are common for real data.
Spiked covariance model. Every matrix A ∈ Rn×d from the distribution Asp (s, ℓ) has s < k
“heavy” rows Ar1 , · · · , Ars of norm ℓ > 1. The indices of the heavy rows can be arbitrary, but must
be the same for all members of Asp (s, ℓ) and are unknown to the algorithm. The remaining (“light”)
rows have unit norm. In other words, let R = {r1 , . . . , rs }. For all rows Ai , i ∈ [n], Ai = ℓ · vi if
i ∈ R and Ai = vi otherwise, where vi is a uniformly random unit vector.
Zipfian on squared row norms. Every A ∈ Rn×d ∼ Azipf has rows which are uniformly random
and orthogonal. Each A has 2i+1 rows of squared norm n2 /22i for i ∈ [1, . . . , O(log(n))]. We also
assume that each row has the same squared norm for all members of Azipf .
Theorem F.1. Consider a matrix A from either the spiked covariance model or a Zipfian distribution.
Let SL denote a CountSketch constructed by Algorithm 3 that optimizes the positions of the non-zero
values with respect to A. Let SC denote a CountSketch matrix. Then there is a fixed η > 0 such that,
                                  2                                               2
minrank-k X∈rowsp(SL A) ∥X − A∥F ≤ (1 − η) minrank-k X∈rowsp(SC A) ∥X − A∥F
Remark F.2. Note that the above theorem implicitly provides an upper bound on the generalization
error of the greedy placement method on the two distributions that we considered in this paper. More
precisely, for each of these two distributions, if Π is learned via our greedy approach over a set of
sampled training matrices, the solution returned by the sketching algorithm using Π over any (test)
                                                                                                   2
matrix A sampled from the distribution has error at most (1 − η) minrank-k X∈rowsp(SC A) ∥X − A∥F .

A key structural property of the matrices from these two distributions that is crucial in our analysis is
the ϵ-almost orthogonality of their rows (i.e., (normalized) pairwise inner products are at most ϵ).
Hence, we can find a QR-factorization of the matrix of such vectors where the upper diagonal matrix
R has diagonal entries close to 1 and entries above the diagonal are close to 0.
To state our result, we first provide an interpretation of the location optimization task as a selection
of hash function for the rows of A. Note that left-multiplying A by CountSketch S ∈ Rm×n is
equivalent to hashing the rows of A to m bins with coefficients in {±1}. The greedy algorithm
proceeds through the rows of A (in some order) and decides which bin to hash to, denoting this by
adding an entry to S. The intuition is that our greedy approach separates heavy-norm rows (which
are important “directions” in the row space) into different bins.
Proof Sketch of Theorem F.1 The first step is to observe that in the greedy algorithm, when rows are
examined according to a non-decreasing order of squared norms, the algorithm will isolate rows into
their singleton bins until all bins are filled. In particular, this means that the heavy norm rows will all
be isolated—e.g., for the spiked covariance model, Lemma F.8 presents the formal statement.
Next, we show that none of the rows left to be processed (all light rows) will be assigned to the same
bin as a heavy row. The main proof idea is to compare the cost of “colliding” with a heavy row to the
cost of “avoiding” the heavy rows. This is the main place we use the properties of the aforementioned
distributions and the fact that each heavy row is already mapped to a singleton bin. Overall, we show
that at the end of the algorithm no light row will be assigned to the bins that contain heavy rows—the
formal statement and proof for the spiked covariance model is in Lemma F.12.
Finally, we can interpret the randomized construction of CountSketch as a “balls and bins” experiment.
In particular, considering the heavy rows, we compute the expected number of bins (i.e., rows in
SC A) that contain a heavy row. Note that the expected number of rows in SC A that do not contain
                                          s
any heavy row is k · (1 − k1 )s ≥ k · e− k−1 . Hence, the number of rows in SC A that contain a heavy
                                 s                               s
row of A is at most k(1 − e− k−1 ). Thus, at least s − k(1 − e− k−1 ) heavy rows are not mapped to an
isolated bin (i.e., they collide with some other heavy rows). Then, it is straightforward to show that
the squared loss of the solution corresponding to SC is larger than the squared loss of the solution
corresponding to SL , the CountSketch constructed by Algorithm 3—please see Lemma F.14 for the
formal statement of its proof.


                                                    26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Preliminaries and notation. Left-multiplying A by a CountSketch S ∈ Rm×n is equivalent to
hashing the rows of A to m bins with coefficients in {±1}. The greedy algorithm proceeds through
the rows of A (in some order) and decides which bin to hash to, which we can think of as adding an
entry to S. We will denote the bins by bi and their summed contents by wi .

F.1    S PIKED COVARIANCE MODEL WITH SPARSE LEFT SINGULAR VECTORS .

To recap, every matrix A ∈ Rn×d from the distribution Asp (s, ℓ) has s < k “heavy” rows
(Ar1 , · · · , Ars ) of norm ℓ > 1. The indices of the heavy rows can be arbitrary, but must be
the same for all members of the distribution and are unknown to the algorithm. The remaining rows
(called “light” rows) have unit norm.
In other words: let R = {r1 , . . . , rs }. For all rows Ai , i ∈ [n]:

                                                    ℓ · vi if i ∈ R
                                          Ai =
                                                    vi     o.w.
where vi is a uniformly random unit vector.
We also assume that Sr , Sg ∈ Rk×n and that the greedy algorithm proceeds in a non-increasing row
norm order.

Proof sketch. First, we show that the greedy algorithm using a non-increasing row norm ordering
will isolate heavy rows (i.e., each is alone in a bin). Then, we conclude by showing that this yields a
better k-rank approximation error when d is sufficiently large compared to n.
We begin with some preliminary observations that will be of use later.
It is well-known that a set of uniformly random vectors is ϵ-almost orthogonal (i.e., the magnitudes
of their pairwise inner products are at most ϵ).
                                         d
Observation F.3. Let v1 , · · · , vn ∈ Rq  be a set of random unit vectors. Then with probability
                                                    log n
1 − 1/ poly(n), we have |⟨vi , vj ⟩| ≤ 2              d , ∀ i < j ≤ n.
               q
We define ϵ = 2 logd n .
Observation F.4. Let u1 , · · · , ut be a set of vectors such that for each pair of i < j ≤ t,
              u
|⟨ ∥uuii ∥ , ∥ujj ∥ ⟩| ≤ ϵ, and gi , · · · , gj ∈ {−1, 1}. Then,
      t                                              t             2       t
      X          2
                          X                          X                     X         2
                                                                                               X
            ∥ui ∥2 − 2ϵ           ∥ui ∥2 ∥uj ∥2 ≤          gi ui       ≤         ∥ui ∥2 + 2ϵ           ∥ui ∥2 ∥uj ∥2   (F.1)
      i=1                 i<j≤t                      i=1           2       i=1                 i<j≤t


Next, a straightforward consequence of ϵ-almost orthogonality is that we can find a QR-factorization
of the matrix of such vectors where R (an upper diagonal matrix) has diagonal entries close to 1 and
entries above the diagonal are close to 0.
Lemma F.5. Let u1 , · · · , ut ∈ Rd be a set of unit vectors such that for any pair of i < j ≤ t,
|⟨ui , uj ⟩| ≤ ϵ where ϵ = O(t−2 ). There exists an orthonormal basis e1 , · · · , et for the subspace
                                                         Pi                               Pi−1
spanned by u1 , · · · , ut such that for each i ≤ t, ui = j=1 ai,j ej where a2i,i ≥ 1 − j=1 j 2 · ϵ2
and for each j < i, a2i,j ≤ j 2 ϵ2 .

Proof. We follow the Gram-Schmidt process to construct the orthonormal basis e1 , · · · , et of the
space spanned by u1 , · · · , ut , by first setting e1 = u1 and then processing u2 , · · · , ut , one-by-one.
The proof is by induction. We show that once the first j vectors u1 , · · · , uj are processed, the
statement of the lemma holds for these vectors. Note that the base case of the induction trivially holds
as u1 = e1 . Next, suppose that the induction hypothesis holds for the first ℓ vectors u1 , · · · , uℓ .
Claim F.6. For each j ≤ ℓ, a2ℓ+1,j ≤ j 2 ϵ2 .

Proof. The proof of the claim is itself by induction. Note that, for j = 1 and using the fact that
|⟨u1 , uℓ+1 ⟩| ≤ ϵ, the statement holds and a2ℓ+1,1 ≤ ϵ2 . Next, suppose that the statement holds for all


                                                             27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


j ≤ i < ℓ. Then using that |⟨ui+1 , uℓ+1 ⟩| ≤ ϵ,
                                          i
                                          X
  |aℓ+1,i+1 | ≤ (|⟨uℓ+1 , ui+1 | +                |aℓ+1,j | · |ai+1,j |)/|ai+1,i+1 |
                                          j=1
                         i
                         X
                ≤ (ϵ +          j 2 ϵ2 )/|ai+1,i+1 |          ▷ by the induction hypothesis on aℓ+1,j for j ≤ i
                         j=1
                         i
                         X                        i
                                                  X
                ≤ (ϵ +          j 2 ϵ2 )/(1 −           j 2 · ϵ2 )1/2      ▷ by the induction hypothesis on ai+1,i+1
                         j=1                      j=1
                         i
                         X                        i
                                                  X                                   i
                                                                                      X
                ≤ (ϵ +          j 2 ϵ2 ) · (1 −           j 2 · ϵ2 )1/2 · (1 + 2 ·            j 2 ϵ2 )
                         j=1                      j=1                                 j=1
                         i
                         X                              i
                                                        X
                ≤ (ϵ +          j 2 ϵ2 ) · (1 + 2 ·           j 2 ϵ2 )
                         j=1                            j=1
                        i
                        X                          i
                                                   X
                ≤ ϵ((         j 2 ϵ) · (1 + 4ϵ ·           j 2 ϵ) + 1)
                        j=1                        j=1

                ≤ ϵ(i + 1)         ▷ by ϵ = O(t−2 )


                          2                                   Pℓ
Finally, since ∥uℓ+1 ∥2 = 1, a2ℓ+1,ℓ+1 ≥ 1 −                      j=1 j
                                                                          2 2
                                                                           ϵ .

Corollary F.7. Suppose that ϵ = O(t−2 ). There exists an orthonormal basis e1 , · · · , et for the space
                                                                                               Pi
spanned by the randomly picked vectors v1 , · · · , vt , of unit norm, so that for each i, vi = j=1 ai,j ej
                 Pi−1
where a2i,i ≥ 1 − j=1 j 2 · ϵ2 and for each j < i, a2i,j ≤ j 2 · ϵ2 .

Proof. The proof follows from Lemma F.5 and the fact that the set of vectors v1 , · · · , vt is ϵ-almost
orthogonal (by Observation F.3).

The first main step is to show that the greedy algorithm (with non-increasing row norm ordering) will
isolate rows into their own bins until all bins are filled. In particular, this means that the heavy rows
(the first to be processed) will all be isolated.
We note that because we set rank(SA) = k, the k-rank approximation cost is the simplified
                          2                                                        2
expression AV V ⊤ − A F , where U ΣV ⊤ = SA, rather than [AV ]k V ⊤ − A F . This is just the
projection cost onto row(SA). Also, we observe that minimizing this projection cost is the same as
maximizing the sum of squared projection coefficients:
                              2            X                                                  2
        arg min A − AV V ⊤ F = arg min           ∥Ai − (⟨Ai , v1 ⟩v1 + . . . + ⟨Ai , vk ⟩vk )∥2
            S                                         S
                                                              i∈[n]
                                                               X                2
                                                                                    X
                                           = arg min                 (∥Ai ∥2 −              ⟨Ai , vj ⟩2 )
                                                      S
                                                              i∈[n]                 j∈[k]
                                                                X X
                                           = arg max                         ⟨Ai , vj ⟩2
                                                      S
                                                               i∈[n] j∈[k]


In the following sections, we will prove that our greedy algorithm makes certain choices by showing
that these choices maximize the sum of squared projection coefficients.
Lemma F.8. For any matrix A or batch of matrices A, at the end of iteration k, the learned
CountSketch matrix S maps each row to an isolated bin. In particular, heavy rows are mapped to
isolated bins.


                                                                   28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. For any iteration i ≤ k, we consider the choice of assigning Ai to an empty bin versus an
occupied bin. Without loss of generality, let this occupied bin be bi−1 , which already contains Ai−1 .
We consider the difference in cost for empty versus occupied. We will do this cost comparison for Aj
with j ≤ i − 2, j ≥ i + 1, and finally, j ∈ {i − 1, i}.
First, wePrlet {e1 , . . . , ei } be an orthonormal basis for {A1 , . . . , Ai } such that for each r ≤ i,
Ar =        j=1 ar,j ej where ar,r > 0. This exists by Lemma F.5. Let {e1 , . . . , ei−2 , e} be an
orthonormal basis for {A1 , . . . , Ai+2 , Ai−1 ± Ai }. Now, e = c0 ei−1 + c1 ei for some c0 , c1 because
(Ai−1 ± Ai ) − proj{e1 ,...,ei−2 } (Ai−1 ± Ai ) ∈ span(ei−1 , ei ). We note that c20 + c21 = 1 because we
let e be a unit vector. We can find c0 , c1 to be:
                              ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1                                ai,i
              c0 = q                                , c1 = q
                                              2   2
                        (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 ) + ai,i             (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i,i

1. j ≤ i − 2: The cost is zero for both cases because Aj ∈ span({e1 , . . . , ei−2 }).
2. j ≥ i + 1: We compare the rewards (sum of squared projection coefficients) and find that
   {e1 , . . . , ei−2 , e} is no better than {e1 , . . . , ei }.
           ⟨Aj , e⟩2 = (c0 ⟨Aj , ei−1 ⟩ + c1 ⟨Aj , ei ⟩)2
                      ≤ (c21 + c20 )(⟨Aj , ei−1 ⟩2 + ⟨Aj , ei ⟩2 )        ▷ Cauchy-Schwarz inequality
                                      2             2
                      = ⟨Aj , ei−1 ⟩ + ⟨Aj , ei ⟩

3. j ∈ {i − 1, i}: We compute the sum of squared projection coefficients of Ai−1 and Ai onto e:
                1
   (                              ) · (a2i−1,i−1 (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + (ai,i−1 (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 ) + ai,i ai,i )2 )
    (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i,i
                    1
    =(                                 ) · ((ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 (a2i−1,i−1 + a2i,i−1 )
       (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i,i
       + a4i,i + 2ai,i−1 a2i,i (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 ))                                                          (F.2)
   On the other hand, the sum of squared projection coefficients of Ai−1 and Ai onto ei−1 ∪ ei is:
                              (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i,i
                          (                                 ) · (a2i−1,i−1 + a2i,i−1 + a2i,i )                (F.3)
                              (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i,i
   Hence, the difference between the sum of squared projections of Ai−1 and Ai onto e and ei−1 ∪ ei
   is ((F.3) - (F.2))
                  a2i,i ((ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i−1,i−1 + a2i,i−1 − 2ai,i−1 (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 ))
                                              (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i,i
                         2a2i,i a2i−1,i−1
              =                                 >0
                  (ai−1,i−1 + ai,i−1 )2 + a2i,i

Thus, we find that {e1 , . . . , ei } is a strictly better basis than {e1 , . . . , ei−2 , e}. This means the greedy
algorithm will choose to place Ai in an empty bin.

Next, we show that none of the rows left to be processed (all light rows) will be assigned to the same
bin as a heavy row. The main proof idea is to compare the cost of “colliding” with a heavy row to
the cost of “avoiding” the heavy rows. Specifically, we compare the decrease (before and after bin
assignment of a light row) in sum of squared projection coefficients, lower-bounding it in the former
case and upper-bounding it in the latter.
We introduce some results that will be used in Lemma F.12.
Claim F.9. Let Ak+r , r ∈ [1, . . . , n − k] be a light row not yet processed by the greedy algorithm. Let
{e1 , . . . , ek } be the Gram-Schmidt basis for the current {w1 , . . . , wk }. Let β = O(n−1 k −3 ) upper
bound the inner products of the normalized Ak+r , w1 , . . . , wk . Then, for any bin i, ⟨ei , Ak+r ⟩2 ≤
β 2 · k2 .


                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. This is a straightforward application of Lemma F.5. From that, we have ⟨Ak+r , ei ⟩2 ≤ i2 β 2 ,
for i ∈ [1, . . . , k], which means ⟨Ak+r , ei ⟩2 ≤ k 2 β 2 .
Claim F.10. Let Ak+r be a light row that has been processed by the greedy algorithm. Let
{e1 , . . . , ek } be the Gram-Schmidt basis for the current {w1 , . . . , wk }. If Ak+r is assigned to
bin bk−1 (w.l.o.g.), the squared projection coefficient of Ak+r onto ei , i ̸= k − 1 is at most 4β 2 · k 2 ,
where β = O(n−1 k −3 ) upper bounds the inner products of normalized Ak+r , w1 , · · · , wk .

Proof. Without loss of generality, it suffices to bound the squared projection of Ak+r onto the
direction of wk that is orthogonal to the subspace spanned by w1 , · · · , wk−1 . Let e1 , · · · , ek be
an orthonormal basis of w1 , · · · , wk guaranteed by Lemma F.5. Next, we expand the orthonormal
                                                                                         Pk+1
basis to include ek+1 so that we can write the normalized vector of Ak+r as vk+r = j=1 bj ej .
By a similar approach to the proof of Lemma F.5, for each j ≤ k − 2, bj ≤ β 2 j 2 . Next, since
|⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| ≤ β,
                                           k−1
              1                            X
|bk | ≤                · (|⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| +     |bj · ⟨wk , ej ⟩|)
          |⟨wk , ek ⟩|                     j=1
                                            k−2
                     1                      X
    ≤q           Pk−1              · (β +         β 2 · j 2 + (k − 1) · β)   ▷ |bk−1 | ≤ 1
       1 − j=1           β2 · j2
                               j=1
          Pk−2 2 2
     β + j=1 β · j
    =q    Pk−1           + (k − 1)β
       1 − j=1 β 2 · j 2
                     β 2 (k − 1)2
    ≤ 2(k − 1)β − q     Pk−1                                                 ▷ similar to the proof of Lemma F.5
                   1 − j=1 β 2 · j 2
    < 2β · k
                                                                                     2
Hence, the squared projection of Ak+r onto ek is at most 4β 2 · k 2 · ∥Ak+r ∥2 . We assumed ∥Ak+r ∥ =
1; hence, the squared projection of Ak+r onto ek is at most 4β 2 · k 2 .
Claim F.11. We assume   P that the absolute values of the inner products of vectors in v1 , · · · , vn are
at most ϵ < 1/(n2 Ai ∈b ∥Ai ∥2 ) and the absolute values of the inner products of the normalized
                                                     3
vectors of w1 , · · · , wk are at most β = O(n−3 k − 2 ). Suppose that bin b contains the row Ak+r . Then,
the squared projection of Ak+r onto the direction of w orthogonal to span({w1 , · · · , wk } \ {w}) is
           ∥Ak+r ∥42                          ∥Ak+r ∥42
at most     ∥w∥22
                     + O(n−2 ) and is at least ∥w∥ 2    − O(n−2 ).
                                                   2



Proof. Without loss of generality, we assume that Ak+r is mapped to bk ; w = wk . First, we provide
an upper and a lower bound for |⟨vk+r , wk ⟩| where for each i ≤ k, we let wi = ∥wwii∥ denote the
                                                                                                      2

normalized vector of wi . Recall that by definition vk+r = ∥AAk+r
                                                               k+r
                                                                  ∥2 .
                                      P
                         ∥Ak+r ∥2 + Ai ∈bk ϵ ∥Ai ∥2
        |⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| ≤
                                     ∥wk ∥2
                               ∥Ak+r ∥2 + n−2                                                   n−2
                           ≤                                                 ▷ by ϵ < P
                                  ∥wk ∥2                                                     Ai ∈bk ∥Ai ∥2
                               ∥Ak+r ∥2
                           ≤            + n−2                                ▷ ∥wk ∥2 ≥ 1                    (F.4)
                                ∥wk ∥2

                                             P
                               ∥Ak+r ∥2 −         Ai ∈bk ∥Ai ∥2 · ϵ
           |⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| ≥
                                             ∥wk ∥2
                               ∥Ak+r ∥2
                           ≥            − n−2                                                                (F.5)
                                ∥wk ∥2


                                                           30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Now, let {e1 , · · · , ek } be an orthonormal basis for the subspace spanned by {w1 , · · · , wk } guaranteed
by Lemma F.5. Next, we expand the orthonormal basis to include ek+1 so that we can write
         Pk+1
vk+r = j=1 bj ej . By a similar approach to the proof of Lemma F.5, we can show that for each
j ≤ k − 1, b2j ≤ β 2 j 2 . Moreover,

                                         k−1
            1                            X
|bk | ≤              · (|⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| +     |bj · ⟨wk , ej ⟩|)
        |⟨wk , ek ⟩|                     j=1
                                                                k−1
                        1                                       X
       ≤q            Pk−1                 · (|⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| +         β2 · j2)       ▷ by Lemma F.5
              1−       j=1   β2 · j2                            j=1

                                                                  k−1
                        1                        −2     ∥Ak+r ∥2 X 2 2
       ≤q                                 · (n        +         +     β ·j )         ▷ by (F.4)
              1−
                     Pk−1        2 · j2                  ∥wk ∥2
                       j=1 β                                      j=1

                             1                         ∥Ak+r ∥2
       <β·k+ p                            · (n−2 +              )                    ▷ similar to the proof of Lemma F.5
                        1 − β 2 k3                      ∥wk ∥2
                                                 ∥Ak+r ∥2                                                  3
       ≤ O(n−2 ) + (1 + O(n−2 ))                                                     ▷ by β = O(n−3 k − 2 )
                                                  ∥wk ∥2
           ∥Ak+r ∥2                                                                      ∥Ak+r ∥2
       ≤            + O(n−2 )                                                        ▷            ≤1
            ∥wk ∥2                                                                        ∥wk ∥2

and,

                                                      k−1
                         1                            X
           |bk | ≥                · (|⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| −     |bj · ⟨wk , ej ⟩|)
                     |⟨wk , ek ⟩|                     j=1
                                           k−1
                                           X
               ≥ |⟨wk , vk+r ⟩| −                 β2 · j2                                ▷ since |⟨wk , ek ⟩| ≤ 1
                                           j=1
                                      k−1
                     ∥Ak+r ∥2         X
               ≥              − n−2 −     β2 · j2                                        ▷ by (F.5)
                      ∥wk ∥2          j=1
                     ∥Ak+r ∥2                                                                                  3
               ≥              − O(n−2 )                                                  ▷ by β = O(n−3 k − 2 )
                      ∥wk ∥2

                                                                           ∥Ak+r ∥42                         ∥A     ∥4
Hence, the squared projection of Ak+r onto ek is at most                    ∥wk ∥22
                                                                                     +O(n−2 ) and is at least ∥wk+r∥2 2 −
                                                                                                                 k 2

O(n−2 ).


Now, we show that at the end of the algorithm no light row will be assigned to the bins that contain
heavy rows.
Lemma F.12. We assume that the absolute values of the inner products of vectors in v1 , · · · , vn
                             5
are at most ϵ < min{n−2 k − 3 , (n Ai ∈w ∥Ai ∥2 )−1 }. At iteration k + r, the greedy algorithm will
                                  P
assign the light row Ak+r to a bin that does not contain a heavy row.


Proof. The proof is by induction. Lemma F.8 implies that no light row has been mapped to a bin that
contains a heavy row for the first k iterations. Next, we assume that this holds for the first k + r − 1
iterations and show that is also must hold for the (k + r)-th iteration.
To this end, we compare the sum of squared projection coefficients when Ak+r avoids and collides
with a heavy row.


                                                                    31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


First, we upper bound β = maxi̸=j≤k |⟨wi , wj ⟩|/(∥wi ∥2 ∥wj ∥2 ). Let ci and cj respectively denote
the number of rows assigned to bi and bj .
                           |⟨wi , wj ⟩|               ci · cj · ϵ
           β = max                         ≤p               q                        ▷ Observation F.4
                 i̸=j≤k ∥wi ∥2 ∥wj ∥
                                          2     ci − 2ϵc2i · cj − 2ϵc2j
                                                 √
                                            ≤ 16ϵ ci cj                               ▷ϵ ≤ n−2 k −5/3
                                                      5
                                           ≤ n−1 k − 3                                ▷ϵ ≤ n−2 k −5/3

1. If Ak+r is assigned to a bin that contains c light rows and no heavy rows. In this case, the
projection loss of the heavy rows A1 , · · · , As onto row(SA) remains zero. Thus, we only need
to bound the change in the sum of squared projection coefficients of the light rows before and
after iteration k + r. Without loss of generality, let wk denote the bin that contains Ak+r . Since
Sk−1 = span({w1 , · · · , wk−1 }) has not changed, we only need to bound the difference in cost
between projecting onto the component of wk − Ak+r orthogonal to Sk−1 and the component of wk
orthogonal to Sk−1 , respectively denoted as ek and ek .

1. By Claim F.9, for the light rows that are not yet processed (i.e., Aj for j > k + r), the squared
   projection of each onto ek is at most β 2 k 2 . Hence, the total decrease in the squared projection is
   at most (n − k − r) · β 2 k 2 .
2. By Claim F.10, for the processed light rows that are not mapped to the last bin, the squared
   projection of each onto ek is at most 4β 2 k 2 . Hence, the total decrease in the squared projection
   cost is at most (r − 1) · 4β 2 k 2 .
                                                                                                              4
3. For each row Ai ̸= Ak+r that is mapped to the last bin, by Claim F.11 and the fact ∥Ai ∥2 =
           2                                                                     ∥Ai ∥22
   ∥Ai ∥2 = 1, the squared projection of Ai onto ek is at most ∥w −A                       2   + O(n−2 ) and the
                                                                                 k    k+r ∥2
                                                          ∥Ai ∥22
   squared projection of Ai onto ek is at least           ∥wk ∥22
                                                                    − O(n−2 ).
                                                                                                       ∥A     ∥2
   Moreover, the squared projection of Ak+r onto ek compared to ek increases by at least ( ∥wk+r∥2 2 −
                                                                                                            k 2
                                   ∥Ak+r ∥22
   O(n−2 )) − O(n−2 ) =             ∥wk ∥22
                                             − O(n−2 ).

   Hence, the total squared projection of the rows in the bin bk decreases by at least:
                                      2                 X ∥Ai ∥2
               X               ∥Ai ∥2        −2                   2       −2
       (                             2 + O(n    )) − (            2 − O(n    ))
       Ai ∈wk /{Ar+k   }
                         ∥wk − A    ∥
                                 r+k 2                 Ai ∈wk
                                                              ∥w ∥
                                                                k 2
                       2                          2
       ∥wk − Ar+k ∥2 + O(n−1 )                ∥wk ∥2 − O(n−1 )
   ≤                           2          −               2          + O(n−1 )                  ▷ by Observation F.4
               ∥wk − Ar+k ∥2                       ∥wk ∥2
   ≤O(n−1 )

Hence, summing up the bounds in items 1 to 3 above, the total decrease in the sum of squared
projection coefficients is at most O(n−1 ).

2. If Ak+r is assigned to a bin that contains a heavy row. Without loss of generality, we can
assume that Ak+r is mapped to bk that contains the heavy row As . In this case, the distance of heavy
rows A1 , · · · , As−1 onto the space spanned by the rows of SA is zero. Next, we bound the amount
of change in the squared distance of As and light rows onto the space spanned by the rows of SA.
Note that the (k − 1)-dimensional space corresponding to w1 , · · · , wk−1 has not changed. Hence, we
only need to bound the decrease in the projection distance of Ak+r onto ek compared to ek (where
ek , ek are defined similarly as in the last part).

1. For the light rows other than Ak+r , the squared projection of each onto ek is at most β 2 k 2 . Hence,
   the total increase in the squared projection of light rows onto ek is at most (n−k)·β 2 k 2 = O(n−1 ).


                                                              32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2. By Claim F.11, the sum of squared projections of As and Ak+r onto ek decreases by at least
                                    4                   4
                2        ∥As ∥2 + ∥Ak+r ∥2
           ∥As ∥2 − (                               2       + O(n−1 ))
                              ∥As + Ar+k ∥2
                                            4                    4
                2               ∥As ∥2 + ∥Ak+r ∥2
       ≥ ∥As ∥2 − (                 2                   2                 + O(n−1 ))          ▷ by Observation F.4
                         ∥As ∥2 + ∥Ar+k ∥2 − n−O(1)
                     2          2                       2             2
           ∥Ar+k ∥2 (∥As ∥2 − ∥Ak+r ∥2 ) − ∥As ∥2 · O(n−1 )
       ≥                        2                   2                             − O(n−1 )
                         ∥As ∥2 + ∥Ar+k ∥2 − O(n−1 )
                     2          2                       2             2
           ∥Ar+k ∥2 (∥As ∥2 − ∥Ak+r ∥2 ) − ∥As ∥2 · O(n−1 )
       ≥                                    2                 2                   − O(n−1 )
                                ∥As ∥2 + ∥Ar+k ∥2
                     2          2                       2
           ∥Ar+k ∥2 (∥As ∥2 − ∥Ak+r ∥2 )
       ≥                  2                     2           − O(n−1 )
                   ∥As ∥2 + ∥Ar+k ∥2
                     2                          2            2
           ∥Ar+k ∥2 (1 − (∥Ak+r ∥2 / ∥As ∥2 ))
       ≥                                2           2                − O(n−1 )
                   1 + (∥Ar+k ∥2 / ∥As ∥2 )
                     2          ∥Ak+r ∥2                                                          1 − ϵ2
       ≥ ∥Ar+k ∥2 (1 −                   ) − O(n−1 )                                          ▷          ≥1−ϵ
                                 ∥As ∥2                                                           1 + ϵ2

Hence, in this case, the total decrease in the squared projection is at least
               2          ∥Ak+r ∥2                   ∥Ak+r ∥2
     ∥Ar+k ∥2 (1 −                 ) − O(n−1 ) = 1 −          ) − O(n−1 )                         ▷ ∥Ar+k ∥2 = 1
                           ∥As ∥2                      ∥As ∥2
                                                        √                                                    √
                                               = 1 − (1/ ℓ) − O(n−1 )                             ▷ ∥As ∥2 = ℓ
Thus, for a sufficiently large value of ℓ, the greedy algorithm will assign Ak+r to a bin that only
contains light rows. This completes the inductive proof and in particular implies that at the end of the
algorithm, heavy rows are assigned to isolated bins.
Corollary F.13. The approximation loss of the best rank-k approximate solution in the rowspace
Sg A for A ∼ Asp (s, ℓ), where A ∈ Rn×d for d = Ω(n4 k 4 log n) and Sg is the CountSketch
constructed by the greedy algorithm with non-increasing order, is at most n − s.

Proof. First, we need to show that P the absolute values of the inner products of vectors in v1 , · · · , vn
are at most ϵ < min{n−2 k −2 , (n Ai ∈w ∥Ai ∥2 )−1 } so that we can apply Lemma F.12. To show
                                            q
this, note that by Observation F.3, ϵ ≤ 2 logd n ≤ n−2 k −2 since d = Ω(n4 k 4 log n). The proof
follows from Lemma F.8 and Lemma F.12. Since all heavy rows are mapped to isolated bins, the
projection loss of the light rows is at most n − s.

Next, we bound the Frobenius norm error of the best rank-k-approximation solution constructed by
the standard CountSketch with a randomly chosen sparsity pattern.
Lemma F.14. Let s = αk where 0.7 < α < 1. The expected squared loss of the best rank-k
approximate solution in the rowspace Sr A for A ∈ Rn×d ∼ Asp (s, ℓ), where d = Ω(n6 ℓ2 ) and Sr
                                                                                      ℓk
is the sparsity pattern of CountSketch is chosen uniformly at random, is at least n + 4e − (1 + α)k −
  −O(1)
n       .

Proof. We can interpret the randomized construction of the CountSketch as a “balls and bins”
experiment. In particular, considering the heavy rows, we compute the expected number of bins (i.e.,
rows in Sr A) that contain a heavy row. Note that the expected number of rows in Sr A that do not
                                                   s
contain any heavy row is k · (1 − k1 )s ≥ k · e− k−1 . Hence, the number of rows in Sr A that contain
                                           s                                 s
a heavy row of A is at most k(1 − e− k−1 ). Thus, at least s − k(1 − e− k−1 ) heavy rows are not
mapped to an isolated bin (i.e., they collide with some other heavy rows). Then, it is straightforward
to show that the squared loss of each such row is at least ℓ − n−O(1) .


                                                                       33
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Claim F.15. Suppose that heavy rows Ar1 , · · · , Arc are mapped to the same bin via a CountSketch
S. Then, the total squared distances of these rows from the subspace spanned by SA is at least
(c − 1)ℓ − O(n−1 ).


Proof. Let b denote the bin that contains the rows Ar1 , · · · , Arc and suppose that it has c′ light rows
as well. Note that by Claim F.10 and Claim F.11, the squared projection of each row Ari onto the
subspace spanned by the k bins is at most
                         4
                ∥Ahi ∥2
                     2       + O(n−1 )
                ∥w∥2
                             ℓ2
            ≤                        √          + O(n−1 )
              cℓ + c′ − 2ϵ(c2 ℓ + cc′ ℓ + c′2 )
                   ℓ2
            ≤              + n−O(1)                                       ▷ by ϵ ≤ n−3 ℓ−1
              cℓ − n−O(1)
                ℓ2
            ≤ 2 2 · (cℓ + O(n−1 ) + O(n−1 )
              c ℓ
              ℓ
            ≤ + O(n−1 )
              c

Hence, the total squared loss of these c heavy rows is at least cℓ − c · ( cℓ + O(n−1 )) ≥ (c − 1)ℓ −
O(n−1 ).


Thus, the expected total squared loss of the heavy rows is at least:
                                 s
         ℓ · (s − k(1 − e− k−1 )) − s · n−O(1)
       ≥ℓ · k(α − 1 + e−α ) − ℓα − n−O(1)                ▷ s = α · (k − 1) where 0.7 < α < 1
        ℓk
       ≥ − ℓ − n−O(1)                                    ▷ α ≥ 0.7
        2e
        ℓk
       ≥ − O(n−1 )                                       ▷ assuming k > 4e
        4e

Next, we compute a lower bound on the expected squared loss of the light rows. Note that Claim F.10
and Claim F.11 imply that when a light row collides with other rows, its contribution to the total
squared loss (note that the loss accounts for the amount it decreases from the squared projection of
the other rows in the bin as well) is at least 1 − O(n−1 ). Hence, the expected total squared loss of
the light rows is at least:

                         (n − s − k)(1 − O(n−1 )) ≥ (n − (1 + α) · k) − O(n−1 )

Hence, the expected squared loss of a CountSketch whose sparsity is picked at random is at least

            ℓk                                          ℓk
               − O(n−1 ) + n − (1 + α)k − O(n−1 ) ≥ n +    − (1 + α)k − O(n−1 )
            4e                                          4e



Corollary F.16. Let s = α(k − 1) where 0.7 < α < 1 and let ℓ ≥ (4e+1)n      αk    . Let Sg be the
CountSketch whose sparsity pattern is learned over a training set drawn from Asp via the greedy
approach. Let Sr be a CountSketch whose sparsity pattern is picked uniformly at random. Then, for
an n × d matrix A ∼ Asp where d = Ω(n6 ℓ2 ), the expected loss of the best rank-k approximation
of A returned by Sr is worse than the approximation loss of the best rank-k approximation of A
returned by Sg by at least a constant factor.


                                                   34
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof.

                                  2          ℓk
E[          min           ∥X − A∥F ] ≥ n +      − (1 + α)k − n−O(1)                         ▷ Lemma F.14
Sr rank-k X∈rowsp(Sr A)                      4e
                                                                                                  (4e + 1)n
                                      ≥ (1 + 1/α)(n − s)                                    ▷ℓ≥
                                                                                                      αk
                                                                                        2
                                      = (1 + 1/α)            min           ∥X − A∥F         ▷ Corollary F.13
                                                    rank-k X∈rowsp(Sg A)


F.2   Z IPFIAN ON SQUARED ROW NORMS .

Each matrix A ∈ Rn×d ∼ Azipf has rows which are uniformly random and orthogonal. Each A has
2i+1 rows of squared norm n2 /22i for i ∈ [1, . . . , O(log(n))]. We also assume that each row has the
same squared norm for all members of Azipf .
In this section, the s rows with largest norm are called the heavy rows and the remaining are the light
rows. For convenience, we number the heavy rows 1, . . . , s; however, the heavy rows can appear at
any indices, as long as any row of a given index has the same norm for all members of Azipf . Also,
                                                      Phs i+1
we assume that s ≤ k/2 and, for simplicity, s = i=1          2    for some hs ∈ Z+ . That means the
                                              2 2hs
minimum squared norm of a heavy row is n /2           and the maximum squared norm of a light row is
n2 /22hs +2 .
The analysis of the greedy algorithm ordered by non-increasing row norms on this family of matrices
is similar to our analysis for the spiked covariance model. Here we analyze the case in which rows
are orthogonal. By continuity, if the rows are close enough to being orthogonal, all decisions made
by the greedy algorithm will be the same.
As a first step, by Lemma F.8, at the end of iteration k the first k rows are assigned to different bins.
Then, via a similar inductive proof, we show that none of the light rows are mapped to a bin that
contains one of the top s heavy rows.
Lemma F.17. At each iteration k + r, the greedy algorithm picks the position of the non-zero value
in the (k + r)-th column of the CountSketch matrix S so that the light row Ak+r is mapped to a bin
that does not contain any of top s heavy rows.



Proof. We prove the statement by induction. The base case r = 0 trivially holds as the first k rows
are assigned to distinct bins. Next we assume that in none of the first k + r − 1 iterations a light row
is assigned to a bin that contains a heavy row. Now, we consider the following cases:


1. If Ak+r is assigned to a bin that only contains light rows. Without loss of generality we can
assume that Ak+r is assigned to bk . Since the vectors are orthogonal, we only need to bound the
difference in the projection of Ak+r and the light rows that are assigned to bk onto the direction of
wk before and after adding Ak+r to bk . In this case, the total squared loss corresponding to rows in
bk and Ak+r before and after adding Ak+1 are respectively
                                                                   P            4
                                                                    Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2
                                           2
                                                  X          2
         before adding Ak+r to bk : ∥Ak+r ∥2 +          ∥Aj ∥2 − ( P            2)
                                                 Aj ∈bk             Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2
                                                                             4      P           4
                                           2
                                                  X            2
                                                                       ∥Ak+r ∥2 +   Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2
          after adding Ak+r to bk : ∥Ak+r ∥2 +            ∥Aj ∥2 − (         2      P           2)
                                                 Aj ∈bk
                                                                       ∥Ak+r ∥2 +   Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2



                                                   35
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, the amount of increase in the squared loss is
 P             4              4    P              4           2 P             4          4 P             2
   Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2      ∥Ak+r ∥2 + Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2         ∥Ak+r ∥2 · Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2 − ∥Ak+r ∥2 · Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2
(P             2) − (         2    P              2) =     P             2         2  P             2
   Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2      ∥Ak+r ∥2 + Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2            ( Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2 )(∥Ak+r ∥2 + Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2 )
                                                                              P                4
                                                                                   Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2            2
                                                                              P                2   − ∥Ak+r ∥2
                                                                        2          Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2
                                                             = ∥Ak+r ∥2 · P            2          2
                                                                           Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2 + ∥Ak+r ∥2
                                                                          P            2          2
                                                                      2    Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2 − ∥Ak+r ∥2
                                                             ≤ ∥Ak+r ∥2 · P            2          2
                                                                           Aj ∈bk ∥Aj ∥2 + ∥Ak+r ∥2
                                                                                                                (F.6)

2. If Ak+r is assigned to a bin that contains a heavy row. Without loss of generality and by the
induction hypothesis, we assume that Ak+r is assigned to a bin b that only contains a heavy row Aj .
Since the rows are orthogonal, we only need to bound the difference in the projection of Ak+r and
Aj In this case, the total squared loss corresponding to Aj and Ak+r before and after adding Ak+1
to b are respectively
                                                         2
              before adding Ak+r to bk : ∥Ak+r ∥2
                                                                                       4               4
                                                         2          2       ∥Ak+r ∥2 + ∥Aj ∥2
                after adding Ak+r to bk : ∥Ak+r ∥2 + ∥Aj ∥2 − (                        2               2)
                                                                            ∥Ak+r ∥2 + ∥Aj ∥2
Thus, the amount of increase in the squared loss is
                                        4          4                           2                   2
                       2       ∥Ak+r ∥2 + ∥Aj ∥2             2 ∥Aj ∥2 − ∥Ak+r ∥2
                  ∥Aj ∥2 − (         2        2 ) = ∥Ak+r ∥2 ·      2          2            (F.7)
                              ∥Ak+r ∥2 + ∥Aj ∥2                ∥Aj ∥2 + ∥Ak+r ∥2
                                        2   P              2
Then (F.7) is larger than (F.6) if ∥Aj ∥2 ≥ Ai ∈bk ∥Ai ∥2 . Next, we show that at every inductive
iteration, there exists a bin b which only contains light rows and whose squared norm is smaller
                                                                                    Phm i+1
than the squared norm of any heavy row. For each value m, define hm so that m = i=1       2    =
2hm +2 − 2.
                                                                2
Recall that all heavy rows have squared norm at least 2n2hs . There must be a bin b that only contains
light rows and has squared norm at most
                                                     2i+1 n2
                                          Phn
           2
                 X        2      n2         i=hk +1 22i
       ∥w∥2 =        ∥Ai ∥2 ≤ 2(h +1) +
                              2 s              k−s
               Ai ∈b

                                   n2              2n2
                            ≤               +
                                22(hs +1)       2hk (k − s)
                                   n2            n2
                            ≤               +                                ▷ s ≤ k/2 and k > 2hk +1
                                22(hs +1)       22hk
                                  n2
                            ≤                                                ▷ hk ≥ hs + 1
                              22hs +1
                                   2
                            < ∥As ∥2
Hence, the greedy algorithm will map Ak+r to a bin that only contains light rows.
Corollary F.18. The squared loss of the best rank-k approximate solution in the rowspace of Sg A
for A ∈ Rn×d ∼ Azipf where A ∈ Rn×d and Sg is the CountSketch constructed by the greedy
                                              2
algorithm with non-increasing order, is < 2hnk −2 .

                                                            Phn                  2
Proof. At the end of iteration k, the total squared loss is i=h   k +1
                                                                       2i+1 · 2n2i . After that, in each
                                                                          2
iteration k + r, by (F.6), the squared loss increases by at most ∥Ak+r ∥2 . Hence, the total squared


                                                       36
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


loss in the solution returned by Sg is at most
                                  hn                    hn
                                  X  2i+1 n2        2
                                                        X  1    4n2    n2
                          2(                 ) = 4n   ·       <     =
                                       22i                 2i   2hk   2hk −2
                               i=hk +1                      i=hk +1


Next, we bound the squared loss of the best rank-k-approximate solution constructed by the standard
CountSketch with a randomly chosen sparsity pattern.
Observation F.19. Let us assume that the orthogonal rows Ar1 , · · · , Arc are mapped to the same bin
                           2          2
and for each i ≤ c, ∥Ar1 ∥2 ≥ ∥Ari ∥2 . Then, the total squared loss of Ar1 , · · · , Arc after projecting
                                         2                 2
onto Ar1 ± · · · ± Arc is at least ∥Ar2 ∥2 + · · · + ∥Arc ∥2 .

Proof. Note that since Ar1 , · · · , Arc are orthogonal, for each i ≤ c, the squared projection of Ari
                                   4 Pc             2
onto Ar1 ± · · · ± Arc is ∥Ari ∥2 / j=1 Arj 2 . Hence, the sum of squared projection coefficients
of Ar1 , · · · , Arc onto Ar1 ± · · · ± Arc is
                                         Pc           4
                                            j=1 Arj 2           2
                                         Pc           2 ≤ ∥Ar1 ∥2
                                            j=1  A rj 2

Hence, the total projection loss of Ar1 , · · · , Arc onto Ar1 ± · · · ± Arc is at least
                               c
                               X              2       2                 2                   2
                                     Arj 2 − ∥Ar1 ∥2 = ∥Ar2 ∥2 + · · · + ∥Arc ∥2 .
                               j=1


In particular, Observation F.19 implies that whenever two rows are mapped into the same bin, the
squared norm of the row with smaller norm fully contributes to the total squared loss of the solution.
Lemma F.20. For k > 210 − 2, the expected squared loss of the best rank-k approximate solution in
the rowspace of Sr A for An×d ∼ Azipf , where Sr is the sparsity pattern of a CountSketch chosen
                                        2
uniformly at random, is at least 1.095n
                                  2hk −2
                                          .

Proof. In light of Observation F.19, we need to compute the expected number of collisions between
rows with “large” norm. We can interpret the randomized construction of the CountSketch as a “balls
and bins” experiment.
                                                                                                    2
For each 0 ≤ j ≤ hk , let Aj denote the set of rows with squared norm 22(hnk −j) and let A>j =
                                              hk −j+1
                                                                    Phk                Phk −j i
                                                                            2hk −i+1 = i=1
S
  j<i≤hk Ai . Note that for each j, |Aj | = 2         and |A>j | = i=j+1                      2 =
   hk −j                                     hk +1
2(2      − 1). Moreover, note that k = 2(2         − 1). Next, for a row Ar in Aj (0 ≤ j < hk ), we
compute the probability that at least one row in A>j collides with Ar .
                                                                            1 |A>j |
Pr[at least one row in A>j collides with Ar ] = (1 − (1 −                     )      )
                                                                            k
                                                                        |A>j |
                                                     ≥ (1 − e−            k      )
                                                                         hk −j
                                                                      − 2h +1 −1
                                                     = (1 − e           2 k    −1    )
                                                                         −j−2                       2hk −j − 1
                                                     ≥ (1 − e−2                  )        ▷ since              > 2−j−2
                                                                                                    2hk +1 − 1
Hence, by Observation F.19, the contribution of rows in Aj to the total squared loss is at least
             −j−2                    n2                   −j−2           n2                     −j−2          n2
   (1 − e−2         ) · |Aj | ·               =(1 − e−2          )·                  = (1 − e−2         )·            · 2j−1
                                  22(hk −j)                           2hk −j−1                               2hk −2


                                                           37
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Thus, the contribution of rows with “large” squared norm, i.e., A>0 , to the total squared loss is at
least4
                          hk
                  n2      X                   −j−2                  n2
                 h −2
                      ·         2j−1 · (1 − e−2      ) ≥ 1.095 ·                ▷for hk > 8
                2 k       j=0
                                                                   2hk −2



Corollary F.21. Let Sg be a CountSketch whose sparsity pattern is learned over a training set
drawn from Asp via the greedy approach. Let Sr be a CountSketch whose sparsity pattern is picked
uniformly at random. Then, for an n × d matrix A ∼ Azipf , for a sufficiently large value of k, the
expected loss of the best rank-k approximation of A returned by Sr is worse than the approximation
loss of the best rank-k approximation of A returned by Sg by at least a constant factor.

Proof. The proof follows from Lemma F.20 and Corollary F.18.
Remark F.22. We have provided evidence that the greedy algorithm that examines the rows of A
according to a non-increasing order of their norms (i.e., greedy with non-increasing order) results in
a better rank-k solution compared to the CountSketch whose sparsity pattern is chosen at random.
However, still other implementations of the greedy algorithm may result in a better solution compared
to the greedy algorithm with non-increasing order. To give an example, in the following simple
instance the greedy algorithm that checks the rows of A in a random order (i.e., greedy with random
order) achieves a rank-k solution whose cost is a constant factor better than the solution returned by
the greedy with non-increasing order.
Let A be a matrix with four orthogonal rows u, u, v, w where ∥u∥2 = 1 and ∥v∥2 = ∥w∥2 = 1 + ϵ
and suppose that the goal is to compute a rank-2 approximation of A. Note that in the greedy
algorithm with non-decreasing order, v and w will be assigned to different bins and by a simple
calculation we can show that the copies of u also will be assigned to different bins. Hence, the
                                                         (1+ϵ)2
squared loss in the computed rank-2 solution is 1 + 2+(1+ϵ)     2 . However, the optimal solution will

assign v and w to one bin and the two copies of u to the other bin which results in a squared loss of
(1 + ϵ)2 which is a constant factor smaller than the solution returned by the greedy algorithm with
non-increasing order for sufficiently small values of ϵ.
On the other hand, in the greedy algorithm with a random order, with a constant probability of ( 13 + 18 ),
the computed solution is the same as the optimal solution. Otherwise, the greedy algorithm with
random order returns the same solution as the greedy algorithm with a non-increasing order. Hence,
in expectation, the solution returned by the greedy with random order is better than the solution
returned by the greedy algorithm with non-increasing order by a constant factor.

G        E XPERIMENT D ETAILS
G.1       L OW-R ANK A PPROXIMATION

In this section, we describe the experimental parameters in our experiments. We first introduce some
parameters in Stage 2 of our approach proposed in Section 3.

          • bs: batch size, the number of training samples used in one iteration.
          • lr: learning rate of gradient descent.
          • iter: the number of iterations of gradient descent.

Table 7.1: Test errors for LRA (using Algorithm 2 with four sketches)
For a given m, the dimensions of the four sketches were: S ∈ Rm×n , R ∈ Rm×d , S2 ∈
R5m×n , R2 ∈ R5m×d .
Parameters of the algorithm: bs = 1, lr = 1.0, 10.0 for hyper and video respectively, num_it = 1000.
For our algorithm 4, we use the average of all training matrix as the input to the algorithm.
    4
        The numerical calculation is computed using WolframAlpha.


                                                        38
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 7.1: Test errors for LRA (using Algorithm 1 with one sketch)
Parameters of the algorithm: bs = 1, lr = 1.0, 10.0 for hyper and video respectively, num_it = 1000.
For our algorithm 4, we use the sum of all training matrix as the input to the algorithm.

G.2    S ECOND -O RDER O PTIMIZATION

As we state in Section 6, when we fix the positions of the non-zero entries (uniformly chosen in each
column or sampled according to the heavy leverage score distribution), we aim to optimize the values
by gradient descent, as mentioned in Section 3. Here the loss function is given in Section 6. In our
implementation, we use PyTorch (Paszke et al. (2019)), which can compute the gradient automatically
(here we can use torch.qr() and torch.svd() to define our loss function). For a more nuanced loss
function, which may be beneficial, one can use the package released in Agrawal et al. (2019), where
the authors studied the problem of computing the gradient of functions which involve the solution to
certain convex optimization problem.
As mentioned in Section 2, each column of the sketch matrix S has exactly one non-zero entry.
Hence, the i-th coordinate of p can be seen as the non-zero position of the i-th column of S. In
the implementation, to sample p randomly, we can sample a random integer in {1, . . . , m} for each
coordinate of p. For the heavy rows mentioned in Section 6, we can allocate positions 1, . . . , k to the
k heavy rows, and for the other rows, we randomly sample an integer in {k + 1, . . . , m}. We note
that once the vector p, which contains the information of the non-zero positions in each column of S,
is chosen, it will not be changed during the optimization process in Section 3.
Next, we introduce the parameters for our experiments:

       • bs: batch size, the number of training samples used in one iteration.
       • lr: learning rate of gradient descent.
       • iter: the number of iterations of gradient descent

In our experiments, we set bs = 20, iter = 1000 for all datasets. We set lr = 0.1 for the Electric
dataset.


                                                   39
