Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


DITTO: O FFLINE                            I MITATION                 L EARNING                 WITH
W ORLD M ODELS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                              A BSTRACT

         We propose DITTO, an offline imitation learning algorithm which uses world
         models and on-policy reinforcement learning to addresses the problem of covari-
         ate shift, without access to an oracle or any additional online interactions. We
         discuss how world models enable offline, on-policy imitation learning, and pro-
         pose a simple intrinsic reward defined in the world model latent space that induces
         imitation learning by reinforcement learning. Theoretically, we show that our for-
         mulation induces a divergence bound between expert and learner, in turn bounding
         the difference in reward. We test our method on difficult Atari environments from
         pixels alone, and achieve state-of-the-art performance in the offline setting.



1    I NTRODUCTION

Generating agents which can capably act in complex environments is challenging. In the most
difficult environments, hand-designed controllers are often insufficient and learning-based methods
must be used to achieve good performance. When we can exactly specify the goals and constraints
of the problem using a reward function, reinforcement learning (RL) offers an approach which has
been extremely successful at solving a range of complex tasks, such as the strategy games of Go
(Silver et al., 2016), Starcraft (Vinyals et al., 2019), and poker (Brown et al., 2020), and difficult real
world control problems like quadrupedal locomotion (Lee et al., 2020), datacenter cooling (Lazic
et al., 2018), and chip placement (Mirhoseini et al., 2020). RL lifts the human designer’s work from
explicitly designing a good policy, to designing a good reward function. However, this optimization
often results in policies that maximize reward in undesirable ways that their designers did not intend
(Lehman et al., 2018) - the so-called reward hacking phenomenon (Krakovna et al., 2020). To
combat this, practitioners spend substantial effort observing agent failure modes and tuning reward
functions with extra regularization terms and weighting hyperparameters to counteract undesirable
behaviors (Wang et al., 2022) (Peng et al., 2017).
Imitation learning (IL) offers an alternative approach to policy learning which bypasses reward spec-
ification by directly mimicking the behavior of an expert demonstrator. The simplest kind of IL,
behavior cloning (BC), trains an agent to predict an expert’s actions from observations, then acts on
these predictions at test time. This approach fails to account for the sequential nature of decision
problems, since decisions at the current step affect which states are seen later. The distribution of
states seen at test time will differ from those seen during training unless the expert training data cov-
ers the entire state space, and the agent makes no mistakes. This distribution mismatch, or covariate
shift, leads to a compounding error problem: initially small prediction errors lead to small changes
in state distribution, which lead to larger errors, and eventual departure from the training distribution
altogether (Pomerleau, 1989). Intuitively, the agent has not learned how to act under its own induced
distribution. This was formalized in the seminal work of Ross & Bagnell (2010), who gave a tight
regret bound on the difference in return achieved by expert and learner, which is quadratic in the
episode length for BC.
Follow-up work in Ross et al. (2011) showed that a linear bound on regret can be achieved if the
agent learns online in an interactive setting with the expert: Since the agent is trained under its
own distribution with expert corrections, there is no distribution mismatch at test-time. This works
well when online learning is safe and expert supervision can be scaled, but is untenable in many
real-world use-cases such as robotics, where online can be unsafe, time-consuming, or otherwise


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


infeasible. On the one hand, we want to generate data on-policy to avoid covariate shift, but on the
other hand, we may not be able to afford to learn online due to safety or other concerns.
Ha & Schmidhuber (2018) propose a two-stage approach to policy learning, where agents first learn
to predict the environment dynamics with a recurrent neural network called a “world model” (WM),
and then learn the policy inside the WM alone. This approach is desirable since it enables on-policy
learning offline, given the existence of the world model. Similar model-based learning methods
have recently achieved success in standard online RL settings (Hafner et al., 2021), and impressive
zero-shot transfer of policies trained solely in the WM to physical robots (Wu et al., 2022).
In this paper, we propose an imitation learning algorithm called Dream Imitation (DITTO), which
addresses the tension between offline and on-policy learning, by training an agent using on-policy
RL inside a learned world model. Specifically, we define a reward which measures divergence be-
tween the agent and expert demonstrations in the latent space of the world model, and show that
optimizing this reward with RL induces imitation on the expert. We discuss the relationship be-
tween our method and the imitation learning as divergence minimization framework (Ghasemipour
et al., 2019), and show that our method optimizes a similar bound without requiring adversarial train-
ing. We compare our method against behavior cloning and generative adversarial imitation learning
(GAIL, Ho & Ermon (2016)), which we adapt to the world model setting, and show that we achieve
better performance and sample efficiency in challenging Atari environments from pixels alone.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

       • We discuss how world models relieve the tension between offline and on-policy learning
         methods, which mitigates covariate shift from offline learning.
       • We demonstrate the first fully offline model-based imitation learning method that achieves
         strong performance on Atari from pixels, and show that our agent outperforms competitive
         baselines adapted to the offline setting.
       • We show how imitation learning can naturally be cast as a reinforcement learning problem
         in the latent space of learned world models, and propose a latent-matching intrinsic reward
         which compares favorably against commonly used adversarial and sparse formulations.

2     R ELATED W ORK

2.1   I MITATION BY R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING

Imitation learning algorithms can be classified according to the set of resources needed to produce a
good policy. Ross et al. (2011) give strong theoretical and empirical results in the online interactive
setting, which assumes that we can both learn while acting online in the real environment, and that
we can interactively query an expert policy to e.g. provide the learner with the optimal action in
the current state. Follow-up works have progressively relaxed the resource assumptions needed to
produce good policies. Sasaki & Yamashina (2021) show that the optimal policy can be recovered
with a modified form of BC when learning from imperfect demonstrations, given a constraint on
the expert sub-optimality bound. Brantley et al. (2020) study covariate shift in the online, non-
interactive setting, and demonstrate an approximately linear regret bound by jointly optimizing the
BC objective with a novel policy ensemble uncertainty cost, which encourages the learner to return
to and stay in the distribution of expert support. They achieve this by augmenting the BC objective
with the following uncertainty cost term:
                                                E                 E
                                             1 X               1 X
                      Varπ∼ΠE (π(a|s)) =           (πi (a|s) −       πj (a|s))2                    (1)
                                             E i=1             E j=1

This term measures the total variance of a policy ensemble ΠE = {π1 , ..., πE } trained on disjoint
subsets of the expert data.They optimize the combined BC plus uncertainty objective using standard
online RL algorithms, and show that this mitigates covariate shift.
Inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) can achieve improved performance over BC by first learning a
reward from the expert demonstrations for which the expert is optimal, then optimizing that reward
with on-policy reinforcement learning. This two-step process, which includes on-policy RL in the


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


second step, helps IRL methods mitigate covariate shift due to train and test distribution mismatches.
However, the learned reward function can fail to generalize outside of the distribution of expert states
which form its support.
A recent line of work treats IRL as divergence minimization: instead of directly copying the expert
actions, they minimize a divergence measure between expert and learner state distributions
                                          min D ρπ , ρE

                                                                                                (2)
                                              π
                             P∞
where ρπ (s, a) = (1 − γ) t=0 γ t P (st = s, at = a) is the discounted state-action distribution
induced by π, and D is a divergence measure between probability distributions. The popular GAIL
algorithm (Ho & Ermon, 2016) constructs a minimax game in the style of GANs (Goodfellow et al.,
2014) between the learner policy π, and a discriminator Dψ which learns to distinguish between
expert and learner state distributions
              max min E(s,a)∼ρE [− log Dψ (s, a)] + E(s,a)∼ρπ [− log (1 − Dψ (s, a))]                  (3)
                π   Dψ

This formulation minimizes the Jensen-Shannon divergence between the expert and learner policies,
and bounds the expected return difference between agent and expert. However, Wang et al. (2019)
point out that adversarial reward learning is inherently unstable since the discriminator is always
trained to penalize the learner state-action distribution, even if the learner has converged to the expert
policy. This finding is consistent with earlier work (Brock et al., 2019) which observed discriminator
overfitting, necessitating early stopping to prevent training collapse. Multiple works have reported
difficulty getting GAIL to work reliably in pixel-based observation environments (Brantley et al.,
2020) (Reddy et al., 2020).
To combat problems with adversarial training, Wang et al. (2019) and Reddy et al. (2020) consider
reducing IL to RL on an intrinsic reward
                                             1 if (s, a) ∈ DE

                                 r(s, a) =                                                    (4)
                                             0 otherwise

where DE is the expert dataset. While this sparse formulation is impractical e.g. in continuous action
settings, they show that a generalization of the intrinsic reward using support estimation by random
network distillation (Burda et al., 2019) results in stable learning that matches the performance
of GAIL without the need for adversarial training. Ciosek (2022) showed that this formulation
is equivalent to divergence minimization under the total variation distance, and produced a bound
on the difference in extrinsic reward achieved between the expert and a learner trained with this
approach.

2.2   O FFLINE L EARNING

Kumar et al. (2019) showed how naı̈ve application of Bellman backups in off-policy RL results
in incorrect, overly optimistic value estimation. These off-policy bootstrapping errors are further
compounded in the model-based setting, since states where either the learned dynamics or reward
functions generalize poorly will be found and incorrectly backed out by a naı̈ve Q-learner. This is
acceptable in the online setting, since areas of state space which the agent is overly-optimistic about
will tend to be visited, resulting in natural corrections to inaccuracies; but the offline setting does not
share this property. To counteract these problems, offline RL methods either constrain the learner
policy to stay on the expert distribution directly (Wu et al., 2019), or use pessimistic methods to
discourage value estimates from becoming too large out of distribution (Kumar et al., 2020) (Rigter
et al., 2022).

2.3   W ORLD M ODELS

World models have recently emerged as a promising approach to model-based learning. Ha &
Schmidhuber (2018) defined the prototypical two-part model: a variational autoencoder (VAE) is
trained to reconstruct observations from individual frames, while a recurrent state-space model
(RSSM) is trained to predict the VAE encoding of the next observation, given the current latent
state and action. World models can be used to train agents entirely inside the learned latent space,


                                                    3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


without the need for expensive decoding back to the observation space. Hafner et al. (2020) intro-
duced Dreamer, an RL agent which is trained purely in the latent space of the WM, and successfully
transfers to the true environment at test-time. Wu et al. (2022) showed that the same approach can
be used to simultaneously learn a model and agent policy to control a physical quadrupedal robot
online, without the control errors usually associated with transferring policies trained only in simu-
lation to a physical system (Hwangbo et al., 2019).
In this work, we propose the use of world models to address a number of common problems in imita-
tion learning. Intrinsic rewards which induce imitation learning, like those introduced in Reddy et al.
(2020) and Wang et al. (2019), can pose challenging online learning problems, since the rewards
are sparse or require tricky additional training procedures to work in high-dimensional observation
spaces. Similarly, approaches like GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016) and AIRL (Fu et al., 2018) require
adversarial on-policy training that is difficult to make work in practice. In contrast, our approach
remedies both the online learning and reward specification problems by performing safe offline pol-
icy learning solely inside the compact latent space of the world model, and uses a natural divergence
measure as reward: distance between learner and expert in the world model latent space. This pro-
vides a conceptually simple and dense reward signal for imitation by reinforcement learning, which
we find outperforms competitive approaches in data efficiency and asymptotic performance.

3     D REAM I MITATION
We study imitation learning in a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) with dis-
crete time-steps and actions, and high dimensional observations generated by an unknown environ-
ment. The POMDP M is composed of the tuple M = (S, A, X , R, T , U, γ), where s ∈ S is the
state space, a ∈ A is the action space, x ∈ X is the observation space, γ is the discount factor,
and r = R(s, a) is the reward function. The transition dynamics are Markovian, and given by
st+1 ∼ T (· | st , at ). The agent does not have access to the underlying states, and only receives
observations represented by xt ∼ U(· | s). The goal is to maximize the discounted sum of extrinsic
(environment) rewards E[Σt γ t rt ], which the agent does not have access to.
Training proceeds in two parts: we first learn a world model from recorded sequences of observa-
tions, then train an actor-critic agent to imitate the expert in the world model. The latent dynamics
of the world model define a fully observable Markov decision process (MDP), since the model states
ŝt are Markovian. Model-based rollouts always begin from an observation drawn from the expert
demonstrations, and continue for a fixed set of time steps H, the agent training horizon. The agent
is rewarded for matching the latent trajectory of the expert.

3.1   P RELIMINARIES

We show that bounding the learner-expert state distribution divergence in the world model also
bounds their return difference in the actual environment, and connect our method to the IL as di-
vergence minimization framework (Ghasemipour et al., 2019). Rafailov et al. (2021) showed that
for a learned dynamics model Tb whose total variation from the true transitions is bounded such that
DTV (T (s, a), Tb (s, a)) ≤ α ∀(s, a) ∈ S × A and Rmax = max(s,a) R(s, a) then
                                                  Rmax      Rmax
                    J (π E , M) − J (π, M) ≤ α           +        D TV    ρ E
                                                                              ,
                                                                            M M ρπ
                                                                                                 (5)
                                                (1 − γ)2 1 − γ                    c
                                              | {z } |                 {z           }
                                                learning error      adaptation error

where J (π, M) is the expected return of policy π in MDP M, and M       c is the “imagination MDP”
induced by the world model. This implies the difference between the expert return and the learner
return in the true environment is bounded by two terms, 1) a term proportional to the model ap-
proximation error α, which could in principle be reduced with more data, and 2) a model domain
adaptation error term, which captures the generalization error of a model trained under data from
one policy, and deployed under another. Rafailov et al. (2021) also show that bounding the diver-
gence between latent distributions upper bounds the true state distribution divergence. Formally,
given a latent representation of the transition history zt = q(x≤t , a<t ) and a belief distribution
P (st | x≤t , a<t ) = P (st | zt ), then if the policy conditions only on the latent representation zt
such that the belief distribution is independent of the current action P (st | zt , at ) = P (st | zt ),


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 1: The learner begins from random expert latent states during training, and generates on-
policy latent trajectories in the world model. The intrinsic reward 8 encourages the learner to recover
from its mistakes over multiple time steps to match the expert trajectory.


then the divergence between the latent state distribution of the expert and learner upper bounds the
divergence between their true state distribution:
      Df (ρπM (x, a) ∥ ρE                π           E                π           E
                        M (x, a)) ≤ Df (ρM (s, a) ∥ ρM (s, a)) ≤ Df (ρM (z, a) ∥ ρM (z, a))        (6)
Where Df is a generic f -divergence , e.g. KL or TV. This result, along with equation 5, suggests that
minimizing divergence in the model latent space is sufficient to bound the expected expert-learner
return difference.
Reward       To bound expert-learner state distribution divergences, prior approaches have focused
on sparse indicator function rewards (Ciosek, 2022), or adversarial reward learning (Ghasemipour
et al., 2019). We propose a new formulation, which rewards the agent for matching the expert
latent state-action pairs over an episode. In particular, for an arbitrary distance function d, agent
state-action latent ztπ , and a set of expert state-action latents DE :
                                   rtint (ztπ ) = 1 − min d(ztπ , z E )                            (7)
                                                       z E ∈DE


This function rewards matching the agent’s state-action pairs to the expert’s, as studied in Ciosek
(2022). The major difference is that we also smooth in the latent space, meaning an exact match isn’t
required for a reward. We show in appendix A how to make this relaxed reward compatible with the
theoretical results from Ciosek (2022). In particular, we prove that maximizing this reward bounds
the total variation in latent-state distributions between the expert and learner, as well as bounding
their extrinsic reward difference.
Intuitively, matching latent states between the learner and expert is easier than matching observa-
tions, since the representations learned from generative world model training should provide a much
richer signal of state similarity. In practice, the minimization over DE can be computationally ex-
pensive, so we modify the objective 7 to exactly match learner latent states to expert latents from the
same time-step, as shown in Figure 1. In particular, we randomly sample consecutive expert latents
  E
zt:t+H   from DE and unroll the agent from the same starting state in the world model, yielding a
                             π
sequence of agent latents zt:t+H   . Finally, we compute a reward at each step t as follows:

                                                                      ztE · ztπ
                       rtint (ztE , ztπ ) = 1 − d(ztE , ztπ ) =                                    (8)
                                                                  max(∥ztE ∥, ∥ztπ ∥)2
This formulation changes our method from distribution matching to mode seeking, since states fre-
quently visited by the expert will receive greater reward in expectation. We found that this modified
dot product reward empirically outperformed L2 and cosine-similarity metrics.

3.2   W ORLD M ODEL

Dataset      World model training can be performed using datasets generated by policies of any
quality, since the model only predicts transition dynamics. The transition dataset is composed of N
                                                                          ∥en ∥
episodes en of sequences of observations xt , actions at : D = {(xt , at )t=0   | n ∈ N }.
Model architecture We adapt the architecture proposed by Hafner et al. (2021), which is com-
posed of an image encoder, a recurrent state-space model (RSSM) which learns the transition dy-
namics, and a decoder which reconstructs observations from the compact latent states. The encoder


                                                      5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


uses a convolutional neural network (CNN) to produce representations, while the decoder is a trans-
posed CNN. The RSSM predicts a sequence of length T deterministic recurrent states (ht )Tt=0 , each
of which are used to parameterize two distributions over stochastic hidden states. The stochastic
posterior state zt is a function of the current observation xt and recurrent state ht , while the stochas-
tic prior state ẑt is trained to match the posterior without access to the current observation. The
current observation is reconstructed from the full model state, which is the concatenation of the
deterministic and stochastic states ŝt = (ht , zt ). The RSSM components are:
                             Model state:                    ŝt = (ht , zt )
                             Recurrent state:                ht = fϕ (ŝt−1 , at−1 )
                             Prior predictor:                ẑt ∼ pϕ (ẑt | ht )                      (9)
                             Posterior predictor:            zt ∼ qϕ (zt | ht , xt )
                             Image reconstruction:           x̂t ∼ pϕ (x̂t | ŝt )
All components are implemented as neural networks, with a combined parameter vector ϕ. Since
the prior model predicts the current model state using only the previous action and recurrent state,
without using the current observation, we can use it to learn behaviors without access to observa-
tions or decoding back into observation space. The prior and posterior models predict categorical
distributions which are optimized with straight-through gradient estimation (Bengio et al., 2013).
All components of the model are trained jointly with a modified ELBO objective:
                                  " T                                                                #
                                   X
      min Eqϕ (z1:T |a1:T ,x1:T )     − log pϕ (xt | ŝt ) + βDKL-B (qϕ (zt | ŝt ) ∥ pϕ (ẑt | ht ))  (10)
       ϕ
                                t=1

where DKL-B (q ∥ p) denotes KL balancing (Hafner et al., 2021), which is used to control the regu-
larization of prior and posterior towards each other with a parameter δ,
                    DKL-B (q ∥ p) = δ DKL (q ∥ sg(p)) +(1 − δ) DKL (sg(q) ∥ p)                        (11)
                                      |     {z      }          |     {z      }
                                          posterior regularizer              prior regularizer

and sg(·) is the stop gradient operator. The idea behind KL balancing is that the prior and poste-
rior should not be regularized at the same rate: the prior should update more quickly towards the
posterior, which encodes strictly more information.

3.3   AGENT

Agent architecture The agent is composed of a stochastic actor which samples actions from
a learned policy with parameter vector θ, and a deterministic critic which predicts the expected
discounted sum of future rewards the actor will achieve from the current state with parameter vector
ψ. Both the actor and critic condition only on the current model state ŝt , which is Markovian:
                                 Actor:     at ∼ πθ (at | ŝt )
                                                                                                      (12)
                                 Critic: vψ (ŝt ) ≈ Eπθ ,pϕ [ΣH    t
                                                               t=0 γ rt ]

We train the critic to regress the λ-target (Sutton & Barto, 2005)
                  Vtλ = rt + γ (1 − λ)vψ (ŝt+1 ) + λVt+1λ         λ

                                                               , Vt+H = vψ (ŝt+H )                   (13)
which lets us control the temporal-difference (TD) learning horizon with the hyperparameter λ.
Setting λ = 0 recovers 1-step TD learning, while λ = 1 recovers unbiased Monte Carlo returns, and
intermediate values represent an exponentially weighted sum of n-step returns. In practice we use
λ = 0.95. To train the critic, we regress the λ-target directly with the objective:
                                           "H−1                            #
                                            X
                                                 1                   λ   2
                               min Eπθ ,pϕ
                                ψ                2 (vψ (ŝt ) − sg(Vt ))                     (14)
                                               t=1

There is no loss on the last time step since the target equals the critic there. We follow Mnih et al.
(2015), who suggest using a copy of the critic which updates its weights slowly, called the target
network, to provide the value bootstrap targets.


                                                         6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The actor is trained to maximize the discounted sum of rewards predicted by the critic. We train the
actor to maximize the same λ-target as the critic, and add an entropy regularization term to encour-
age exploration and prevent policy collapse. We optimize the actor using REINFORCE gradients
(Williams, 2004) and subtract the critic value predictions from the λ-targets for variance reduction.
The full actor loss function is:
                                                                                            
                                H−1
                                 X
             L(θ) = Eπθ ,pϕ         − log πθ (at | ŝt )sg(Vtλ − vψ (ŝt )) − ηH(πθ (ŝt ))    (15)
                                                                                            
                                 t=1
                                     |                  {z                 }   |  {z       }
                                                   reinforce                 entropy regularizer


Algorithm Learning proceeds in two phases: First, we train the WM on all available demonstra-
tion data using the ELBO objective 10. Next, we encode expert demonstrations into the world model
latent space, and use the on-policy actor critic algorithm described above to optimize the intrinsic
reward 8, which measures the divergence between agent and expert over time in latent space. In
principle, any on-policy RL algorithm could be used in place of actor-critic. We describe the full
procedure in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 Dream Imitation (DITTO)
                                            n                           o
                                                            ∥en ∥
 1: Require demonstration data D = (xt , at , xt+1 )t=0           |n∈N
 2: Initialize world model parameters ϕ
 3: while not converged do                                                        ▷ World model learning
 4:     Draw Bwm transition sequences {(xt , at , xt+1 )k+L   t=k } ∼ D
 5:     Compute all sequential RSSM components according to eqn 9
 6:     Update ϕ with ELBO loss 10
 7: end while
 8: Initialize actor and critic parameters θ, ψ
 9: while not converged do                                                                   ▷ Agent training
10:     Draw Bac expert latent state sequences (ŝE    τ ) ∼ D̂
                                                                 E
                                  π        t+H
11:     Generate trajectories (ŝτ , aτ )τ =t with aτ ∼ πθ (· | ŝτ )
12:     Compute rewards rτint (ŝπτ , ŝE                    π
                                        τ ) and values vψ (ŝτ )
13:     Compute λ-returns Vτλ = rt + γ (1 − λ)v(ŝπτ+1 ) + λVτλ+1 ,            Vτλ+H = v(ŝπτ+H )
                                        Pt+H
14:     Update critic on λ-targets: τ =t 21 (vψ (ŝπτ ) − sg(Vτλ ))2
15:     Update actor with eqn 15
16: end while



4     E XPERIMENTS
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to study completely offline imitation learning without
behavior cloning in pixel-based observation environments. Prior works generally focus on improv-
ing behavior cloning (Sasaki & Yamashina, 2021), or study a mixed setting with some online inter-
actions allowed (Rafailov et al., 2021) (Kidambi et al., 2021). To demonstrate the effectiveness of
world models for imitation learning, we train without any interaction with the true environment.

4.1   AGENTS

To test the performance of our algorithm, we compare DITTO to a standard baseline method, be-
havior cloning, and to two methods which we introduce in the world model setting.
Behavior cloning We train a BC model end-to-end from pixels, using a convolutional neural
network architecture. Compared to prior works which study behavior cloning from pixels in Atari
games (Hester et al., 2017)(Zhang et al., 2020)(Kanervisto et al., 2020), our implementation achieves
stronger results, even in games where it is trained with lower-scoring data.
Dream agents We adapt GAIL (Ho & Ermon, 2016) and BC to the world model setting, which
we dub D-GAIL and D-BC respectively. D-GAIL and D-BC both receive world model latent states
instead of pixel observations. The D-BC agent is trained with maximum-likelihood estimation on


                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Results on five Atari environments from pixels, with fixed horizon H = 15. The plots
show mean final performance across 5 runs with 20 validation simulations, and shaded regions show
±1 standard error. The experts are strong pre-trained PPO agents from the RL Baselines3 Zoo.


the expert demonstrations in latent space, with an additional entropy regularization term which we
found stabilized learning:
                        LBC = E(ŝ,a)∼D̂E [− log (π(a|ŝ)) − ηBC H(π(ŝ))]                       (16)

The D-GAIL agent is trained on-policy in the world model using the adversarial objective from
Equation 3. The D-GAIL agent optimizes its learned adversarial reward with the same actor-critic
formulation used by DITTO, described in Section 3.3. We train both DITTO and D-GAIL with a
fixed horizon of H = 15. At test-time, the model-based agent policies are composed with the world
model encoder and RSSM to convert high-dimensional observations into latent representations.
All model-based policies in our experiments use an identical multi-layer perceptron (MLP) archi-
tecture for fair comparison in terms of the policies’ representation capacity, while the BC agent is
parameterized by a stacked CNN and MLP architecture which mirrors the world model encoder plus
agent policy. We found that D-GAIL was far more stable than expected, since prior works (Reddy
et al., 2020) (Brantley et al., 2020) reported negative results training GAIL on Atari games from
pixels in the easier online setting. This suggests that world models may be beneficial for representa-
tion learning even in the online case, and that other online algorithms could be improved by moving
them to the world model setting.
We evaluate our algorithm and baselines on 5 Atari environments, using strong PPO agents (Schul-
man et al., 2017) from the RL Baselines3 Zoo (Raffin, 2020) as expert demonstrators, using
N E = {4, 8, 15, 30, 60, 125, 250, 500, 1000} expert episodes to train the agent policies in the world
model. To train the world models, we generate 1000 episodes from a pre-trained policy, either
PPO or advantage actor-critic (A2C) (Mnih et al., 2016), which achieves substantially lower reward
compared to PPO. Surprisingly, we found that the A2C and PPO-trained world models performed
similarly, and that only the quality of the imitation episodes affected final performance. We hy-
pothesize that this is because the A2C and PPO-generated datasets provide similar coverage of the
environment. It appears that the world model can learn environment dynamics from broad classes


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


of datasets as long as they cover the state distribution well. The data-generating policy’s quality is
relevant for imitation learning, but appears not to be for dynamics learning, apart from coverage.

4.2   R ESULTS

Figure 2 plots the performance of DITTO against our proposed world model baselines and standard
BC. In MsPacman and Qbert, most methods recover expert performance with the least amount of
data we tested, and are tightly clustered, suggesting these environments are easier to learn good
policies from low amounts of data. D-GAIL exhibited adversarial collapse twice in MsPacman,
an improvement over standard GAIL, which exhibits adversarial collapse much more frequently in
prior works which study imitation learning from pixels in Atari (Reddy et al., 2020)(Brantley et al.,
2020). In contrast, DITTO always recovers or exceeds average expert performance in all tested
environments, and matches or outperforms the baselines in terms of both sample efficiency and
asymptotic performance.


5     C ONCLUSION

Addressing covariate shift in imitation learning is a long-standing problem. In this work we pro-
posed DITTO, a method which addresses this problem in the challenging offline setting where no
environment interactions are allowed while learning. The offline setting exacerbates covariate shift,
since the agent learns from and acts under unrelated distributions, and cannot easily estimate its
own induced state distribution to perform off-policy corrections. Recent strong IL methods such
as DRIL (Brantley et al., 2020) and V-MAIL (Rafailov et al., 2021) achieve excellent sample effi-
ciency in terms of expert demonstrations, but still require environment interaction to perform on-
policy learning. Our agent consistently recovers expert performance without online interaction in
the tested Atari environments from pixel observations, and matches or exceeds the performance of
strong baselines which we implement in the world model setting.
DITTO learns by decomposing imitation learning into two parts: First, a world model is learned to
approximate the underlying environment dynamics from all available demonstration data, regardless
of the quality of the policy which generated it. Next, expert demonstrations are encoded into tra-
jectories in the world model latent space. Finally, DITTO produces on-policy rollouts in the world
model, and optimizes an intrinsic reward which measures the agent’s drift from expert trajectories.
By optimizing this reward with standard on-policy reinforcement learning algorithms, DITTO learns
to recover from its own mistakes across multiple time-steps, and match the expert state distribution,
which we prove bounds the agent-expert return difference in the true environment.
Decoupling dynamics and policy learning lets us learn the world model from any historical demon-
stration data, and provides us with a surprisingly rich signal for imitation learning: the latent repre-
sentations learned via generative world modeling. Our latent space reward extends the recent work
on imitation by reinforcement learning (Ciosek, 2022) to difficult pixel-based observation environ-
ments, and contrasts with recent IL methods which need to employ adversarial (Fu et al., 2018) or
sparse rewards Wang et al. (2019) to induce imitation, which can be difficult to train. Furthermore,
other methods from reinforcement and imitation learning are orthogonal to and compatible with
ours, and could be combined with DITTO to achieve greater performance and sample efficiency,
e.g. by adding behavioral cloning rewards or uncertainty costs to DITTO’s objective.


6     R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT

In order to ensure reproducibility of the results, all hyperparameters used in our experiments are
included in Appendix A. The code for the experiments will be made available for the reviewing
process and we intend to release the code for the camera-ready version of the paper.


R EFERENCES
Yoshua Bengio, Nicholas Léonard, and Aaron C. Courville. Estimating or propagating gradients
  through stochastic neurons for conditional computation. ArXiv, abs/1308.3432, 2013. 6


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kianté Brantley, Wen Sun, and Mikael Henaff. Disagreement-regularized imitation learning. In
  ICLR, 2020. 2, 3, 8, 9
Andrew Brock, Jeff Donahue, and Karen Simonyan. Large scale GAN training for high fidelity
  natural image synthesis. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1xsqj09Fm. 3
Noam Brown, Anton Bakhtin, Adam Lerer, and Qucheng Gong. Combining deep reinforcement
  learning and search for imperfect-information games. ArXiv, abs/2007.13544, 2020. 1
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos J. Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. ArXiv, abs/1810.12894, 2019. 3
Kamil Ciosek. Imitation learning by reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2022. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=1zwleytEpYx. 3, 5, 9, 12, 13
Justin Fu, Katie Luo, and Sergey Levine. Learning robust rewards with adversarial inverse rein-
  forcement learning. ArXiv, abs/1710.11248, 2018. 4, 9
Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Richard S. Zemel, and Shixiang Shane Gu. A divergence min-
  imization perspective on imitation learning methods. In CoRL, 2019. 2, 4, 5
Ian J. Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron C. Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. In NIPS, 2014. 3
David R Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Recurrent world models facilitate policy evolution. ArXiv,
  abs/1809.01999, 2018. 2, 3
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learn-
  ing behaviors by latent imagination. ArXiv, abs/1912.01603, 2020. 4
Danijar Hafner, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Mohammad Norouzi, and Jimmy Ba. Mastering atari with
  discrete world models. ArXiv, abs/2010.02193, 2021. 2, 5, 6
Todd Hester, Matej Vecerı́k, Olivier Pietquin, Marc Lanctot, Tom Schaul, Bilal Piot, Andrew
  Sendonaris, Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Ian Osband, John P. Agapiou, Joel Z. Leibo, and Au-
  drunas Gruslys. Learning from demonstrations for real world reinforcement learning. ArXiv,
  abs/1704.03732, 2017. 7
Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. In NIPS, 2016. 2, 3, 4,
  7
Jemin Hwangbo, Joonho Lee, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Dario Bellicoso, Vassilios Tsounis, Vladlen
  Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning agile and dynamic motor skills for legged robots. Sci-
  ence Robotics, 4(26):eaau5872, 2019. doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.aau5872. URL https://www.
  science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/scirobotics.aau5872. 4
Anssi Kanervisto, Joonas Pussinen, and Ville Hautamäki. Benchmarking end-to-end behavioural
  cloning on video games. 2020 IEEE Conference on Games (CoG), pp. 558–565, 2020. 7
Rahul Kidambi, Jonathan Chang, and Wen Sun. Mobile: Model-based imitation learning from
  observation alone. In NeurIPS, 2021. 7
Victoria Krakovna, Jonathan Uesato, Vladimir Mikulik, Matthew Rahtz, Tom Everitt,
  Ramana Kumar, Zac Kenton, Jan Leike, and Shane Legg.          Specification gam-
  ing: the flip side of ai ingenuity, 2020.  https://www.deepmind.com/blog/
  specification-gaming-the-flip-side-of-ai-ingenuity, Last accessed on
  2022-9-12. 1
Aviral Kumar, Justin Fu, G. Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Stabilizing off-policy q-learning via boot-
  strapping error reduction. In NeurIPS, 2019. 3
Aviral Kumar, Aurick Zhou, G. Tucker, and Sergey Levine. Conservative q-learning for offline
  reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2006.04779, 2020. 3


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Nevena Lazic, Craig Boutilier, Tyler Lu, Eehern Wong, Binz Roy, M. K. Ryu, and Gregory P.
  Imwalle. Data center cooling using model-predictive control. In NeurIPS, 2018. 1
Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning
  quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain. Science Robotics, 5, 2020. 1
Joel Lehman, Jeff Clune, Dusan Misevic, Christoph Adami, Lee Altenberg, Julie Beaulieu, Pe-
  ter John Bentley, Samuel Bernard, Guillaume Beslon, David M. Bryson, Patryk Chrabaszcz,
  Nick Cheney, Antoine Cully, Stéphane Doncieux, Fred C. Dyer, Kai Olav Ellefsen, Robert Feldt,
  Stephan Fischer, Stephanie Forrest, Antoine Frénoy, Christian Gagné, Léni K. Le Goff, Laura M.
  Grabowski, Babak Hodjat, Frank Hutter, Laurent Keller, Carole Knibbe, Peter Krcah, Richard E.
  Lenski, Hod Lipson, Robert MacCurdy, Carlos Maestre, Risto Miikkulainen, Sara Mitri, David E.
  Moriarty, Jean-Baptiste Mouret, Anh M Nguyen, Charles Ofria, Marc Parizeau, David P. Par-
  sons, Robert T. Pennock, William F. Punch, Thomas S. Ray, Marc Schoenauer, Eric Shulte, Karl
  Sims, Kenneth O. Stanley, François Taddei, Danesh Tarapore, Simon Thibault, Westley Weimer,
  Richard A. Watson, and Jason Yosinksi. The surprising creativity of digital evolution: A col-
  lection of anecdotes from the evolutionary computation and artificial life research communities.
  Artificial Life, 26:274–306, 2018. 1
Azalia Mirhoseini, Anna Goldie, Mustafa Yazgan, Joe Wenjie Jiang, Ebrahim M. Songhori, Shen
  Wang, Young-Joon Lee, Eric Johnson, Omkar Pathak, Sungmin Bae, Azade Nazi, Jiwoo Pak,
  Andy Tong, Kavya Srinivasa, Will Hang, Emre Tuncer, Ananda Babu, Quoc V. Le, James Laudon,
  Richard Ho, Roger Carpenter, and Jeff Dean. Chip placement with deep reinforcement learning.
  ArXiv, abs/2004.10746, 2020. 1
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A. Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G. Belle-
  mare, Alex Graves, Martin A. Riedmiller, Andreas Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, Stig Petersen,
  Charlie Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier-
  stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning.
  Nature, 518:529–533, 2015. 6
Volodymyr Mnih, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Tim
  Harley, David Silver, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement
  learning. In ICML, 2016. 8
Xue Bin Peng, Glen Berseth, KangKang Yin, and Michiel van de Panne. Deeploco: dynamic
  locomotion skills using hierarchical deep reinforcement learning. ACM Trans. Graph., 36:41:1–
  41:13, 2017. 1
Dean A. Pomerleau. Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network. In NeurIPS, 1989. 1
Rafael Rafailov, Tianhe Yu, Aravind Rajeswaran, and Chelsea Finn. Visual adversarial imitation
  learning using variational models. ArXiv, abs/2107.08829, 2021. 4, 7, 9
Antonin Raffin.    Rl baselines3              zoo.          https://github.com/DLR-RM/
  rl-baselines3-zoo, 2020. 8
Siddharth Reddy, Anca D. Dragan, and Sergey Levine. Sqil: Imitation learning via reinforcement
  learning with sparse rewards. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
  URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=S1xKd24twB. 3, 4, 8, 9
Marc Rigter, Bruno Lacerda, and Nick Hawes. Rambo-rl: Robust adversarial model-based offline
 reinforcement learning. ArXiv, abs/2204.12581, 2022. 3
Stéphane Ross and J. Andrew Bagnell. Efficient reductions for imitation learning. In AISTATS,
   2010. 1
Stéphane Ross, Geoffrey J. Gordon, and J. Andrew Bagnell. A reduction of imitation learning and
   structured prediction to no-regret online learning. In AISTATS, 2011. 1, 2
Fumihiro Sasaki and Ryota Yamashina. Behavioral cloning from noisy demonstrations. In ICLR,
  2021. 2, 7


                                                11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. ArXiv, abs/1707.06347, 2017. 8
David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J. Maddison, Arthur Guez, L. Sifre, George van den Driess-
  che, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Vedavyas Panneershelvam, Marc Lanctot, Sander
  Dieleman, Dominik Grewe, John Nham, Nal Kalchbrenner, Ilya Sutskever, Timothy P. Lillicrap,
  Madeleine Leach, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Thore Graepel, and Demis Hassabis. Mastering the game
  of go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature, 529:484–489, 2016. 1
Richard S. Sutton and Andrew G. Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. IEEE Transac-
  tions on Neural Networks, 16:285–286, 2005. 6
Oriol Vinyals, Igor Babuschkin, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Michaël Mathieu, Andrew Dudzik, Juny-
  oung Chung, David H. Choi, Richard Powell, Timo Ewalds, Petko Georgiev, Junhyuk Oh, Dan
  Horgan, Manuel Kroiss, Ivo Danihelka, Aja Huang, L. Sifre, Trevor Cai, John P. Agapiou, Max
  Jaderberg, Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, Rémi Leblond, Tobias Pohlen, Valentin Dalibard, David
  Budden, Yury Sulsky, James Molloy, Tom Le Paine, Caglar Gulcehre, Ziyun Wang, Tobias Pfaff,
  Yuhuai Wu, Roman Ring, Dani Yogatama, Dario Wünsch, Katrina McKinney, Oliver Smith, Tom
  Schaul, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Demis Hassabis, Chris Apps, and David Silver.
  Grandmaster level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature, pp. 1–5, 2019.
  1
Ruohan Wang, Carlo Ciliberto, Pierluigi Vito Amadori, and Y. Demiris. Random expert distillation:
  Imitation learning via expert policy support estimation. In ICML, 2019. 3, 4, 9
Tsun-Hsuan Wang, Alexander Amini, Wilko Schwarting, Igor Gilitschenski, Sertaç Karaman, and
  Daniela Rus. Learning interactive driving policies via data-driven simulation. 2022 International
  Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 7745–7752, 2022. 1
Ronald J. Williams. Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
  learning. Machine Learning, 8:229–256, 2004. 7
Philipp Wu, Alejandro Escontrela, Danijar Hafner, Ken Goldberg, and P. Abbeel. Daydreamer:
  World models for physical robot learning. ArXiv, abs/2206.14176, 2022. 2, 4
Yifan Wu, G. Tucker, and Ofir Nachum. Behavior regularized offline reinforcement learning. ArXiv,
  abs/1911.11361, 2019. 3
Ruohan Zhang, Zhuode Liu, L. Guan, Luxin Zhang, Mary M. Hayhoe, and Dana H. Ballard. Atari-
  head: Atari human eye-tracking and demonstration dataset. Proceedings of the ... AAAI Confer-
  ence on Artificial Intelligence. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 34 4:6811–6820, 2020.
  7


A    P ROOF OF DIVERGENCE REWARD BOUND
We prove a corollary of proposition 1 from Ciosek (2022). Ciosek (2022) uses many intermediate re-
sults and definitions, so we encourage the reader to reference their work while reading to understand
this proof.
Corollary A.1. Suppose we also have another imitation learner, which uses the same data-set of
                                                                                              ′
size N, and still satisfies Assumption 3, but instead trains on some other intrinsic reward, Rint which
satisfies (for some ϵ > 0):
                                   ′
                                  Rint (s, a) = 1, ∀(s, a) ∈ D
                                       ′
                                  0 ≤ Rint (s, a) ≤ 1 − ϵ, otherwise
Let ρJ be the limiting state-action distribution of this imitation learner. Then:
                                                             η
                                          ||ρJ − ρE ||TV ≤
                                                             ϵ
                                                               η
                                        EρJ [R] ≥ EρE [R] −
                                                               ϵ

                                                  12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                              ′                           ′
Proof. Lemma 5 trivially still holds with Rint   instead of Rint , as Rint    ≥ Rint always,
           ′
∀ρ, Eρ [Rint  ] ≥ Eρ [Rint ]. Hence the bound holding true for EρI [Rint ] implies it holds for
      ′
EρI [Rint ] too.

Lemma 7 holds with κ replaced by κϵ , so the result is EρI [R] ≥ (1 − κϵ )EρE [R] − 4τmix κϵ .
We do this by considering their proof in Appendix D. The properties of thePintrinsic reward are
utilised in just one paragraph, after equation 25. This is done in stating that ℓ ℓM
                                                                                   T → EρI [Rint ]
                                                                                    ℓ

      B+1                                             ′
and T → 1 − EρI [Rint ]. This is not true for Rint . Let pa be the limiting chance of the ex-
                         ′
                            imitation agent. Almost by definition, ℓ ℓM             B+1
                                                                  P
pert agreeing with the Rint                                             T → pa and T → 1 − pa .
                                                                         ℓ


                ′
Note that EρI [Rint ] ≤ pa + (1 − pa )(1 − ϵ); we yield a reward of 1 every time we
                                                                        ′
agree, and at most 1 − ϵ if we disagree. Hence, using 1 − κ = EρI [Rint   ], we have
                                                             κ
1 − κ ≤ pa + (1 − pa )(1 − ϵ) = 1 − ϵ + pa ϵ, hence pa ≥ 1 − ϵ .

So, taking limits as done in the original proof, we have:
                            EρI [R] ≥ pa EρE [R] − (1 − pa )4τmix − 0
                                    = pa ≥ pa (EρE [R] + 4τmix ) − 4τmix
                                           κ
                                    ≥ (1 − )(EρE [R] + 4τmix ) − 4τmix
                                           ϵ

Now, combining these lemmas is exactly as in section 4.4 in Ciosek (2022). The factor of 1ϵ carries
forward, yielding EρJ [R] ≥ EρE [R] − ηϵ as required.



B     H YPERPARAMETERS

                              Table 1: Experimental hyperparameters
                  Description                    Symbol                     Value

    Number of world model training episodes      N          1000
    Number of expert training episodes           NE         {4, 8, 15, 30, 60, 125, 250, 500, 1000}
    World model training batch size              Bwm        50
    World model training sequence length         L          50
    Agent training batch size                    Bac        512
    Agent training horizon                       H          15
    Discount factor                              γ          0.95
    T D(λ) parameter                             λ          0.95
    KL-Balancing weight                          β          0.1
    KL-Balancing trade-off parameter             δ          0.8
    Actor-critic entropy weight                  η          5 × 10−2
    Behavior cloning entropy weight              ηBC        0.1
    Optimizer                                    -          Adam
    All learning rates                           -          3 × 10−4
    Actor-critic target network update rate      -          100 steps



C     T IME HORIZON ABLATION


                                                 13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 3: We ablate the agent learning horizon H at fixed data, for N = 125 episodes. We find that
the environment seems to have a characteristic planning horizon, which for Breakout appears at H =
9. This result suggests that learning to act over multiple steps is beneficial in some environments.
D-BC is always trained to predict the next expert action, and has no planning horizon.


                                                14
