Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


F OOL SHAP WITH S TEALTHILY B IASED S AMPLING .
 Gabriel Laberge1 , Ulrich Aïvodji2 , Satoshi Hara3 , Mario Marchand4 , Foutse Khomh1
 1
   Polytechnique Montréal, Québec 2 École de technologie supérieure, Québec
 3
   Osaka University, Japan 4 Universitié de Laval à Québec
 {gabriel.laberge,foutse.khomh}@polymtl.ca
 ulrich.aivodji@etsmtl.ca
 satohara@ar.sanken.osaka-u.ac.jp
 mario.marchand@ift.ulaval.ca



                                              A BSTRACT
         SHAP explanations aim at identifying which features contribute the most to the
         difference in model prediction at a specific input versus a background distribution.
         Recent studies have shown that they can be manipulated by malicious adversaries
         to produce arbitrary desired explanations. However, existing attacks focus solely
         on altering the black-box model itself. In this paper, we propose a complementary
         family of attacks that leave the model intact and manipulate SHAP explanations
         using stealthily biased sampling of the data points used to approximate expecta-
         tions w.r.t the background distribution. In the context of fairness audit, we show
         that our attack can reduce the importance of a sensitive feature when explaining
         the difference in outcomes between groups while remaining undetected. More
         precisely, experiments performed on real-world datasets showed that our attack
         could yield up to a 90% relative decrease in amplitude of the sensitive feature
         attribution. These results highlight the manipulability of SHAP explanations and
         encourage auditors to treat them with skepticism.


1    I NTRODUCTION
As Machine Learning (ML) gets more and more ubiquitous in high-stake decision contexts (e.g. ,
healthcare, finance, and justice), concerns about its potential to lead to discriminatory models are
becoming prominent. The use of auditing toolkits (Adebayo et al., 2016; Saleiro et al., 2018; Bellamy
et al., 2018) is getting popular to circumvent the use of unfair models. However, although auditing
toolkits can help model designers in promoting fairness, they can also be manipulated to mislead both
the end-users and external auditors. For instance, a recent study of Fukuchi et al. (2020) has shown
that malicious model designers can produce a benchmark dataset as fake “evidence” of the fairness of
the model even though the model itself is unfair.
Another approach to assess the fairness of ML systems is to explain their outcome in a post hoc
manner (Guidotti et al., 2018). For instance, SHAP (Lundberg & Lee, 2017) has risen in popularity as
a means to extract model-agnostic local feature attributions. Feature attributions are meant to convey
how much the model relies on certain features to make a decision at some specific input. The use of
feature attributions for fairness auditing is desirable for cases where the interest is on the direct impact
of the sensitive attributes on the output of the model. One such situation is in the context of causal
fairness (Chikahara et al., 2021). In some practical cases, the outputs cannot be independent from the
sensitive attribute unless we sacrifice much of prediction accuracy. For example, any decisions based
on physical strength are statistically correlated to gender due to biological nature. The problem in
such a situation is not the statistical bias (such as demographic parity), but whether the decision is
based on physical strength or gender, i.e. the attributions of each feature.
The focus of this study is on manipulating the feature attributions so that the dependence on sensitive
features is hidden and the audits are misled as if the model is fair even if it is not the case. Recently,
several studies reported that such a manipulation is possible, e.g. by modifying the black-box model
to be explained (Slack et al., 2020; Begley et al., 2020; Dimanov et al., 2020), by manipulating
the computation algorithms of feature attributions (Aïvodji et al., 2019), and by poisoning the data
distribution (Baniecki et al., 2021; Baniecki & Biecek, 2022). With these findings in mind, the current


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


possible advice to the auditors is not to rely solely on the reported feature attributions for fairness
auditing. A question then arises about what “evidence” we can expect in addition to the feature
attributions, and whether they can be valid “evidence” of fairness.
In this study, we show that we can craft fake “evidence” of fairness for SHAP explanations, which
provides the first negative answer to the last question. In particular, we show that we can produce not
only manipulated feature attributions but also a benchmark dataset as the fake “evidence” of fairness.
The benchmark dataset ensures the external auditors reproduce the reported feature attributions using
the existing SHAP library. In our study, we leverage the idea of stealthily biased sampling introduced
by Fukuchi et al. (2020) to cherry-pick which data points to be included in the benchmark. Moreover,
the use of stealthily biased sampling allows us to keep the manipulation undetected by making the
distribution of the benchmark sufficiently close to the true data distribution. Figure 1 illustrates the
impact of our attack in an explanation scenario with the Adult Income dataset.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
                                                                     occupation           Original
 • Theoretically, we formalize a notion of foreground dis-            education
                                                                                          Manipulated

   tribution that can be used to extend Local Shapley Val-            workclass
                                                                            race
   ues (LSV) to Global Shapley Values (GSV), which can
                                                                    capital_loss
   be used to decompose fairness metrics among the fea-             relationship
   tures (Section 2.2). Moreover, we formalize the task of      hours_per_week
                                                                             age
   manipulating the GSV as a Minimum Cost Flow (MCF)
                                                                    capital_gain
   problem (Section 4).                                           marital_status
                                                                         gender
 • Experimentally (Section 5), we illustrate the impact of
                                                                                   0.10      0.08       0.06        0.04    0.02   0.00
   the proposed manipulation attack on a synthetic dataset                                                     Shap value

   and four popular datasets, namely Adult Income, COM-
   PAS, Marketing, and Communities. We observed that           Figure 1: Example of our attack on
   the proposed attack can reduce the importance of a          the Adult Income dataset. After the at-
   sensitive feature while keeping the data manipulation       tack, the feature gender moved from
   undetected by the audit.                                    the most negative attribution to the 6th ,
                                                               hence hiding some of the model bias.
Our results indicate that SHAP explanations are not robust
and can be manipulated when it comes to explaining the
difference in outcomes between groups. Even worse, our results confirm we can craft a benchmark
dataset so that the manipulated feature attributions are reproducible by external audits. Henceforth,
we alert auditors to treat post-hoc explanation methods with skepticism even if it is accompanied by
some additional evidence.


2     S HAPLEY VALUES

2.1   L OCAL S HAPLEY VALUES

Shapley values are omnipresent in post-hoc explainability because of their fundamental mathematical
properties (Shapley, 1953) and their implementation in the popular SHAP Python library (Lundberg
& Lee, 2017). SHAP provides local explanations in the form of feature attributions i.e. given an input
of interest x, SHAP returns a score φi P R for each feature i “ 1, 2, . . . , d. These scores are meant
to convey how much the model f relies on feature i to make its decision f pxq. Shapley values have a
long background in coalitional game theory, where multiple players collaborate toward a common
outcome. In the context of explaining model decisions, the players are the input features and the
common outcome is the model output f pxq. In coalitional games, players (features) are either present
or absent. Since one cannot physically remove an input feature once the model has already been fitted,
SHAP removes features by replacing them with a baseline value z. This leads to the Local Shapley
Value (LSV) φi pf, x, zq which respect the so-called efficiency axiom (Lundberg & Lee, 2017)
                                   d
                                   ÿ
                                         φi pf, x, zq “ f pxq ´ f pzq.                                                                    (1)
                                   i“1

Simply put, the difference between the model prediction at x and the baseline z is shared among the
different features. Additional details on the computation of LSV are presented in Appendix B.1.


                                                    2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.2   G LOBAL S HAPLEY VALUES

LSV are local because they explain the prediction at a specific x and rely on a single baseline input z.
Since model auditing requires a more global analysis of model behavior, we must understand the
predictions at multiple inputs x „ F sampled from a distribution F called the foreground. Moreover,
because the choice of baseline is somewhat ambiguous, the baselines are sampled z „ B from
a distribution B colloquially referred to as the background. Taking inspiration from Begley et al.
(2020), we can compute Global Shapley Values (GSV) by averaging LSV over both foreground and
background distributions.
Definition 2.1.
                         Φi pf, F, Bq :“ E rφi pf, x, zq , i “ 1, 2, . . . , d.
                                                         ‰
                                                                                                    (2)
                                            x„F
                                            z„B
Proposition 2.1. The GSV have the following property
                              d
                              ÿ
                                    Φi pf, F, Bq “ E rf pxqs ´ E rf pxqs.                                  (3)
                                                   x„F                x„B
                              i“1



2.3   M ONTE -C ARLO E STIMATES

In practice, computing expectations w.r.t the whole background and foreground distributions may
be prohibitive and hence Monte-Carlo estimates are used. For instance, when a dataset is used to
represent a background distribution, explainers in the SHAP library such as the ExactExplainer
and TreeExplainer will subsample this dataset 1 by selecting 100 instances uniformly at random
when the size of the dataset exceeds 100. More formally, let
                                                  ÿ
                                    CpS, ωq :“         ωj δpxpjq q                           (4)
                                                      xpjq PS

                                     ř a finite set of input examples S, where δp¨q is the Dirac
represent a categorical distribution over
probability measure, wj ě 0 @j, and j ωj “ 1. Estimating expectations with Monte-Carlo amounts
to sampling M instances
                                     S0 „ F M     S1 „ B M ,                                 (5)
and computing the plug-in estimate
                          Φpf,
                          p    S0 , S1 q :“Φpf, CpS0 , 1{M q, CpS1 , 1{M qq
                                            1    ÿ       ÿ                                                 (6)
                                          “ 2                φpf, xpiq , z pjq q.
                                           M piq        pjq
                                                  x    PS0 z    PS1

When a set of samples is a singleton (e.g. S1 “ tz pjq u), we shall use the convention
Φpf,
p     S0 , tz pjq uq ” Φpf,
                       p    S0 , z pjq q to improve readability. In Appendix B.2, Φpf,
                                                                                  p    S0 , S1 q is shown
to be a consistent and asymptotically normal estimate of Φpf, F, Bq meaning that one can compute
approximate confidence intervals around Φ        p to capture Φ with high probability. In practice, the
estimates Φ p are employed as the model explanation which we see as a vulnerability. As discussed in
Section 4, the Monte-Carlo estimation is the key ingredient that allows us to manipulate the GSV in
favor of a dishonest entity.

3     AUDIT S CENARIO
This section introduces an audit scenario to which the proposed attack of SHAP can apply. This sce-
nario involves two parties: a company and an audit. The company has a dataset D “ tpxpiq , y piq quN
                                                                                                   i“1
with xpiq P Rd and y piq P t0, 1u that contains N input-target tuples and also has a model
f : X Ñ r0, 1s that is meant to be deployed in society. The binary feature with index s (i.e.
xs P t0, 1u) represents a sensitive feature with respect to which the model should not explicitly
   1
     https://github.com/slundberg/shap/blob/0662f4e9e6be38e658120079904899cccda59ff8/shap/maskers/_tabular.py#
L54-L55


                                                       3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                           f1
                     E[f (x)|xs = 0] E[f (x)|xs = 1]
                                                                           x´s                  B


                                                                                                          f2
                                                                                 F



                           f (x)                                                                        xs
(a) The data initially provided by the company to the             (b) Two models f1 and f2 (decision boundaries in
audit is f pD0 q and f pD1 q i.e. the model predictions for       dashed lines) with perfect accuracy exhibit a dispar-
all instances in the private dataset for different values         ity in outcomes w.r.t groups with xs ă 0 and xs ą 0.
of xs . This dataset can later be used by the audit to            Here, Φs pf1 , F, Bq “ ´1 while Φs pf2 , F, Bq “ 0.
assess whether or not the subsets S01 , S11 provided by           Hence, f2 is indirectly unfair toward xs because of
the company where cherry-picked.                                  correlations in the data.

                                   Figure 2: Illustrations of the audit scenario.

discriminate. Both the data D and the model f are highly private so the company is very careful
when providing information about them to the audit. Hence, f is a black box from the point of view
of the audit. At first, the audit asks the company for the necessary data to compute fairness metrics
e.g. the Demographic Parity (Dwork et al., 2012), the Predictive Equality (Corbett-Davies et al.,
2017), or the Equal Opportunity (Hardt et al., 2016). Note that our attack would apply as long as the
fairness metric is a difference in model expectations over subgroups. For simplicity, the audit decides
to compute the Demographic Parity
                                       Erf pxq|xs “ 0s ´ Erf pxq|xs “ 1s,                                          (7)
and therefore demands access to the model outputs for all inputs with different values of the sensitive
                                                         piq                                piq
feature : f pD0 q and f pD1 q, where D0 “ txpiq : xs “ 0u and D1 “ txpiq : xs “ 1u are
subsets of the input data of sizes N0 and N1 respectively. Doing so does not force the company to
share values of features other than xs nor does it requires direct access to the inner workings of the
proprietary model. Hence, this demand respects privacy requirements and the company will accept to
share the model outputs across all instances, see Figure 2a. At this point, the audit confirms that the
model is indeed biased in favor of xs “ 1 and puts in question the ability of the company to deploy
such a model. Now, the company argues that, although the model exhibits a disparity in outcomes, it
does not mean that the model explicitly uses the feature xs to make its decision. If such is the case,
then the disparity could be explained by other features statistically associated with xs . Some of these
other features may be acceptable grounds for decisions. To verify such a claim, the audit decides
to employ post-hoc techniques to explain the disparity. Since the model is a black-box, the audits
shall compute the GSV. The foreground F and background B are chosen to be the data distributions
conditioned on xs “ 0 and xs “ 1 respectively
                                   F :“ CpD0 , 1{N0 q              B :“ CpD1 , 1{N1 q.                             (8)
According to Equation 3, the resulting GSV will sum up to the demographic parity (cf. Equation 7).
If the sensitive feature has a large negative GSV Φs , then this would mean that the model is explicitly
relying on xs to make its decisions and the company would be forbidden from deploying the model.
If the GSV has a small amplitude, however, the company could still argue in favor of deploying the
model in spite of having disparate outcomes. Indeed, the difference in outcomes by the model could
be attributed to more acceptable features. See Figure 2b for a toy example illustrating this reasoning.
To compute the GSV, the audit demands the two datasets of inputs D0 and D1 , as well as the ability
to query the black box f at arbitrary points. Because of privacy concerns on sharing values of x
across the whole dataset, and because GSV must be estimated with Monte-Carlo, both parties agree
that the company shall only provide subsets S0 Ă D0 and S1 Ă D1 of size M to the audit so they
can compute a Monte-Carlo estimate Φpf,
                                     p    S0 , S1 q. The company first estimate GSV on their own by
choosing S0 , S1 uniformly at random from F and B (cf. Equation 5) and observe that Φ
                                                                                    p s indeed has a


                                                              4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


large negative value. They realize they must carefully select which data points will be sent, otherwise,
the audit may observe the bias toward xs “ 1 and the model will not be deployed. Moreover, the
company understands that the audit currently has access to the data f pD0 q and f pD1 q representing
the model predictions on the whole dataset (see Figure 2a). Therefore, if the company does not
share subsets S0 , S1 that were chosen uniformly at random from D0 , D1 , it is possible for the audit
to detect this fraud by doing a statistical test comparing f pS0 q to f pD0 q and f pS1 q to f pD1 q. The
company needs a method to select misleading subsets S01 , S11 whose GSV is manipulated in their
favor while remaining undetected by the audit. Such a method is the subject of the next section.

4     F OOL SHAP WITH S TEALTHILY B IASED S AMPLING
4.1   M ANIPULATION

To fool the audit, the company can decide to indeed sub-sample S01 uniformly at random S01 „ F M .
Then, given this choice of foreground data, they can repeatedly sub-sample S11 „ B M , and choose
the set S11 leading to the smallest |Φ p s pf, S 1 , S 1 q|. We shall call this method “brute-force”. Its issue
                                                  0   1
is that, by sub-sampling S11 from B, it will take an enormous number of repetitions to reduce the
attribution since the GSV Φ p s pf, S 1 , S 1 q is concentrated on the population GSV Φs pf, F, Bq.
                                     0     1

A more clever method is to re-weight the background distribution before sampling from it i.e. define
  1
Bω  :“ CpD1 , ωq with ω ‰ 1{N1 and then sub-sample S11 „ Bω    1M
                                                                  . To make the model look fairer,
the company needs the Φs computed with these cherry-picked points to have a small magnitude.
                      p
                                               p
Proposition 4.1. Let S01 be fixed, and let Ñ represent convergence in probability as the size M of
the set S11 „ Bω
               1M
                  increases, we have
                                               p
                                                 ÿ
                           p s pf, S 1 , S 1 q Ñ
                           Φ                        ωj Φp s pf, S 1 , z pjq q.                 (9)
                                       0   1                           0
                                                   z pjq PD1


We note that the coefficients Φ p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q in Equation 9 are tractable and can be computed and
                                         0
stored by the company. We discuss in more detail how to compute them in Appendix B.3. An
                                                                          1
additional requirement is that the non-uniform distribution Bω               remains similar to the original B.
Otherwise, the fraud could be detected by the audit. In this work, the notion of similarity between
distributions will be captured by the Wasserstein distance in output space.
Definition 4.1 (Wassertein Distance). Any probability measure π over            řD1 ˆ D1 is calledřa coupling
                             1                              1
measure between B and Bω       , denoted π P ∆pB, Bω          q, if 1{N1 “ j πij and ωj “ i πij . The
                                         1
Wassertein distance between B and Bω          mapped to the output-space is defined as
                                                         ÿ
                                   1
                         WpB, Bω q “ min 1                  |f pz piq q ´ f pz pjq q|πij ,                (10)
                                           πP∆pB,Bω q
                                                        i,j
a.k.a the cost of the optimal transport plan that distributes the mass from one distribution to the other.
We propose Algorithm 1 to compute the weights ω by minimizing the magnitude of the GSV
while maintaining a small Wasserstein distance. The trade-off between attribution manipulation and
proximity to the data is tuned via a hyper-parameter λ ą 0. We show in the Appendix A.2 that the
optimization problem at line 5 of Algorithm 1 can be reformulated as a Minimum Cost Flow (MCF)
                                                             r 2.5 q as in Fukuchi et al. (2020)).
and hence can be solved in polynomial time (more precisely OpN   1


4.2   D ETECTION

We now discuss ways the audit can detect manipulation of the sampling procedure. Recall that the
audit has previously been given access to f pD0 q, f pD1 q representing the model outputs across all
instances in the private dataset. The audit will then be given sub-samples S01 , S11 of D0 , D1 on which
they can compute the output of the model and compare with f pD0 q, f pD1 q. To assess whether or
not the sub-samples provided by the company were sampled uniformly at random, the audit has to
conduct statistical tests. The null hypothesis of these tests will be that S01 , S11 were sampled uniformly
at random from D0 , D1 . The detection Algorithm 2 with significance α uses both the Kolmogorov-
Smirnov and Wald tests with Bonferonni corrections (i.e. the α{4 terms in the Algorithm). The
Kolmogorov-Smirnov and Wald tests are discussed in more detail in Appendix C.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Compute non-uniform weights
                                      p s pf, S 1 , z pjq quj , λ)
 1: procedure COMPUTE _ WEIGHTS(D1 , tΦ        0
                        ř        p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q s
 2:          β :“ signr zpjq PD1 Φ        0
 3:          B :“ CpD1 , 1{N1 q                                                 Ź Unmanipulated background
               1
 4:          Bω  :“ CpD1 , ωq                                   Ź Manipulated background as a function of ω
                              ř               p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q ` λWpB, B 1 q
 5:          ω “ arg minω β zpjq PD1 ωj Φ                0                   ω      Ź Optimization Problem
 6:          return ω;

Algorithm 2 Detection with significance α
 1: procedure DETECT _ FRAUD(f pD0 q, f pD1 q, f pS01 q, f pS11 q, α, M )
 2:    for i “ 0, 1 do
 3:        f pSi q „ Cpf pDi q, 1{Ni qM                                Ź Subsample without cheating.
 4:        p-value-KS “ KSp f pSi q, f pSi1 q q                Ź KS test comparing f pSi q and f pSi1 q
 5:        p-value-Wald “ Waldp f pSi1 q, f pDi q q                                       Ź Wald test
 6:        if p-value-KS ă α{4 or p-value-Wald ă α{4 then                 Ź Reject the null hypothesis
 7:            return 1
 8:    return 0;


4.3        W HOLE PROCEDURE

The procedure returning the subsets S01 , S11 is presented in Algorithm 3. It conducts a log-space
search between λmin and λmax for the λ hyper-parameter (line 6) in order to explore the possible
                                                                         1
attacks. For each value of λ, the attacker runs Algorithm 1 to obtain Bω   (line 7), then repeatedly
          1     1M                                                                                 1
samples S1 „ Bω (line 10) and attempts to detect the fraud (line 11). The attacker will choose Bω
that minimizes the magnitude of Φp s while having a detection rate below some threshold τ (line 12).
An example of search over λ on a real-world dataset is presented in Figure 3.

Algorithm 3 Fool SHAP
 1: procedure F OOL _SHAP(f, D0 , D1 , M, λmin , λmax , τ, α)
 2:    S01 „ CpD0 , 1{N0 qM                                                     Ź S01 is sampled without cheating
                            1   pjq          pjq
 3:    Compute Φs pf, S0 , z q @z P D1
                  p                                                                              Ź cf. Section B.3
 4:    B ‹ “ CpD1 , 1{N1 q
                    ř
 5:    Φ‹s “ 1{N1 zpjq PD1 Φ      p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q
                                             0                                             Ź Initialize the solution
 6:    for λ “ λmax , . . . , λmin do                                      (
 7:        ω “ COMPUTE _ WEIGHTS(D1 , Φ               p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q , λ)
                                                               0            j
 8:        Detection “ 0
 9:        for rep “ 1, . . . , 100 do                                                  Ź Detect the manipulation
10:            S11 „ Bω 1M

11:            Detection += D ETECT _ FRAUD(f pD0 q, f pD1 q, f pS01 q, f pS11 q, α, M )
               ř               p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q| ă |Φ‹ | and Detection ă 100τ then
12:        if | zpjq PD1 ωj Φ            0                   s
                 ‹      1
13:            B “ Bω
                      ř
14:            Φ‹s “ zpjq PD1 ωj Φ      p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q
                                                   0                                        Ź Update the solution
15:          S11 „ B ‹M                    Ź Cherry-pick by sampling from the non-uniform background
16:          return S01 , S11

One limitation of Fool SHAP is that it manipulates a single sensitive feature. In Appendix E.4,
we present a possible extension of Algorithm 1 to handle multiple sensitive features and present
preliminary results of its effectiveness. A second limitation is that it only applies to “interventional”
Shapley values which break feature correlations. This choice was made because most methods in the
SHAP library2 are “interventional”. Future work should port Fool SHAP to “observational” Shapley
values that use conditional expectations to remove features (Frye et al., 2020).
      2
          except the TreeExplainer when no background data is provided


                                                         6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     100
                                                                0.00
                      80
Detection Rate (%)
                                                               −0.02
                      60


                                                         GSV
                                                               −0.04
                      40
                                                               −0.06
                      20                                                             Sensitive feature
                                                               −0.08
                                                                                     Other features
                       0   λ?                                           λ?
                           100           101   102                     100         101                   102
                                        λ                                         λ

Figure 3: Example of log-space search over values of λ using an XGBoost classifier fitted on Adults.
(a) The detection rate as a function of the parameter λ of the attack. The attacker uses a detection rate
threshold τ “ 10%. (b) For each value of λ, the vertical slice of the 11 curves is the GSV obtained
                     1
with the resulting Bω  . The goal here is to reduce the amplitude of the sensitive feature (red curve).

4.4                    C ONTRIBUTIONS

The first technique to fool SHAP with perturbations of the background distribution was a genetic
algorithm Baniecki & Biecek (2022). Although promising, the cross-over and mutation operations
it employs to perturb data do not take into account feature correlations and can therefore generate
unrealistic data. Moreover, the objective to minimize does not enforce similarity between the original
and manipulated backgrounds. We show in Appendix E.3 that these limitations lead to systematic
fraud detections. Hence, our contributions are two-fold. First, by perturbing the background via non-
                                                    1
uniform weights over pre-existing instances (i.e. Bω   :“ CpD1 , ωq ) rather than a genetic algorithm,
we avoid the issue of non-realistic data. Second, by considering the Wasserstein distance, we can
control the similarity between the original and fake backgrounds.
Since the Stealthity Biased Sampling technique introduced in Fukuchi et al. (2020) also leverages a
non-uniform distribution over data points and the Wasserstein distance, it makes sense to adapt it to
fool SHAP. Still, the approach of Fukuchi et al. is different from ours. Indeed, in their work, they
minimize the Wasserstein distance while enforcing a hard constraint on the number of instances that
land on the different bins for the target and sensitive feature, That way, they can set the Demographic
Parity to any given value while staying close to the original data. In our setting of manipulating
the model explanation, we leave the Demographic Parity intact and instead manipulate its feature
attribution. In terms of the optimization objective, we now minimize a Shapley value with a soft
constraint on the Wasserstein distance.


5                     E XPERIMENTS

5.1                    T OY EXPERIMENT

The task is predicting which individual will be hired for a job that requires carrying heavy objects.
The causal graph for this toy data is presented in Figure 4 (left). We observe that sex (S) influences
height (H), and that both these features influence the Muscular Mass (M ). In the end, the hiring
decisions (Y ) are only based on the two attributes relevant to the job: H and M . Also, two noise
features N 1, N 2 were added. More details and justifications for this causal graph are discussed in
Appendix D.1. Since strength and height (two important qualifications for applicants) are correlated
with sex, any model f that fits the data will exhibit some disparity in hiring rates between sexes.
Although, if the model decisions do not rely strongly on feature S, the company can argue in favor
of deployment. GSV are used by the audit to measure the amount by which the model relies on the
sex feature, see Figure 4 (Middle). By employing Fool SHAP with M “ 100, the company can
reduce the GSV of feature S considerably compared to the brute-force and genetic algorithms. More
importantly, the audit is not able to detect that the provided samples S01 , S11 were cherry-picked, see
Figure 4 (Right). More results are presented in Appendix E.1.


                                                     7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                             1.0
                      N2           Original
                                   Brute
                                   Genetic                                   0.8
      S               N1
                                   Fool SHAP                                                         f (D1 )
                                                                             0.6                     f (S10 )


                                                                       CDF
  H       M   Muscle Mass
                                                                                                     f (D0 )
                                                                             0.4                     f (S00 )
      Y            Height
                                                                             0.2
                     Sex
                                                                             0.0
                            −0.4     −0.3      −0.2   −0.1       0.0               0.0   0.2   0.4      0.6     0.8   1.0
                                               GSV                                                Output


Figure 4: Toy example. Left: Causal graph. Middle: GSV for the different attacks with M “ 100.
Right: Comparison of the CDF of the Fool SHAP subsets f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole
data f pD0 q, f pD1 q. Here the audit cannot detect the fraud using their detection algorithm.

5.2   DATASETS

We consider four standard datasets from the FAccT literature, namely COMPAS, Adult-Income,
Marketing, and Communities.

• COMPAS regroups 6,150 records from criminal offenders in Florida collected from 2013-2014.
  This binary classification task consists in predicting who will re-offend within two years. The
  sensitive feature s is race with values xs “ 0 for African-American and xs “ 1 for Caucasian.
• Adult Income contains demographic attributes of 48,842 individuals from the 1994 U.S. census.
  It is a binary classification problem with the goal of predicting whether or not a particular person
  makes more than 50K USD per year. The sensitive feature s in this dataset is gender, which took
  values xs “ 0 for female, and xs “ 1 for male.
• Marketing involves information on 41,175 customers of a Portuguese bank and the binary classifi-
  cation task is to predict who will subscribe to a term deposit. The sensitive attribute is age and
  took values xs “ 0 for age 30-60, and xs “ 1 for age not30-60
• Communities & Crime contains per-capita violent crimes for 1994 different communities in
  the US. The binary classification task is to predict which communities have crimes below
  the median rate. The sensitive attribute is PercentWhite and took values xs “ 0 for
  PercentWhite<90%, and xs “ 1 for PercentWhite>=90%.

Three models were considered for the two datasets: Multi-Layered Perceptrons (MLP), Random
Forests (RF), and eXtreme Gradient Boosted trees (XGB). One model of each type was fitted on
each dataset for 5 different train/test splits seeds, resulting in 60 models total. Values of the test set
accuracy and demographic parity for each model type and dataset are presented in Appendix D.2.

5.3   D ETECTOR C ALIBRATION

Detector calibration refers to the assessment that, Table 1: False Positive Rates (%) of the de-
assuming the null hypothesis to be true, the prob- tector i.e. the frequency at which S0 , S1 are
ability of rejecting it (i.e. false positive) should considered cherry-picked when they are not.
be bounded by the significance level α. Remem- No rate should be above 5%.
ber that the null hypothesis of the audit detec-
tor is that the sets S01 , S11 provided by the com-                       mlp rf      xgb
pany are sampled uniformly from D0 , D1 . Hence,
to test the detector, the audit can sample their          COMPAS          4.0    4.6 4.0
own subsets f pS0 q, f pS1 q uniformly from at ran-       Adult           4.3    4.3 4.2
dom from f pD0 q, f pD1 q, run the detection algo-        Marketing              4.9 5.0
rithm, and count the number of detection over             Communities            3.8 4.2
1000 repeats. Table 1 shows the false positive
rates over the five train-test splits using a signifi-
cance level α “ 5%. We observe that the false positive rates are indeed bounded by α for
all model types and datasets implying that the detector employed by the audit is calibrated.

                                                             8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.4   ATTACK R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSION

The first step of the attack (line 3 of Algorithm
3) requires that the company run SHAP on their


                                                            Relative Amplitude Decrease (%)
                                                                                              100
own and compute the necessary coefficients to
run Algorithm 1. For the COMPAS and Adults                                                     80                              Brute
datasets, the ExactExplainer of SHAP was used.                                                                                 Genetic
Since Marketing and Communities contain more                                                   60                              Ours

than 15 features, and since the ExactExplainer
scales exponentially with the number of features,                                              40
we were restricted to using the TreeExplainer
(Lundberg et al., 2020) on these datasets. The                                                 20
TreeExplainer avoids the exponential cost of
Shapley values but is only applicable to tree-based                                             0
models such as RFs and XGBs. Therefore, we could                                                    COMPAS   Adult Marketing   C&C
                                                                                                                 Dataset
not conduct the attack on MLPs fitted on Marketing
and Communities.
                                                                Figure 5: Relative decrease in amplitude of
The following step is to solve the MCF for various the sensitive feature attribution induced by the
values of λ (line 7 of Algorithm 3). As stated previ- various attacks on SHAP.
ously, solving the MCF can be done in polynomial
time in terms of N1 , which was tractable for a small dataset like COMPAS and Communities, but not
for larger datasets like Adult and Marketing. To solve this issue, as was done in Fukuchi et al. (2020),
we compute the manipulated weights multiple times using 5 bootstrap sub-samples of D1 of size
2000 to obtain a set of weights ω r1s , ω r2s , . . . , ω r5s which we average to obtain the final weights ω.
Results of 46 attacks with M “ 200 are shown in Figure 5. Specific examples of the conducted attacks
are presented in Appendix E.2. As a point of reference, we also show results for the brute-force and
genetic algorithms. To make comparisons to our attack more meaningful, the brute-force method
was only allowed to run for the same amount of time it took to search for the non-uniform weights
ω (about 30-180 seconds). Also, the genetic algorithm ran for 400 iterations and was stopped early
if there were 10 consecutive detections. We note that, across all datasets, Fool SHAP leads to
greater reductions of the sensitive feature attribution compared to brute-force search and the genetic
perturbations of the background.
Now focusing on Fool SHAP, for the datasets COMPAS and Marketing, we observe median reductions
in amplitudes of about 90%. This means that our attack can considerably reduce the apparent
importance of the sensitive attribute. For the Adult and Communities datasets, the median reduction
in amplitude is about 50% meaning that we typically reduce by half the importance of the sensitive
feature. Still, looking at the maximum reduction in amplitude for Adult-Income and Communities,
we note that one attack managed to reduce the amplitude by 90%. Therefore, luck can play a part in
the degree of success of Fool SHAP, which is to be expected from data-driven attacks.
Finally, the audit was consistently unable to detect the fraud using statistical tests. This observation
raises concerns about the risk that SHAP explanations can be attacked to return not only manipulated
attributions but also non-detectable fake evidence of fairness.


6     C ONCLUSION

To conclude, we proposed a novel attack on Shapley values that does not require modifying the
model but rather manipulates the sampling procedure that estimates expectations w.r.t the background
distribution. We show on a toy example and four fairness datasets that our attack can reduce the
importance of a sensitive feature when explaining the difference in outcomes between groups using
SHAP. Crucially, the sampling manipulation is hard to detect by an audit that is given limited access
to the data and model. These results raise concerns about the viability of using Shapley values to
assess model fairness. We leave as future work the use of Shapley values to decompose other fairness
metrics such as predictive equality and equal opportunity. Moreover, we wish to move to use cases
beyond fairness, as we believe that the vulnerability of Shapley values that was demonstrated can
apply to many other properties such as safety and security.


                                                     9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7       E THICS S TATEMENT
The main objective of this work is to raise awareness about the risk of manipulation of SHAP
explanations and their undetectability. As such, it aims at exposing the potential negative societal
impacts of relying on such explanations. It remains however possible that malicious model producers
could use this attack to mislead end users or cheat during an audit. However, we believe this
paper makes a significant step toward increasing the vigilance of the community and fostering the
development of trustworthy explanations methods. Furthermore, by showing how fairness can be
manipulated in explanation contexts, this work contributes to the research on the certification of the
fairness of automated decision-making systems.

8       R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The source code of all our experiments is available online3 . Moreover, experimental details are
provided in appendix D.2 for the interested reader.

R EFERENCES
Julius A Adebayo et al. Fairml: Toolbox for diagnosing bias in predictive modeling. Master’s thesis,
  Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2016. 1
Ulrich Aïvodji, Hiromi Arai, Olivier Fortineau, Sébastien Gambs, Satoshi Hara, and Alain Tapp.
  Fairwashing: the risk of rationalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  161–170. PMLR, 2019. 1
Hubert Baniecki and Przemyslaw Biecek. Manipulating shap via adversarial data perturbations
 (student abstract). 2022. 1, 7
Hubert Baniecki, Wojciech Kretowicz, and Przemyslaw Biecek. Fooling partial dependence via data
  poisoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.12837, 2021. 1, 25
Tom Begley, Tobias Schwedes, Christopher Frye, and Ilya Feige. Explainability for fair machine
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07389, 2020. 1, 3
Rachel KE Bellamy, Kuntal Dey, Michael Hind, Samuel C Hoffman, Stephanie Houde, Kalapriya
  Kannan, Pranay Lohia, Jacquelyn Martino, Sameep Mehta, Aleksandra Mojsilovic, et al. Ai fairness
  360: An extensible toolkit for detecting, understanding, and mitigating unwanted algorithmic bias.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.01943, 2018. 1
Yoichi Chikahara, Shinsaku Sakaue, Akinori Fujino, and Hisashi Kashima. Learning individually
  fair classifier with path-specific causal-effect constraint. In International Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 145–153. PMLR, 2021. 1
Sam Corbett-Davies, Emma Pierson, Avi Feller, Sharad Goel, and Aziz Huq. Algorithmic decision
  making and the cost of fairness. In Proceedings of the 23rd acm sigkdd international conference
  on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 797–806, 2017. 4
Botty Dimanov, Umang Bhatt, Mateja Jamnik, and Adrian Weller. You shouldn’t trust me: Learning
  models which conceal unfairness from multiple explanation methods. In SafeAI@ AAAI, 2020. 1
Cynthia Dwork, Moritz Hardt, Toniann Pitassi, Omer Reingold, and Richard Zemel. Fairness through
  awareness. In Proceedings of the 3rd innovations in theoretical computer science conference, pp.
  214–226, 2012. 4
Christopher Frye, Damien de Mijolla, Tom Begley, Laurence Cowton, Megan Stanley, and Ilya Feige.
  Shapley explainability on the data manifold. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01272, 2020. 6
Kazuto Fukuchi, Satoshi Hara, and Takanori Maehara. Faking fairness via stealthily biased sampling.
  In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 34, pp. 412–419, 2020.
 1, 2, 5, 7, 9
    3
        https://github.com/gablabc/Fool_SHAP


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Riccardo Guidotti, Anna Monreale, Salvatore Ruggieri, Franco Turini, Fosca Giannotti, and Dino
  Pedreschi. A survey of methods for explaining black box models. ACM computing surveys (CSUR),
  51(5):1–42, 2018. 1
Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. Equality of opportunity in supervised learning. Advances
 in neural information processing systems, 29, 2016. 4
Ian Janssen, Steven B Heymsfield, ZiMian Wang, and Robert Ross. Skeletal muscle mass and
  distribution in 468 men and women aged 18–88 yr. Journal of applied physiology, 2000. 20
A J Lee. U-statistics: Theory and Practice. Routledge, 2019. 18
Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in
  neural information processing systems, 30, 2017. 1, 2
Scott M Lundberg, Gabriel Erion, Hugh Chen, Alex DeGrave, Jordan M Prutkin, Bala Nair, Ronit
  Katz, Jonathan Himmelfarb, Nisha Bansal, and Su-In Lee. From local explanations to global
  understanding with explainable ai for trees. Nature machine intelligence, 2(1):56–67, 2020. 9, 17
Frank J Massey Jr. The kolmogorov-smirnov test for goodness of fit. Journal of the American
  statistical Association, 46(253):68–78, 1951. 19
Pedro Saleiro, Benedict Kuester, Loren Hinkson, Jesse London, Abby Stevens, Ari Anisfeld,
  Kit T Rodolfa, and Rayid Ghani. Aequitas: A bias and fairness audit toolkit. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1811.05577, 2018. 1
Lloyd S Shapley. A value for n-person games. Contributions to the Theory of Games, pp. 307–317,
  1953. 2
Dylan Slack, Sophie Hilgard, Emily Jia, Sameer Singh, and Himabindu Lakkaraju. Fooling lime
  and shap: Adversarial attacks on post hoc explanation methods. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
 Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, pp. 180–186, 2020. 1
Larry Wasserman. All of Statistics: A concise course in statistical inference. Springer, 2004. 13


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P ROOFS

A.1      P ROOFS FOR G LOBAL S HAPLEY VALUES (GSV)

Proposition A.1 (Proposition 2.1). The GSV have the following property
                             d
                             ÿ
                                  Φi pf, F, Bq “ E rf pxqs ´ E rf pxqs.                                    (11)
                                                         x„F                     x„B
                            i“1


Proof. As a reminder, we have defined the vector
                                    Φpf, F, Bq “ E rφpf, x, zq ,
                                                              ‰
                                                                                                           (12)
                                                             x„F
                                                             z„B

whose components sum up to
                             d
                             ÿ                            d
                                                          ÿ
                                  Φi pf, F, Bq “                  E r φi pf, x, zq s                       (13)
                                                             x„F
                            i“1                          i“1 z„B
                                                                   d
                                                                  „ÿ                      
                                                     “ E                   φi pf, x, zq                    (14)
                                                         x„F
                                                         z„B        i“1
                                                     “ E r f pxq ´ f pzq s                                 (15)
                                                         x„F
                                                         z„B
                                                     “ E rf pxqs ´ E rf pzqs                               (16)
                                                         x„F                     z„B
                                                     “ E rf pxqs ´ E rf pxqs,                              (17)
                                                         x„F                     x„B

where at the last step we have simply renamed a dummy variable.
                                                                                 p
Proposition A.2 (Proposition 4.1). Let S01 be fixed, and let Ñ represent convergence in probability
as the size M of the set S11 „ B 1M increases, then we have
                                                           N1
                                                   p
                                                           ÿ
                               p s pf, S 1 , S 1 q Ñ
                               Φ                                     p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q.
                                                                  ωj Φ                                     (18)
                                        0     1                               0
                                                          j“1


Proof.
                                         1            ÿ           ÿ
                      Φpf,
                      p    S01 , S11 q “ 2                                 φpf, xpiq , z pjq q
                                        M
                                                    xpiq PS01 z pjq PS11

                                          1          ÿ ˆ 1              ÿ                              ˙
                                     “                                           φpf, xpiq , z pjq q       (19)
                                          M             1
                                                          M
                                                z   pjqPS1           xpiq PS01
                                          1          ÿ
                                     “                       Φpf,
                                                             p    S01 , z pjq q.
                                          M
                                                z pjq PS11


Since S01 is assumed to be fixed, then the only random variable in Φ p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q is z pjq which
                                                                              0
                                         1                                        p s pf, S 1 , zq and we
represents an instance sampled from the B . Therefore, we can define ψpzq :“ Φ               0
get


                      p s pf, S 1 , S 1 q “ 1
                                                      ÿ
                      Φ                                       p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q
                                                              Φ
                               0     1                                 0
                                            M
                                                 z pjq PS11
                                                                                                           (20)
                                          1           ÿ
                                      “                       ψpz pjq q           with S11 „ B 1M .
                                          M
                                                 z pjq PS11



                                                             12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


By the weak law of large number, the following holds as M goes to infinity (Wasserman, 2004,
Theorem 5.6)
                             1 ÿ                  p
                                        ψpz pjq q Ñ E 1 rψpzqs.                         (21)
                             M pjq 1                z„B
                                  z   PS1

Now, as a reminder, the manipulated background distribution is B 1 :“ CpD1 , ωq with ω ‰ 1{N1 .
Therefore

                                                p
                            p s pf, S 1 , S 1 q Ñ
                            Φ        0     1      E 1 rψpzqs
                                                z„B
                                            “         E       rψpzqs
                                                z„CpD1 ,ωq
                                                N1
                                                ÿ
                                            “         ωj ψpz pjq q                        (22)
                                                j“1
                                                N1
                                                ÿ
                                            “            p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q
                                                      ωj Φ        0
                                                j“1

concluding the proof.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2     P ROOFS FOR O PTIMIZATION P ROBLEM

A.2.1    T ECHNICAL L EMMAS
We provide some technical lemmas that will be essential when proving Theorem A.1. These are
presented for completeness and are not intended as contributions by the authors. Let us first write the
formal definition of the minimum of a function.
Definition A.1 (Minimum). Given some function f : D Ñ R, the minimum of f over D (denoted
f ‹ ) is defined as follows:
                 f ‹ “ min f pxq ðñ Dx‹ P D s.t. f ‹ “ f px‹ q ď f pxq @x P D.
                       xPD


Basically, the notion of minimum coincides with the infimum inf f pDq (highest lower bound) when
this lower bound is attained for some x‹ P D. By the Extreme Values Theorem, the minimum always
exists when D is compact and f is continuous. For the rest of this appendix, we shall only study
optimization problems where points on the domain set D “ tpx, yq : x P X , y P Yx Ă Yu can be
selected by the following procedure

      1. Choose some x P X
      2. Given the selected x, choose some y P Yx Ă Y, where the set Yx is non-empty and depends
         on the value of x.

When optimizing functions over these domains, one can optimize in two steps as highlighted in the
following lemma.
Lemma A.1. Given a compact domain D of the form described above and a continuous objective
function f : D Ñ R, the minimum f ‹ is attained for some px‹ , y ‹ q and the following holds
                                   min f px, yq “ min min f px, yq.
                                  px,yqPD              xPX yPYx


Proof. Let frpxq :“ inf yPYx f px, yq, which is a well defined function on X . We can then take its
infimum f ‹ “ inf xPX frpxq. But is f ‹ an infimum of f pDq? By the definition of infimum

                                     f ‹ ď frpxq        @x P X
                                         “ inf f px, yq
                                             yPYx

                                          ď f px, yq         @ y P Yx ,
         ‹
so that f is a lower bound of f pDq. In fact, it is the highest lower bound possible so
                                    inf     f px, yq “ inf inf f px, yq.                          (23)
                                  px,yqPD              xPX yPYx

By the Extreme Value Theorem, since D is compact and f is continuous, there exists px‹ , y ‹ q P D
s.t. f ‹ “ inf px,yqPD f px, yq “ maxpx,yqPD f px, yq “ f px‹ , y ‹ q. Since the infimum is attained on
the left-hand-side of Equation 23, then it must also be attained on the right-hand-side and therefore
we can replace all inf with min in Equation 23, leading to the desired result.
Lemma A.2. Given a compact domain D of the form described above and two continuous functions
h : X Ñ R and g : Y Ñ R, then
                           ˆ           ˙         ˆ                 ˙
                     min hpxq ` gpyq “ min hpxq ` min gpyq
                        px,yqPD                        xPX                yPYx


Proof. Applying Lemma A.1 with the function f px, yq :“ hpxq ` gpyq proves the Lemma.


                                                    14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                               apeq “ λ |f pz piq q ´ f pz pjq q|
                                     `j        cpeq “ 8                             ri
                                               f peq ” π
                                                       ri,j

   apeq “ β Φp s pf, S 1 , z pjq q
                      0
                                                                                         apeq “ 0
   cpeq “ 8                                                                              cpeq “ 1
   f peq ” ω
           rj                                                                            f peq “ 1


            s                                                                                        t


Figure 6: Graph G on which we solve the MCF. Note that the total amount of flow is d “ N1 and
there are N1 left and right nodes `j , ri .


A.2.2      M INIMUM C OST F LOWS
Let G “ pV, Eq be a graph with vertices v P V with directed edges e P E Ă V ˆ V, c : E Ñ R` be a
capacity and a : E Ñ R be a cost. Moreover, let s, t P E be two special vertices called the source and
the sink respectivelly, and d P R` be a total flow. The Minimum-Cost Flow (MCF) problem of G
consists of finding the flow function f : E Ñ R` that minimizes the total cost
                               ÿ
                         min      apeqf peq
                                 f
                                     ePE
                                s.t. 0 ď f peq ď cpeq @e P E
                                                              $                                      (24)
                                     ÿ            ÿ           &0  u P V z ts, tu
                                          f peq ´      f peq “ d  u“s
                                                              %
                                     ePu`         ePu´         ´d u “ t
where u` :“ tpu, vq P Eu and u´ :“ tpv, uq P Eu are the outgoing and incoming edges from u. The
terminology of flow arises from the constraint that, for vertices that are not the source nor the sink,
the outgoing flow must equal the incoming one, which is reminiscent of conservation laws in fluidic.
We shall refer to f ppu, vqq as the flow from u to v.
Now that we have introduced minimum cost flows, let us specify the graph that will be employed to
manipulate GSV, see Figure 6. We label the flow going from the sink s to one of the left vertices as
ω
ri ” ωi ˆ N1 , and the flow going from `j to ri as π
                                                   ri,j ” πi,j ˆ N1 . The required flow is fixed at
d “ N1 .


                                                          15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Theorem A.1. Solving the MCF of Figure 6 leads to a solution of the linear program in Algorithm 1.


Proof. We begin by showing that the flow conservation constraints in the MCF imply that π is a
                                     1
coupling measure (i.e. π P ∆pB, Bω     q), and ω is constrained to the probability simplex ∆pN1 q.
Applying the conservation law on the left-side of the graph leads to the conclusion that the flows
entering vertices `j must sum up to N1
                                                     N1
                                                     ÿ
                                                           ω
                                                           r j “ N1 .
                                                    j“1

This implies that ω is must be part of the probability simplex. By conservation, the amount of flow
that leaves a specific vertex `j must also be ω
                                              rj , hence
                                             ÿ
                                                 π
                                                 rij “ ωrj .
                                                      i

For any edge outgoing from ri to the sink t, the flow must be exactly 1. This is because we have N1
edges with capacity cpeq “ 1 going into the sink and the sink must receive an incoming flow of N1 .
As a consequence of the conservation law on a specific vertex ri , the amount of flow that goes into
each ri is also 1                           ÿ
                                                rij “ 1.
                                                π
                                                       j

Putting everything together, from the conservation laws on G, we have that ω P ∆pN1 q, and
            1
π P ∆pB, Bω   q. Now, to make the parallel between the MCF and Algorithm 1, we must use Lemma
A.2. Note that ω is restricted to the probability simplex, while π is restricted to be a coupling measure.
                                                                  1                                        1
Importantly, the set of all possible coupling measures ∆pB, Bω        q is different for each ω because Bω
depends on ω. Hence, the domain has the same structure as the ones tackled in Lemma A.2 (where
                                                                    1
x P X becomes ω P ∆pN1 qq and y P Yx becomes π P ∆pB, Bω               q). Also, the set of possible ω and π
is a bounded simplex in R   N1 pN1 `1q
                                       so it is compact, and the objective function of the MCF is linear,
thus continuous. Hence, we can apply the Lemma A.2 to the MCF.


      ÿ                       N1
                              ÿ                                     ÿ
min         f peqapeq “ min             p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q ` λ
                                     rj Φ
                                    βω                                    rij |f pz piq q ´ f pz pjq q|
                                                                          π
                                                 0
 f                     ω,r
                       r π
      ePE                     j“1                                   i,j
                              ˆ ÿ N1                                                                 ˙
                           N1                                    ÿ
                                        p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q ` λ π               piq          pjq
                    “ min      β     rj Φ
                                     ω            0                     rij |f pz     q ´ f pz     q|
                      r π N1
                      ω,r
                                 j“1                              i,j
                              ˆ ÿN1                                                                    ˙
                                     ω
                                     rj p                          ÿπ    rij
                    “ N1 min β           Φs pf, S01 , z pjq q ` λ             |f pz piq q ´ f pz pjq q|
                          ω,r
                          r π
                                 j“1
                                     N1                            i,j
                                                                         N1
                                             ˆ ÿ   N1                                   ÿ                     ˙
                                                                      1     pjq                       piq pjq
                    “ N1        min       1
                                                β        ωj Φs pf, S0 , z q ` λ πi,j |f pz q ´ f pz q|
                                                             p
                           ωP∆pN1 q,πP∆pB,Bω q
                                                           j“1                                  i,j
                                                     ˆ                      ˙
                    “ N1          min      1 q
                                                          hpωq ` gpπq
                           ωP∆pN1 q,πP∆pB,Bω
                                   ˆ                                 ˙
                    “ N1      min    hpωq `               min 1 gpπq                                       (cf. Lemma A.2)
                           ωP∆pN1 q                 πP∆pB,B q
                                  ˆ ÿN1                                                         ÿ                                   ˙
                    “ N1      min  β       p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q ` λ
                                        ωj Φ                                          min                     piq
                                                                                                      πi,j |f pz q ´ f pz   pjq
                                                                                                                                  q|
                                                    0                                    1 q
                           ωP∆pN1 q                                               πP∆pB,Bω
                                             j“1                                                i,j
                                  ˆ ÿN1                                 ˙
                                                   1    pjq          1
                    “ N1      min  β    ωj Φs pf, S0 , z q ` λ WpB, Bω q
                                           p
                           ωP∆pN1 q
                                             j“1

which (up to a multiplicative constant N1 ) is a solution of the linear program of Algorithm 1.


                                                            16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


B     S HAPLEY VALUES
B.1   L OCAL S HAPLEY VALUES (LSV)

We introduce Local Shapley Values (LSV) more formally. First, as explained earlier, Shapley values
are based on coalitional game theory where the different features work together toward a common
outcome f pxq. In a game, the features can either be present or absent, which is simulated by replacing
some features with a baseline value z.
Definition B.1 (The Replace Function). Let x be an input of interest x, S Ď t1, 2, . . . , du be a subset
of input features that are considered active, and z be a baseline input, then the replace-function
rS : Rd ˆ Rd Ñ Rd is defined as
                                                 "
                                                   xi if i P S
                                   rS pz, xqi “                                                      (25)
                                                   zi otherwise.
We note that this function is meant to “activate” the features in S.

Now, if we let π be a random permutation of d features, and πi denote all features that appear before
i in π, the LSV are computed via
             φi pf, x, zq :“ E f p rπi Ytiu pz, xq q ´ f p rπi pz, xq q , i “ 1, 2, . . . , d,
                               “                                       ‰
                                                                                                 (26)
                            π„Ω

where Ω is the uniform distribution over d! permutations. Observe that the computation of LSV is
scales poorly with the number of features d hence model-agnostic computations are only possible
with datasets with few features such as COMPAS and Adult-Income. For datasets with larger amounts
of features the TreeExplainer algorithm (Lundberg et al., 2020) can be used to compute the LSV
(cf. Equation 26) in polynomial time given that one is explaining a tree-based model.

B.2   C ONVERGENCE

As a reminder, we are interested in estimating the GSV Φ ” Φpf, F, Bq which requires estimating
expectations w.r.t the foreground and background distributions. Said estimations can be conducted
with Monte-Carlo where we sample M instances
                                      S0 „ F M          S1 „ B M ,                                  (27)
and compute the plug-in estimates
                         Φpf,
                         p    S0 , S1 q :“ Φpf, CpS0 , 1{M q, CpS1 , 1{M qq
                                           1    ÿ       ÿ                                           (28)
                                        “ 2                 φpf, xpiq , z pjq q.
                                          M piq        pjq
                                               x   PS0 z   PS1

We now show that, Φpf,
                     p    S0 , S1 q is a consistent and asymptotically normal estimate of Φpf, F, Bq
Proposition B.1. Let f : X Ñ r0, 1s be a black box, F and B be distributions on X , and Φ        p ”
Φpf,
p    S0 , S1 q be the plug-in estimate of Φ ” Φpf, F, Bq, the following holds for any δ P s0, 1r and
k “ 1, 2 . . . , d
                                                 ´1
                                               FN p0,1q p1 ´ δ{2q
                            ˆ                                     b         ˙
                     lim P |Φk ´ Φk | ě
                                p                     ?             2     2
                                                                   σ10 ` σ01 “ δ,
                    M Ñ8                             2 M
          ´1
where FN   p0,1q is the inverse Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the standard normal
                2
distribution, σ10  “ Vx„F r Ez„B rφi pf, x, zqqs s and σ01
                                                        2
                                                           “ Vz„B r Ex„F rφi pf, x, zqqs s.

Proof. The proof consists simply in noting that LSV φk pf, xpiq , z pjq q are a function of two indepen-
dent samples xpiq „ F and z pjq „ B. The model f is assumed fixed and hence for any feature k we
can define hpxpiq , z pjq q :“ φk pf, xpiq , z pjq q. Now, the estimates of GSV can be rewritten
                                                    1      ÿ       ÿ
                          Φ
                          p k pf, S0 , S1 q “                          hpxpiq , z pjq q,            (29)
                                              |S0 | |S1 | piq     pjq
                                                    x   PS0 z    PS1


                                                   17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


which we recognize as a well-known class of statistics called two-samples U-statistics. Such statistics
are unbiased and asymptotically normal estimates of
                                       Φk pf, F, Bq “ E rhpx, zqs.                                           (30)
                                                           x„F
                                                           z„B

The asymptotic normality of two-samples U-statistics is characterized by the following Theorem
(Lee, 2019, Section 3.7.1).
Theorem B.1. Let Φ  pk ” Φ p k pf, S0 , S1 q be a two-samples U-statistic with |S0 | “ N, |S1 | “ M ,
moreover let hpx, zq have finite first and second moments, then the following holds for any δ P s0, 1r
                                                                     d
                                                     ´1
                                                   FN       p1 ´ δ{2q σ 2
                                 ˆ                                                   ˙
                                                      p0,1q                    σ2
                  lim          P |Φ  p k ´ Φk | ě      ?                 10
                                                                            ` 01       “ δ,
               N `M Ñ8                                   M `N           p     1´p
           s.t. N {pN `M qÑpPp0,1q

       2
where σ10 “ Vx„F r Ez„B rhpx, zqs s and σ01
                                         2
                                            “ Vz„B r Ex„F rhpx, zqs s.

Proposition B.1 follows from this Theorem by choosing N “ M, p “ 0.5 and noticing that having
a model with bounded outputs (f : X Ñ r0, 1s) implies that |hpx, zq| ď 1 @x, z P X which means
that hpx, zq has bounded first and second moments.

B.3    C OMPUTE THE LSV

Running Algorithm 1 requires computing the coefficients Φ      p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q for j “ 1, 2, . . . , N1 . To
                                                                         0
compute them, first note that they can be written in terms of LSV for all instances in S01

                           p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q “ 1
                                                      ÿ
                           Φ        0                      φs pf, xpiq , z pjq q.                            (31)
                                                   M piq 1
                                                       x    PS0

The LSV φs pf, xpiq , z pjq q are computed deeply in the SHAP code and are not directly accessible
using the current API. Hence, we had to access them using Monkey-Patching i.e. we modified
the ExactExplainer class so that it stores the LSV as one of its attributes. The attribute can
then be accessed as seen in Figure 7. The code is provided as a fork the SHAP repository. For the
TreeExplainer, because its source code is in C++ and wrapped in Python, we found it simpler to
simply rewrite our own version of the algorithm in C++ so that it directly returns the LSV, instead of
Monkey-Patching the TreeExplainer.


      Figure 7: How we extract the LSV from the ExactExplainer via Monkey-Patching.


                                                       18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


C     S TATISTICAL T ESTS
C.1    KS TEST

A first test that can be conducted is a two-samples Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test (Massey Jr, 1951).
If we let
                                                  1 ÿ
                                       FpS pxq “         1pz ď xq                             (32)
                                                 |S| zPS
be the empirical CDF of observations in the set S. Given two sets S and S 1 , the KS statistic is
                                  KSpS, S 1 q “ sup |FpS pxq ´ FpS 1 pxq|.                              (33)
                                                 xPR
                                                              1
Under the null-hypothesis H0 : S „ D|S| , S 1 „ D|S | for some univariate distribution D, this
statistic is expected to not be too large with high probability. Hence, when the company provides the
subsets S01 , S11 , the audit can sample their own two subsets f pS0 q, f pS1 q uniformly at random from
f pD0 q, f pD1 q and compute the statistics KSpf pS0 q, f pS01 qq and KSpf pS1 q, f pS11 qq to detect a fraud.

C.2    WALD TEST

An alternative is the Wald test, which is based on the central limit theorem. If S1 „ B M , then the
empirical average of the model output over S1 is asymptotically normally distributed as M increases
                                              1
                                                 ř
                                              M    zPf pS1 q z ´ µ
                      Waldpf pS1 q, f pBqq :“         ?            ù N p0, 1q,                  (34)
                                                   σ{ M
where µ :“ Ez„f pBq rzs and σ 2 :“ Vz„f pBq rzs are the expected value and variance of the model
output across the whole background. The same reasoning holds for S0 and the foreground F.
Applying the Wald test with significance α would detect fraud when
                                                           ´1
                              | Waldpf pS11 q, f pBqq | ą FN p0,1q p1 ´ α{2q,                           (35)
       ´1
where FN p0,1q is the inverse of the CDF of a standard normal variable.


                                                     19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D     M ETHODOLOGICAL D ETAILS
D.1   T OY E XAMPLE

The toy dataset was constructed to closely match the results of the following empirical study compar-
ing skeletal mass distributions between men and women (Janssen et al., 2000). Firstly, the sex feature
was sampled from a Bernoulli
                                        S „ Bernoullip0.5q.                                       (36)
According to Table 1 of Janssen et al. (2000), the average height of women participants was 163
cm while it was 177cm for men. Both height distributions had the same standard deviation of 7cm.
Hence we sampled height via
                                    H|S “ man „ N p177, 49q
                                                                                                  (37)
                                    H|S “ woman „ N p163, 49q

It was noted in Janssen et al. (2000) that there was approximately a linear relationship between height
and skeletal muscle mass for both sexes. Therefore, we computed the muscle mass M as
                              M |tH “ h, S “ manu “ 0.186h ` 5
                              M |tH “ h, S “ womanu “ 0.128h ` 4                                  (38)
                              with   „ N p0, 1q

The values of coefficients 0.186, 0.128 and noise levels 5 and 4 were chosen so the distributions
of M |S would approximately match that of Table 1 in Janssen et al. (2000). Finally the target was
chosen following
               Y |tH “ h, M “ mu „ Bernoullip P pH, M q q
                                                                                                  (39)
               with P pH, M q “ 1 ` expt100ˆ 1pH ă 160q ´ 0.3pM ´ 28qu
                               “                                       ‰´1
                                                                           .
Simply put, the chances of being hired in the past (Y ) were impossible for individuals with a smaller
height than 160cm. Moreover, individuals with a higher mass skeletal mass were given more chances
to be admitted. Yet, individuals with less muscle mass could still be given the job if they displayed
sufficient determination. In the end, we generated 6000 samples leading to the following disparity in
Y.
                 PpY “ 1|S “ manq “ 0.733           PpY “ 1|S “ womanq “ 0.110.                   (40)


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Table 2: Models Test Accuracy % (mean ˘ stddev).

                                           mlp            rf          xgb
                      COMPAS           68.2 ˘ 0.9     67.7 ˘ 0.8   68.6 ˘ 0.8
                      Adult            85.6 ˘ 0.3     86.3 ˘ 0.2   87.1 ˘ 0.1
                      Marketing                       91.1 ˘ 0.1   91.4 ˘ 0.3
                      Communities                       83 ˘ 2       82 ˘ 2

                      Table 3: Models Demographic Parity (mean ˘ stddev).

                                     mlp                 rf                 xgb
                COMPAS          ´0.12 ˘ 0.01      ´0.11 ˘ 0.01       ´0.11 ˘ 0.02
                Adult           ´0.20 ˘ 0.01      ´0.19 ˘ 0.01      ´0.192 ˘ 0.004
                Marketing                        ´0.104 ˘ 0.005      ´0.11 ˘ 0.01
                Communities                       ´0.50 ˘ 0.01       ´0.54 ˘ 0.02


D.2   R EAL DATA

The datasets were first divided into train/test subsets with ratio 45 : 15 . The models were trained
on the training set and evaluated on the test set. All categorical features for COMPAS, Adult, and
Marketing were one-hot-encoded which resulted in a total of 11, 40, and 61 columns for each dataset
respectively. A simple 50 steps random search was conducted to fine-tune the hyper-parameters with
cross-validation on the training set. The resulting test set performance and demographic parities
for all models and datasets, aggregated over 5 random data splits, are reported in Tables 2 and 3
respectively.


                                                 21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                                     1.0
                                                                        1.0
            0.075
                                                                                                     0.8
            0.070                                                       0.8
                                                                                                                                    f (D1 )
            0.065
Amplitude


                                                                              Detection
                                                                        0.6                          0.6                            f (S10 )


                                                                                               CDF
            0.060                                                                                                                   f (D0 )
                                                                        0.4
            0.055                                                                                    0.4                            f (S00 )

            0.050                                                       0.2
                                                                                                     0.2
            0.045
                                                                        0.0
                     0     20     40       60       80    100     120                                0.0
                                       Iterations                                                          0.0       0.2      0.4      0.6     0.8   1.0
                                                                                                                                 Output
                      (a) Iterations of genetic algorithm.
                                                                                                                 (b) CDFs for genetic algorithm.
            1.0                                                                                      1.0


            0.8                                                                                      0.8

                                               f (D1 )                                                                              f (D1 )
            0.6                                f (S10 )                                              0.6                            f (S10 )
CDF


                                               f (D0 )                                         CDF                                  f (D0 )
            0.4                                f (S00 )                                              0.4                            f (S00 )

            0.2                                                                                      0.2


            0.0                                                                                      0.0
                    0.0     0.2        0.4      0.6         0.8          1.0                               0.0       0.2      0.4      0.6     0.8   1.0
                                          Output                                                                                 Output

                          (c) CDFs for brute-force.                                                                 (d) CDFs for Fool SHAP.

                                                                          Figure 8
E              A DDITIONAL R ESULTS
E.1                 T OY E XAMPLE

Figure 8 presents additional results for the toy example. More specifically, Figure 8 (a) illustrates
the evolution of the detection and amplitude of the sensitive feature during the genetic algorithm.
We note that beyond 90 iterations, the detector is systematically able to assert that the dataset is
manipulated. The smallest value of amplitude that can be reached via the genetic algorithm without
being detected is around 0.05. Figures 8 (b) (c) and (d) show the CDFs of f pS11 q where S11 is chosen
via the genetic algorithm, brute-force, and Fool SHAP respectively. We observe that Fool SHAP
is the method where the resulting CDF for f pS11 q is closest to the CDF for f pD1 q. This is why the
audit is not able to detect fraud using statistical tests. The fact that Fool SHAP generates fake CDFs
that are close to the data CDFs is a consequence of minimizing the Wasserstein distance. These
results highlight the superiority of Fool SHAP compared to the brute-force approach and the genetic
algorithm.


                                                                                          22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.2       E XAMPLES OF ATTACKS

In this section, we present 8 specific examples of the attacks that were conducted on COMPAS, Adult,
Marketing, and Communities.


                            Original                                                                 1.0           f(D1)
 juv_other_count            Manipulated                                                                            f(S 01)
                                                                                                                   f(D0)
             sex                                                                                                   f(S 00)
                                                                                                     0.8
   juv_fel_count
c_charge_degree                                                                                      0.6


                                                                                               CDF
 juv_misd_count
                                                                                                     0.4
            age
            race                                                                                     0.2
    priors_count
                                                                                                     0.0
                      0.07      0.06         0.05     0.04 0.03     0.02   0.01    0.00                    0.1         0.2         0.3    0.4       0.5         0.6    0.7         0.8
                                                      Shap value                                                                                Output


Figure 9: Attack of RF fitted on COMPAS. Left: GSV before and after the attack with M “ 200. As
a reminder, the sensitive attribute is race. Right: Comparison of the CDF of the misleading subsets
f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.



                            Original                                                                 1.0
c_charge_degree             Manipulated
 juv_misd_count
                                                                                                     0.8
   juv_fel_count
 juv_other_count                                                                                     0.6
                                                                                               CDF


             sex
                                                                                                     0.4
            race
            age                                                                                                                                                                     f(D1)
                                                                                                     0.2                                                                            f(S 01)
                                                                                                                                                                                    f(D0)
    priors_count                                                                                                                                                                    f(S 00)
                                                                                                     0.0
                     0.08             0.06            0.04       0.02      0.00                                  0.2         0.3         0.4        0.5          0.6         0.7          0.8
                                                      Shap value                                                                                Output


Figure 10: Attack of XGB fitted on COMPAS. Left: GSV before and after the attack with M “ 200.
As a reminder, the sensitive attribute is race. Right: Comparison of the CDF of the misleading
subsets f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.



     occupation             Original                                                                 1.0
                            Manipulated
      education
      workclass                                                                                      0.8
            race
    capital_loss                                                                                     0.6
    relationship
                                                                                               CDF


hours_per_week
                                                                                                     0.4
             age
    capital_gain                                                                                                                                                                    f(D1)
                                                                                                     0.2                                                                            f(S 01)
  marital_status
                                                                                                                                                                                    f(D0)
         gender                                                                                                                                                                     f(S 00)
                                                                                                     0.0
                   0.10        0.08            0.06        0.04     0.02    0.00                           0.0               0.2          0.4             0.6          0.8               1.0
                                                      Shap value                                                                                Output


Figure 11: Attack of XGB fitted on Adults. Left: GSV before and after the attack with M “ 200.
As a reminder, the sensitive attribute is gender. Right: Comparison of the CDF of the misleading
subsets f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.


                                                                                          23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


     occupation            Original                                                                 1.0
                           Manipulated
      workclass
            race                                                                                    0.8
    capital_loss
      education                                                                                     0.6
    capital_gain


                                                                                              CDF
             age
                                                                                                    0.4
hours_per_week
         gender                                                                                                                                                          f(D1)
                                                                                                    0.2                                                                  f(S 01)
    relationship
                                                                                                                                                                         f(D0)
  marital_status                                                                                                                                                         f(S 00)
                                                                                                    0.0
                         0.10    0.08     0.06       0.04     0.02      0.00      0.02                    0.0   0.2           0.4            0.6         0.8                1.0
                                                 Shap value                                                                         Output


Figure 12: Attack of RF fitted on Adults. Left: GSV before and after the attack with M “ 200. As a
reminder, the sensitive attribute is gender. Right: Comparison of the CDF of the misleading subsets
f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.


       duration                                                                                     1.0
       previous
     campaign
         marital
           loan                                                                                     0.8
        housing
  day_of_week
         default
          pdays                                                                                     0.6
     education
                                                                                              CDF
cons_price_idx
     poutcome
             job                                                                                    0.4
         month
 cons_conf_idx
        contact                                                                                                                                                          f(D1)
     euribor3m                                                                                      0.2                                                                  f(S 01)
            age           Original                                                                                                                                       f(D0)
 emp_var_rate             Manipulated                                                                                                                                    f(S 00)
  nr_employed                                                                                       0.0
                     0.05       0.04     0.03      0.02     0.01     0.00      0.01                       0.0       0.2        0.4             0.6             0.8
                                                 Shap value                                                                      Output


Figure 13: Attack of RF fitted on Marketing. Left: GSV before and after the attack with M “ 200.
As a reminder, the sensitive attribute is age. Right: Comparison of the CDF of the misleading
subsets f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.


       previous           Original                                                                  1.0
     campaign             Manipulated
     education
           loan
        housing                                                                                     0.8
         marital
cons_price_idx
  day_of_week
         default                                                                                    0.6
             job
                                                                                              CDF


     euribor3m
     poutcome
        contact                                                                                     0.4
          pdays
         month
 cons_conf_idx                                                                                                                                                           f(D1)
            age                                                                                     0.2                                                                  f(S 01)
       duration                                                                                                                                                          f(D0)
  nr_employed                                                                                                                                                            f(S 00)
 emp_var_rate                                                                                       0.0
                   0.8            0.6             0.4         0.2           0.0                           8     6         4              2           0               2
                                                 Shap value                                                                         Output


Figure 14: Attack of XGB fitted on Marketing. Left: GSV before and after the attack with M “ 200.
As a reminder, the sensitive attribute is age. Right: Comparison of the CDF of the misleading
subsets f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.


                                                                                         24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        PctUnemployed                Original                                                                         1.0
     PctVacantBoarded                Manipulated
      PctYoungKids2Par
            PctTeen2Par
            blackPerCap
      PctLargHouseFam                                                                                                 0.8
            racePctHisp
MedOwnCostPctIncNoMtg
          FemalePctDiv
       PctHousLess3BR                                                                                                 0.6
              TotalPctDiv


                                                                                                                CDF
       PctLess9thGrade
             PctFam2Par
          NumUnderPov                                                                                                 0.4
         MalePctDivorce
        PctPopUnderPov
                 PctIlleg                                                                                                                                                    f(D1)
             pctWInvInc                                                                                               0.2
           PctWhite>90                                                                                                                                                       f(S 01)
                NumIlleg                                                                                                                                                     f(D0)
     PctPersDenseHous                                                                                                                                                        f(S 00)
             PctKids2Par                                                                                              0.0
                             1.6          1.4     1.2    1.0       0.8    0.6      0.4          0.2     0.0                       10         5              0          5       10
                                                               Shap value                                                                               Output


Figure 15: Attack of XGB fitted on Communities. Left: GSV before and after the attack with
M “ 200. As a reminder, the sensitive attribute is PctWhite>90. Right: Comparison of the CDF
of the misleading subsets f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.

       HousVacant             Original                                                                              1.0
  PctHousNoPhone              Manipulated
PctPersOwnOccup
        NumImmig
      pctWPubAsst
  PctLess9thGrade                                                                                                   0.8
 PctLargHouseFam
    MalePctDivorce
       PctTeen2Par
       racePctHisp                                                                                                  0.6
     NumUnderPov
   PctPopUnderPov
        TotalPctDiv                                                                                           CDF
 PctYoungKids2Par                                                                                                   0.4
     FemalePctDiv
        pctWInvInc
PctPersDenseHous                                                                                                                                                             f(D1)
       PctFam2Par                                                                                                   0.2
      PctWhite>90                                                                                                                                                            f(S 01)
           PctIlleg                                                                                                                                                          f(D0)
          NumIlleg                                                                                                                                                           f(S 00)
       PctKids2Par                                                                                                  0.0
                      0.07         0.06         0.05    0.04     0.03       0.02         0.01         0.00                  0.0        0.2       0.4             0.6   0.8     1.0
                                                        Shap value                                                                                     Output


Figure 16: Attack of RF fitted on Communities. Left: GSV before and after the attack with M “ 200.
As a reminder, the sensitive attribute is PctWhite>90. Right: Comparison of the CDF of the
misleading subsets f pS01 q, f pS11 q and the CDF over the whole data. f pD0 q, f pD1 q.


E.3       G ENETIC A LGORITHM

This section motivates the use of stealthily biased sampling to perturb Shapley Values in place of the
method of Baniecki et al. (2021), which fools SHAP by perturbing the background dataset S11 via a
                                                                                             1pkq
genetic algorithm. In said genetic algorithm, a population of P fake background datasets tS1 uP   k“1
evolves iteratively following three biological mechanisms

• Cross-Over: Two parents produce two children by switching some of their feature values.
• Mutation: Some individuals are perturbed with small Gaussian noise.
                                                                1pkq                                                                                    1pkq
• Selection: The individuals S1                                        with the smallest amplitudes |Φs pf, S01 , S1 q| are selected for
  the next generation.

Although the use of a genetic algorithm makes the method of Baniecki et al. (2021) very versatile, its
main drawback is that there is no constraint on the similarity between the perturbed background and
the original one. Moreover, the mutation and cross-over operations ignore the correlations between
features and hence the perturbed dataset can contain unrealistic instances. To highlight these issues,
Figure 17 presents the first two principal components of D1 and S11 for the XGB models used in
Section 5.4. On COMPAS and Marketing especially, we see that the fake samples S11 lie in regions
outside of the data manifold. For Adult-Income and Marketing, the fake data overlaps more with the
original one, but this could be an artifact of only visualizing 2 dimensions.
For a more rigorous analysis of “similarity” between S11 and D1 , we must study the detection rate of
the audit detector. To this end, Figures 18 and 19, present the amplitude reduction and the detection
rate after a given number of iterations of the genetic algorithm. These curves show the average and


                                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                    7.5
                  5.0
                                                                                    5.0
   Component 2


                                                                     Component 2
                  2.5
                                                                                    2.5
                  0.0
                                                                                    0.0
                 −2.5
                                                                                   −2.5
                 −5.0
                                                                                   −5.0
                    −2.5        0.0     2.5     5.0       7.5                             −2.5    0.0      2.5     5.0        7.5
                                      Component 1                                                       Component 1

                                 (a) COMPAS                                                      (b) Adult-Income

                  7.5                                                               20

                  5.0


                                                                     Component 2
   Component 2


                                                                                    10
                  2.5

                  0.0                                                                0

                 −2.5
                                                                                   −10
                           −5            0            5                                    −10            0              10
                                      Component 1                                                       Component 1

                                 (c) Marketing                                                   (d) Communities

Figure 17: First two principal components of D1 (Blue) and S11 (Red) returned by the genetic
algorithm on XGB models.


standard deviation across the 5 train/test splits employed in our main experiments. Moreover, window
20 convolutions were used to smooth the curves and make them more readable. On the Marketing
and Communities datasets, we see that for both XGB and Random Forests models, the detector is
quickly able to assert that the data was manipulated. We suspect the genetic algorithm cannot fool
the detector on these two datasets because they contain a large number of features (Marketing has 20,
Communities has 98). Such a large number of features could make it harder to perturbate samples
while staying close to the original data manifold. Since the model behavior is unpredictable outside
of the data manifold, it is impossible for the genetic algorithm to guarantee that the CDF of f pS11 q
will be close to the CDF of f pD1 q. For adult-income, the detection rate appears to be lower but still,
the largest reductions in amplitude of the sensitive feature were about 15%, even after 2.5 hours of
run-time.
Contrary to the genetic algorithm, our method Fool SHAP addresses both constraints of making the
fake data realistic and keeping it close to the original dataset. Indeed, our objective is tuned to make
sure that the Wasserstein distance between the original and perturbed data is small. Moreover, since
we do not generate new samples but rather apply non-uniform weights to pre-existing ones, we do
not run into the risk of generating unrealistic data.


                                                                26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  30                                                                                                       15



    Relative Amplitude Decrease


                                                                                                             Relative Amplitude Decrease
                                                                                  80                                                                                                                50

                                                                                                                                                                                                    40


                                                                                       Detection Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Detection Rate
                                                                                  60
                                  20                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                  40
                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                  10                                                                                                        5
                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                    10

                                   0                                              0                                                         0                                                       0
                                       0        100        200         300      400                                                             0       100         200              300          400
                                                        Iterations                                                                                               Iterations

                                                      (a) COMPAS                                                                                             (b) Adult-Income
                                                                                                                                           15                                                      100
    Relative Amplitude Decrease


                                                                                                             Relative Amplitude Decrease
                                                                                  80
                                  30                                                                                                                                                               80


                                                                                       Detection Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Detection Rate
                                                                                  60                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                                                                   60
                                  20
                                                                                  40                                                                                                               40
                                                                                                                                            5
                                  10
                                                                                  20                                                                                                               20

                                   0                                              0                                                         0                                                      0
                                       0        100        200         300      400                                                             0       25         50           75          100
                                                        Iterations                                                                                               Iterations

                                                      (c) Marketing                                                                                          (d) Communities

                                       Figure 18: Iterations of the genetic algorithm applied to 5 XGB models per dataset.

                                  15                                                                                                                                                                   40
    Relative Amplitude Decrease


                                                                                                             Relative Amplitude Decrease


                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                           10.0
                                                                                       Detection Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                       30


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Detection Rate
                                  10                                              15
                                                                                                                                            7.5

                                                                                  10                                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                            5.0
                                   5
                                                                                  5                                                         2.5                                                        10


                                   0                                              0                                                         0.0                                                     0
                                       0         50        100         150      200                                                                 0   20       40        60          80         100
                                                        Iterations                                                                                                Iterations

                                                      (a) COMPAS                                                                                             (b) Adult-Income
                                  25                                             100                                                       10                                                      100
    Relative Amplitude Decrease


                                                                                                             Relative Amplitude Decrease


                                  20                                             80                                                         8                                                      80
                                                                                       Detection Rate


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Detection Rate


                                  15                                             60                                                         6                                                      60

                                  10                                             40                                                         4                                                      40

                                   5                                             20                                                         2                                                      20

                                   0                                             0                                                          0                                                      0
                                   0.0         2.5      5.0      7.5     10.0                                                                   0       5          10       15              20
                                                        Iterations                                                                                               Iterations

                                                      (c) Marketing                                                                                          (d) Communities

                                           Figure 19: Iterations of the genetic algorithm applied to 5 RF models per dataset.


.


                                                                                                        27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.4    M ULTIPLE S ENSITIVE ATTRIBUTES

We present preliminary results for settings where one wishes to manipulate the Shapley values
of multiple sensitive features s each part of a set s P S. For example, in our experiments, we
considered gender as a sensitive attribute for the Adult-Income dataset and we showed that one
can diminish the attribution of this feature. Nonetheless, there are two other features in Adult-
Income that share information with gender: relationship and marital-status. In-
deed, relationship can take the value widowed and marital-status can take the value
wife, which are both proxies of gender=female. For this reason, these two other features
may be considered sensitive and decision-making that relies strongly on them may not be ac-
ceptable. Hence, we must derive a method that reduces the total attributions of the features in
S “ tgender, relationship, marital-statusu.
                         ř          p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q s for any s P S. In our experiments, all these signs
We first let βs :“ signr zpjq PD1 Φ             0
will typically be negative. The proposed approach is to minimize the `1 norm
                                                               ÿ
                              p s pf, S 1 , S 1 qqsPS }1 :“
                            }pΦ                                    p s pf, S 1 , S 1 q |,
                                                                  |Φ                                      (41)
                                        0    1                              0     1
                                                                sPS

which we interpret as the total amount of disparity we can attribute to the sensitive attributes. Re-
member that Φp s pf, S 1 , S 1 q converges in probability to ř pjq                 1     pjq
                                                                z PD1 ωj Φs pf, S0 , z       q (cf. Proposition
                                                                         p
                      0     1
4.1). Therefore minimizing the `1 norm will require minimizing
               ÿ           ÿ                                  ÿ     ÿ
                   βs                 p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q “
                                   ωj Φ                          ωj       p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q,
                                                                       βs Φ                                (42)
                                               0                                    0
                 sPS     z pjq PD1                            z pjq PD1   sPS

which is again a linear function of the weights. We present Algorithm 4 as an overload of Algorithm
1 that now supports taking multiple sensitive attributes as inputs.

Algorithm 4 Compute non-uniform weights for multiple sensitive attributes s P S
                                                              (
 1: procedure COMPUTE _ WEIGHTS(D1 , Φ  p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q      , λ)
                                                 0             s,j
                   ř              1   pjq
 2:    βs :“ signr   pjq  Φs pf, S , z q s @s P S;
                           p
                           z   PD1           0
 3:      B :“ CpD1 , 1{N1 q                                             Ź Unmanipulated background
           1
 4:      Bω  :“ CpD1 , ωq                              Ź Manipulated background as a function of ω
                         ř              ř               1     pjq            1
 5:      ω “ arg minω      z pjq PD1 ωj  sPS βs Φs pf, S0 , z
                                                p                 q ` λWpB, Bω q
 6:      return ω;

                                                                                      ř         p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q
The only difference in the resulting MCF is that we must use the cost apeq “ sPS βs Φ                    0
for edges ps, `j q in the graph G of Figure 6. This new algorithm is guaranteed to diminish the `1
norm of the attributions of all sensitive features. However, that this does not imply that all sensitive
attributes will diminish in amplitude. Indeed, minimizing the sum of multiple quantities does not
guarantee that each quantity will diminish. For example, 4 ` 7 is smaller than 6 ` 6 although 4
is smaller than 6 and 7 is higher than 6. Still, we see reducing the `1 norm as a natural way to
hide the total amount of disparity that is attributable to the sensitive features. Another important
methodological change is the way we select the optimal hyper-parameter λ in Algorithm 3. Now at
                              ř      ř              p s pf, S 1 , z pjq q| as a selection criterion.
line 12, we use the `1 norm sPS | zpjq PD1 ωj Φ              0

Figures 20 and 21 present preliminary results of attacks on three RFs/XGBs fitted on Adults with
different train/test splits. We note that in all cases, before the attack, the three sensitive features had
large negative attributions. By applying our method, we can considerably reduce the amplitude of
the two sensitive attributes. The attribution of the remaining sensitive feature remains approximately
constant or slightly becomes more negative. We leave it as future work to run large-scale experiments
with multiple sensitive features for various datasets.


                                                         28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     100
                                                               0.000
                      80
Detection Rate (%)


                                                              −0.025
                      60


                                                        GSV
                                                              −0.050
                      40

                      20                                      −0.075
                                                                                      Sensitive features
                       0 λ   ?                                −0.100                  Other features
                                                                       λ?
                                 102       103   104                        102         103                104
                                       λ
                                                                                  λ
                     100
                                                               0.000
                      80
Detection Rate (%)


                                                              −0.025
                      60
                                                        GSV


                                                              −0.050
                      40
                                                              −0.075
                      20                                                              Sensitive features
                                                              −0.100
                       0 λ   ?                                                        Other features
                                                                       λ?
                                 102       103   104                        102         103                104
                                       λ
                                                                                  λ
                     100
                                                               0.000
                      80
Detection Rate (%)


                                                              −0.025
                      60
                                                        GSV


                                                              −0.050
                      40
                                                              −0.075
                      20                                                              Sensitive features
                                                              −0.100                  Other features
                       0 λ?
                                                                       λ?
                                 102       103   104                        102         103                104
                                       λ
                                                                                  λ

Figure 20: Example of log-space search over values of λ using RFs classifier fitted on Adults and
three sensitive attributes. Each row is a different train/test split seed. (Left) The detection rate as
a function of the parameter λ of the attack. (Right) For each value of λ, the vertical slice of the
                                                       1
11 curves is the GSV obtained with the resulting Bω      . The goal here is to reduce the amplitude all
sensitive features (red curves) in order to hide their contribution to the disparity in model outcomes.


                                                       29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     100                                           0.2

                      80                                           0.0
Detection Rate (%)


                      60                                          −0.2


                                                            GSV
                      40                                          −0.4
                      20                                          −0.6                   Sensitive features
                       0     λ   ?                                                       Other features
                                                                  −0.8    λ?
                                     102       103   104
                                           λ                                   102       103                  104
                                                                                     λ
                     100                                           0.2

                      80                                           0.0
Detection Rate (%)


                      60                                          −0.2
                                                            GSV


                      40                                          −0.4

                      20                                          −0.6
                                                                                         Sensitive features
                       0     λ   ?                                −0.8                   Other features
                                     102       103   104                  λ?
                                           λ                                   102       103                  104
                                                                                     λ
                     100
                                                                   0.2
                      80
Detection Rate (%)


                                                                   0.0
                      60
                                                            GSV


                                                                  −0.2
                      40
                                                                  −0.4
                      20
                                                                                         Sensitive features
                                                                  −0.6
                       0 λ   ?                                                           Other features
                                                                         λ?
                                     102       103   104
                                           λ                                   102       103                  104
                                                                                     λ

Figure 21: Example of log-space search over values of λ using XGBs classifier fitted on Adults and
three sensitive attributes. Each row is a different train/test split seed. (Left) The detection rate as
a function of the parameter λ of the attack. (Right) For each value of λ, the vertical slice of the
                                                       1
11 curves is the GSV obtained with the resulting Bω      . The goal here is to reduce the amplitude all
sensitive features (red curves) in order to hide their contribution to the disparity in model outcomes.


                                                           30
