Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


SYNG4ME: M ODEL E VALUATION USING S YNTHETIC
T EST DATA
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Model evaluation is a crucial step in ensuring reliable machine learning systems.
         Currently, predictive models are evaluated on held-out test data, quantifying aggre-
         gate model performance. Limitations of available test data make it challenging to
         evaluate model performance on small subgroups or when the environment changes.
         Synthetic test data provides a unique opportunity to address this challenge; instead
         of evaluating predictive models on real data, we propose to use synthetic data.
         This brings two advantages. First, supplementing and increasing the amount of
         evaluation data can lower the variance of model performance estimates compared
         to evaluation on the original test data. This is especially true for local performance
         evaluation in low-density regions, e.g. minority or intersectional groups. Second,
         generative models can be conditioned as to induce a shift in the synthetic data
         distribution, allowing us to evaluate how supervised models could perform in
         different target settings. In this work, we propose SYNG4ME: an automated suite
         of synthetic data generators for model evaluation. By generating smart synthetic
         data sets, data practitioners have a new tool for exploring how supervised models
         may perform on subgroups of the data, and how robust methods are to distribu-
         tional shifts. We show experimentally that SYNG4ME achieves more accurate
         performance estimates compared to using the test data alone.


1    I NTRODUCTION
For machine learning (ML) to be truly useful in safety-critical and high-impact areas such as medicine
or finance, it is crucial that models are rigorously audited and evaluated. Failure to perform rigorous
testing could result in models at best failing unpredictably and at worst leading to silent failures. There
are many examples, such as models that perform unexpectedly on certain subgroups (Oakden-Rayner
et al., 2020; Suresh & Guttag, 2019; Cabrera et al., 2019b;a) or models not generalizing across
domains due to distributional mismatches (Pianykh et al., 2020; Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Koh
et al., 2021). Understanding such model limitations is vital to imbue trust in ML systems, as well as
guide user understanding as to the conditions in which the model can be safely and reliably used.
Many mature industries involve standardized processes to evaluate performance under a variety of
testing and/or operating conditions (Gebru et al., 2021). For instance, automobiles make use of
wind tunnels and crash tests to assess specific components, whilst electronic component datasheets
outline conditions where reliable operation is guaranteed. Unfortunately, current approaches to
characterize performance of supervised ML models do not have the same level of detail and rigor.
Instead, the prevailing approach in ML is to evaluate only using average prediction performance
on a hold-out test set. Average performance on a test set from the same underlying distribution has
two clear disadvantages. (1) No insight into granular performance: by treating all samples equally,
we may miss performance differences for smaller subgroups. Even if we would decide to evaluate
performance on a more granular level, we may not have enough real test data to get an accurate
evaluation for small subgroups. (2) Ignores distributional shifts: the world is constantly evolving,
hence the setting of interest may not have the same data distribution as the test set. This typically
leads to overestimated real-world performance (Patel et al., 2008; Recht et al., 2019).
The community has attempted to address both of these issues. (1) Granular performance: Ribeiro
et al. (2020) and Röttger et al. (2021) propose using model behavioral testing methods for model
evaluation — which manually craft tests of specific model use-cases, and (2) Distributional shifts:


                                                    1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(i)                    (ii)          (iii)                (i)                (ii)            (iii)

             (P1) Reliable granular evaluation                  (P2) Sensitivity to distributional shifts

Figure 1: SYNG4ME is a framework for evaluating model performance using synthetic data gen-
erators. It has three phases: training the generative model, generating synthetic data and model
evaluation. Firstly, SYNG4ME enables (P1) reliable granular evaluation when there is (i) limited real
test data in small subgroups, by (ii) generating synthetic data conditional on subgroup information
Xc , thereby (iii) permitting more reliable model evaluation even on small subgroups. Secondly,
SYNG4ME enables assessment of (P2) sensitivity to distributional shifts when (i) the real test data
does not reflect shifts, by (ii) generating synthetic data conditional on marginal shift information of
features Xc , thereby (iii) quantifying model sensitivity to distributional shift. Required inputs are
denoted in yellow.

Koh et al. (2021) and Hendrycks & Dietterich (2018) propose benchmark datasets from different
domains for model evaluation—either by finding a real dataset in the wild or through corrupted data.
Both approaches are largely manual, labor-intensive processes. This raises the following question:
Can we define a model evaluation framework where the evaluation is both low-effort and customizable
to new datasets such that practitioners can evaluate their trained ML model(s) under a variety of
conditions, customized for their specific tasks and datasets of choice?
With the above in mind, our goal is to build a model evaluation framework with the following desired
properties (P1-P2), motivated by practical, real-world ML failure cases (cited below):
(P1) Reliable granular evaluation: we want to accurately evaluate predictive model performance
on a granular level, even for regions with few test samples. For example, evaluating performance
on (i) subgroups (Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020; Suresh et al., 2018; Goel et al., 2020; Cabrera et al.,
2019a;b), (ii) samples of interest (Deo, 2015; Savage, 2012; Nezhad et al., 2017) and (iii) low-density
regions (Saria & Subbaswamy, 2019; D’Amour et al., 2020; Cohen et al., 2021).
(P2) Sensitivity to distributional shifts: we want to accurately evaluate model performance and
sensitivity when the deployment distribution is different, as this often leads to model degradation
(Pianykh et al., 2020; Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Koh et al., 2021).
Contributions. This paper makes the following contributions.

      1. Practical model evaluation framework: We propose Synthetic Data Generation for Model
         Evaluation (SYNG4ME, pronounced: “sing for me”): an evaluation framework for characteriz-
         ing ML model performance for both (P1) reliable granular evaluation and (P2) sensitivity to
         distributional shifts (Sec. 4). At its core, SYNG4ME uses generative models to create synthetic
         test sets for model evaluation. For example, as illustrated in Fig. 1 we can generate larger test
         sets for small subgroups or test sets with shifts in distribution. To the best of our knowledge,
         this is the first work that focuses on synthetic data for evaluating supervised models.

      2. Accurate granular performance evaluation: We find that the use of synthetic test data
         provides a more accurate estimate of the true performance on small subgroups compared to
         just using the small (real) test set alone (Sec. 5.1). This is especially true when for evaluating
         performance on minority and intersectional subgroups, for which we introduce the intersectional
         model performance matrix (Fig. 4).

      3. Quantifying model sensitivity to distributional shifts: We show how synthetic test data is able
         to quantify predictive model performance changes as a result of common distributional shifts
         (defined in Sec. 3), both in terms of model sensitivity across the operating range (Sec. 5.2.1)
         and with only high-level knowledge of the shift (Sec. 5.2.2).


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2    R ELATED WORK

This paper primarily engages with the literature on model testing and benchmarking, synthetic data,
and data-centric AI. We include an extended discussion of related work in Appendix A.
Model testing. ML models are mostly evaluated on hold-out datasets, providing a measure of
aggregate performance (Flach, 2019). Such aggregate measures do not account for underperfor-
mance on specific subgroups (Oakden-Rayner et al., 2020) or assess performance under data shifts
(Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Wiles et al., 2021). The ML community has tried to remedy these
issues. The first approach is to create better benchmark datasets: either synthetic such as Imagenet-C
(Hendrycks & Dietterich, 2018) or by collecting real data such as the Wilds benchmark (Koh et al.,
2021). Benchmark datasets are labor-intensive to collect and evaluation is limited to specific bench-
mark tasks, hence this approach is not flexible for any dataset or task. The second approach is model
behavioral testing of specified properties of an ML model, e.g. see Checklist (Ribeiro et al., 2020) or
HateCheck (Röttger et al., 2021). These methods are also labor-intensive, requiring humans to either
create or validate the tests. In contrast to both paradigms, SYNG4ME generates the evaluation suite
in an automated manner and is applicable to an end-user’s specific task.
Synthetic data. Improvements in generative models, such as GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014), have
propelled the development of synthetic data. Typically, synthetic data is used to overcome challenges
of real data, for example privacy concerns (i.e. to enable data sharing, Jordon et al., 2018; Assefa
et al., 2020), and unfairness in real data (Xu et al., 2019a; van Breugel et al., 2021). SYNG4ME
provides a different use of synthetic data; improving testing and characterization of ML model
performance. This is most closely related to (Antoniou et al., 2017; Dina et al., 2022; Das et al., 2022;
Bing et al., 2022), who show that synthetic data can improve downstream model training, especially
for making predictions on small subgroups (Bing et al., 2022; Antoniou et al., 2017). However, in
contrast to SYNG4ME, these works do not consider distributional shifts (other than balancing the
training dataset), and do not explore the use of synthetic data for model evaluation.


3    P RELIMINARIES

Notation. Let X and Y be the feature and label space, respectively, together denoted as X̃ = (X, Y ).
Assume we have a trained black-box prediction model f : X → Y and also assume we have access
                                      Ntest,f                 iid
to a test dataset Dtest,f = {xi , yi }i=1     with (xi , yi ) ∼ p(X, Y ) , for underlying distribution
p(X, Y ). Importantly, we do not assume access to the training data of the predictive models, Dtrain,f .
Generating synthetic datasets for testing. In the common benchmarking scenario, we compute
an average score (e.g. accuracy) of the predictor f over Dtest,f . However, for our evaluation suite
we wish to get an indication of how the model performance may differ for different subgroups or
across different parts of the distribution and how it may change if the test distribution is shifted. To
                                                              1             k
evaluate this, we develop a variety of synthetic datasets {Dsyn  , . . . , Dsyn } based on Dtest,f , with
the desired properties. To do so, we use a deep generative model G trained on Dtrain,G = Dtest,f .
Note that any existing generative model class can be plugged into this framework, e.g. VAEs, GANs
or normalizing flows. Appendix C outlines how the generative model is selected and tuned.


4    M ODEL E VALUATION USING S YNTHETIC DATA

Overview. Our goal is to generate datasets to evaluate predictive models, providing insight into
model performance on specific groups or new environments. The latter may consist of data limited to
a specific subspace or subgroup, or coming from a shifted distribution. We introduce an evaluation
suite SYNG4ME, which has the following workflow (Fig. 1): (1) train a (conditional) generative
model on the real test set, (2) generate synthetic data conditionally on the subgroup or marginal
shift specification, and (3) evaluate model performance on the generated data. As per Sec. 3, the
SYNG4ME framework is flexible w.r.t. the generative model. In this paper, we focus on tabular
data, the predominant format in many domains, e.g., medicine, finance, manufacturing (Borisov
et al., 2021), and hence illustrate SYNG4ME using CTGAN (Xu et al., 2019b) as the generative
model—see Appendix C other generative model results and more details on the generative training


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


process. Below, we elaborate on how SYNG4ME is formulated to enable: (P1) Reliable granular
evaluation and (P2) Sensitivity to distributional shifts.

4.1      I MPROVING GRANULAR MODEL EVALUATION THROUGH SYNTHETIC DATA (P1)

Models have been shown to have variable performance for different subgroups (Oakden-Rayner et al.,
2020; Suresh & Guttag, 2019; Cabrera et al., 2019a;b). Reliable evaluation of model performance at
such granular levels is often challenging, especially as we may have access to a limited number of
real test examples per subgroup. This challenge is more pronounced with intersectional subgroups.
In evaluating performance on subgroups, we assume that a subgroup S ⊂ X is given. To evaluate
the performance of some predictive model f on S, the usual way to assess performance is simply
restricting the test set Dtest,f to the subspace S. Specifically, given some prediction metric M :
Y × Y → R:
                                             1          X
                   A(f ; Dtest,f , S) =                            M (f (x), f (y)),           (1)
                                        Dtest,f ∩ S
                                                             (x,y)∈Dtest,f ∩S

which with increasing |Dtest,f | converges to the true performance A∗ (f ; p, S)                      =
EX,Y [M (f (X), Y )|(X, Y ) ∈ S].
However, what happens when |Dtest,f ∩ S| is small? The variance VDtest,f ∼p A(f, Dtest,f ; S) will
be large. Therefore, if we use a normal test set for evaluation, this could mean performance estimates
for minority groups are likely to be inaccurate. Since over- and underestimated performance on
these sensitive groups may have negative consequences, this is highly undesirable.
Instead of using Dtest,f , we use a generative model G trained on Dtest,f to create a large synthetic
dataset Dsyn . Subsequently, we measure performance with respect to the synthetic dataset, i.e.
A(f ; Dsyn , S). In Sec. 4.3 we explore why synthetic data may give better estimates compared to test
data, i.e. why |A∗ − A(f ; Dsyn , S)| ≤ |A∗ − A(f ; Dtest,f , S)| in expectation.
Defining subgroups. The actual definition of subgroups is flexible. Examples include a specific
category of one feature (e.g. female), intersectional subgroups (Crenshaw, 1989) (e.g. black, female),
slices from continuous variables (e.g. over 75 years old), particular points of interest (e.g. people
similar to patient X), and outlier groups. In Appendix D.1 we elaborate on some of these further.

4.2      P REDICTING SENSITIVITY TO DISTRIBUTIONAL SHIFTS (P2)

Distributional shifts between training and test sets are not unusual in practice and have been shown to
degrade model performance (Pianykh et al., 2020; Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Koh et al., 2021).
Unfortunately, often there may be no or insufficient data available from the shifted target domain.
To address this, we can consider a family of shifts T and test how a model would behave under
different shifts in the family. Recall, we consider the shifts defined in Sec. 3. Let P be the space of
distributions defined on X̃ . We test models on data from T (p)(X̃), for all T ∈ T , with T : P → P.
The recipe is simple and as follows: (1) Train generator G on Dtrain,G to fit p(X), (2) Define family
of possible shifts T , either with or without background knowledge. Denote shift with magnitude s by
T s ; (3) Set s and generate data Dsyn
                                     s
                                         from T s (p); (4) Evaluate model on Dsyn
                                                                               s
                                                                                  ; (5) Repeat steps 2-4
for different families of shifts and magnitudes s.
Defining shifts. In practice, we may expect a distributional shift between the training set and target
environment (Quinonero-Candela et al., 2008; Amodei et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2021). In some
cases, there is prior knowledge to define shifts. For example, covariate shift (Shimodaira, 2000;
Moreno-Torres et al., 2012) focuses on a changing covariate distribution p(X), but a constant label
distribution p(Y |X) conditional on the features. Label (prior probability) shift (Saerens et al., 2002;
Moreno-Torres et al., 2012) is defined vice versa, with fixed p(X|Y ) and changing p(Y ). 1
Generalizing this slightly, let c ⊂ {1, ..., |X̃|} be the indices the features or targets in X̃, of which
the marginal distribution may shift. Equivalent to covariate and label shift literature, we assume
the distribution p(X̃c̄ |X̃c ) remains constant (c̄ denoting the complement of c).2 Let us denote the
   1
       Concept drifts are beyond the scope of this work.
   2
       This reduces to label and covariate shift for X̃c = Y or X̃c = X, respectively.


                                                         4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


marginal’s shifted distribution by ps (X̃c ) with s the shift magnitude, with p0 (X̃c ) having generated
the original data. The full shifted distribution is p(X̃c̄ |X̃c )ps (X̃c ).
Characterizing sensitivity for single marginal shifts. We consider the typical distributional shift
setting, where we assume the marginal of some variables X̃c changes, but the distribution of the
other variables conditional on X̃c remains fixed (see Sec. 3). Without further knowledge, we study
the simplest case first: only X̃i ’s marginal is shifted. Letting p0 (X̃i ) denote the original marginal,
let us define a family of shifts ps (X̃i ) with s the shift magnitude. For illustration, we choose a
mean shift for continuous variables, ps (X̃i ) = p0 (X̃i − s), and a logistic shift for any binary,
logit ps (X̃i = 1) = logit (ps (X̃i )) − s. 3 Following Sec. 3, we assume p(X̃¬i |X̃i ) remains constant.
This implies T s (p)(X̃) = ps (X̃i )p(X̃¬i |Xi ). This can be repeated for all i and multiple s, in order
to get characteristic curves of the sensitivity of the model performance to distributional shifts. The
actual shift can be achieved using any conditional generative model, with the condition given by X̃i .
Incorporating prior knowledge on shift. In many scenarios, we may want to make stronger
assumptions about the types of shift to consider. Let us give two use cases. First, we may acquire
high-level statistics of some variables in the target domain—e.g. we may know that the age in
the target domain approximately follows a normal distribution N (50, 10). In other cases, we may
actually acquire data in the target domain for some basic variables (e.g. age and gender), but not
all variables. In both cases, we can explicitly use this knowledge for sampling the shifted variables
X̃c , and subsequently generating X̃c̄ |X̃c —e.g. sample (case 1) age from N (50, 10) or (case 2)
(age,gender) from the target dataset. Variables X̃c̄ |X̃c are generated using the original generator G,
trained on Dtest,f .


4.3   W HERE THE MAGIC HAPPENS

We should consider why evaluating
granular performance on the synthetic
data (A(f ; Dsyn , S)) could give bet-
ter estimates than using just the test
data itself (A(f ; Dtest,f , S))). This is
somewhat counterintuitive, since we             (a) Original data        (b) With synthetic data
are training the generative model on
the original test set, thereby adding the Figure 2: Illustration why synthetic data can give more
additional complexity of a generative accurate estimates for low-density regions. Assume we
model and (potentially) no other infor- want to evaluate f (decision boundary=dashed line), which
mation (cf. typical data augmentation aims to discriminate between Y = 1 (green stars) and Y = 0
that benefits from known invariances). (red circles). Due to the low number of samples for Y = 1,
The value does not come from simply evaluating f using the test set alone (Eq. 1) has a high
generating more data—a very large variance. On the other hand, a generative model can learn
synthetic dataset would reduce vari- the manifold from Dtest,f , and generate additional data for
ance of the downstream predictions Y = 1 by only learning the offset (b, green triangles). This
w.r.t. the generative model random- can reduce variance of the estimated performance of f .
ness, but not necessarily w.r.t the un-
derlying test distribution from which the generator’s data was drawn (which we cannot change).
Instead, the answer may lie in the implicit data representations that the generative model learns
(Antoniou et al., 2017); i.e. generative models can learn relationships within the data (e.g. low-
dimensional manifolds) from the entire dataset and transfer this knowledge to low-density regions
(e.g. small subgroups). We give an example in Fig. 2.
Evidently, synthetic data cannot always help model evaluation; e.g. if there is little structural
knowledge that can be transferred from the high- to low-density region, or if there is not enough data
to do so. In Appendix C.2, we experimentally explore when synthetic data helps—and when it does
not. By combining synthetic data with real data, we observe almost consistent benefits (see Sec. 5).

   3
     We consider any categorical variable with m classes using m different shifts of the individual probabilities,
scaling the other probabilities appropriately.


                                                        5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               Race 1 (Majority)
                               Race 5 (Minority)


                     (a) Dtest,f                   (b) Doracle               (c) SYNG4ME
Figure 3: Qualitative assessment of synthetic data. T-SNE on the Adult dataset comparing the real test data
Dtest,f , oracle data Doracle and SYNG4ME data Dsyn . We find that SYGN4ME generates synthetic test data
that covers the oracle dataset well, despite only having access to Dtest,f during training.



5     U SE CASES OF SYNG4ME
This section demonstrates how SYNG4ME satisfies (P1) Reliable granular evaluation and (P2)
Sensitivity to distributional shifts. We re-iterate that the aim throughout is to estimate the true
prediction performance of model f as closely as possible. We tune and select the generative model
itself based on Maximum Mean Discrepancy (Gretton et al., 2012), see Appendix C for details.
Datasets. We conduct experiments with the following real-world datasets. (P1) Reliable granular
evaluation (Sec. 5.1) using UCI’s Adult dataset (Asuncion & Newman, 2007), known to exhibit
performance variations between subgroups due to data imbalances (Cabrera et al., 2019a;b) and a
Covid-19 dataset of Brazilian patients (Baqui et al., 2020), where ethnic subgroups exhibit variations
in representation. (P2) Sensitivity to distribution shift (Sec. 5.2) using Adult, but also two medical
prostate cancer datasets; SEER (Duggan et al., 2016) from the USA and CUTRACT (Prostate
Cancer UK) from the UK, which have the same features, yet have real covariate shift. We describe
the datasets, as well as specific experimental details, in Appendix B.

5.1   (P1) R ELIABLE GRANULAR EVALUATION

Methodology. This experiment illustrates the value of synthetic data when evaluating model perfor-
mance on data subgroups. We consider two types of groups.4 ⃝     1 Minority subgroups: we evaluate
the race subgroup of the Adult dataset, which has severe imbalances in proportional representation
of different race groups, with one subgroup accounting for 0.86 of the data, while the remaining
minority subgroups are < 0.1 each. We conduct similar ethnicity subgroup evaluation using the
Covid-19 dataset (see Appendix D.3.4). The challenge with minority subgroups is that the conven-
tional paradigm of using a hold-out evaluation set might have high-variance in performance estimates
due to the small sample size of the subgroup of interest. ⃝
                                                          2 Intersectional subgroups: we go beyond
a single minority group and evaluate intersectional subgroups (Crenshaw, 1989) (e.g. black males or
young females)—for which we introduce the intersectional model performance matrix (see Fig. 4).
Set-up. We evaluate the subgroup performance of trained model f using different evaluation
sets. The baseline is Dtest,f : a typical hold-out test dataset. We compare this to two SYNG4ME
test datasets, which generate to balance the subgroup samples: (i) SYNG4ME (Dsyn ): synthetic
data generated by G, which is trained on Dtest,f and (ii) SYNG4ME+ (Dsyn ∪ Dtest,f ): test data
augmented with synthetic dataset. For some subgroup S, each test set gives an estimated model
performance A(f ; D· , S), which we compare to the pseudo-oracle performance A(f ; Doracle , S): the
performance of model f evaluated on a large amount of unseen real data Doracle ∼ p(X, Y ), where
|Doracle | ≫ |Dtest,f |.5 We desire that the evaluated model performance estimate approximates the
model performance on Doracle . This is quantified with the following metrics: (1) mean absolute
error between A(f ; Doracle , S) and A(f ; D· , S), and (2) worst-case performance difference (see
Appendix D.3.2).
Analysis. Fig. 3 illustrates that the SYNG4ME synthetic data closely resembles the oracle data.
Table 1 illustrates that for small subgroups (i.e. racial minorities), SYNG4ME provides a more
accurate evaluation of model performance (i.e. with estimates closer to the oracle) compared to a
    4
      Appendix D.1 contains experiments for other definitions of subgroups, including performance on low-density
regions and performance estimates for single samples of interest.
    5
      Specifically, {Dtrain,f ,Dtest,f ,Doracle } = {8.4k, 2.1k, 19.6k}.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Mean absolute difference between pre-
dicted performance and performance evaluated by
oracle. SYNG4ME better approximates true per-
formance on minority subgroups, compared to test
data (Dtest,f ). SYNG4ME+ enjoys the best of
both worlds by combining synthetic and real data.
 Model   Subgroup (%)            Mean Absolute Error % ↓
             Race       SYNG4ME SYNG4ME+                Dtest,f
           #1 (86%)     7.26 ± 0.94 2.31 ± 1.56 10.02 ± 3.36
           #2 (9%)      4.33 ± 0.34 4.55 ± 0.38      6.83 ± 2.67
  RF
           #3 (3%)      3.48 ± 0.82 2.98 ± 0.79 13.68 ± 4.39
           #4 (1%)      1.14 ± 0.62 1.18 ± 0.62      7.26 ± 3.79
           #5 (1%)      1.03 ± 0.85 0.96 ± 0.84      8.06 ± 2.00
           #1 (86%)     7.47 ± 0.83 2.97 ± 0.85      1.39 ± 0.98
           #2 (9%)      4.25 ± 0.36 4.07 ± 0.31       2.14 ± 1.0
                                                                   Figure 4: Intersectional performance matrix for RF
 GBDT
           #3 (3%)      4.40 ± 0.91 4.16 ± 0.91      4.39 ± 1.92   model, which diagnoses underperforming (blue)
           #4 (1%)      1.61 ± 0.62 1.61 ± 0.65      4.50 ± 4.73
           #5 (1%)      0.68 ± 0.58 0.68 ± 0.56      6.31 ± 3.29   2-feature subgroups. For example, there is under-
           #1 (86%)     6.79 ± 1.09 2.85 ± 0.74      1.07 ± 0.83
           #2 (9%)      5.06 ± 0.37 4.72 ± 0.27      1.63 ± 1.35
                                                                   performance on “wives” with 2 or less years of
  MLP
           #3 (3%)      3.60 ± 0.82 3.43 ± 0.83      4.75 ± 0.94   education, and self-employed who work more than
           #4 (1%)      0.55 ± 0.29 0.57 ± 0.31      6.21 ± 3.44
           #5 (1%)      0.48 ± 0.53 0.47 ± 0.54      4.46 ± 2.85   80 hours a week (see arrows).

conventional hold-out dataset (Dtest,f ). In addition, SYNG4ME estimates have reduced standard
deviation. Thus, despite SYNG4ME using the same (randomly drawn test set) Dtest,f to train its
generator, its estimates are more robust to this randomness. The results highlight an evaluation pitfall
of the standard hold-out test set paradigm: the estimate’s high variance w.r.t. the drawn Dtest,f
could lead to potentially misleading conclusions about model performance in the wild, since an
end-user only has access to a single draw of Dtest,f . e.g., we might incorrectly overestimate the true
performance of minorities. The use of synthetic data solves this.
That said, we observe that SYNG4ME sometimes degrades the estimate for the majority group—
where there is already enough data for an accurate estimate, the added randomness of the generative
model is not outweighed by any potential benefits. SYNG4ME+ achieves the best of both worlds by
using a mixture of real and synthetic data, however its majority class performance is still sometimes
poorer than that of test data alone. Consequently, we conclude that synthetic data is recommended
for small subgroups, but has limited application to subgroups that are already large.
Next, we move beyond single-feature minority subgroups and show that synthetic data can also be
used to evaluate performance on intersectional groups — subgroups that are typically even smaller
due to the intersection. SYNG4ME performance estimates on 2-feature intersections are shown in
Fig. 4. Intersectional performance matrices provide model developers insight into where they can
improve their model most, as well as inform users how a model may perform on intersections of
groups (especially important to evaluate sensitive intersectional subgroups).6 Appendix E further
illustrates how these intersectional performance matrices can be used as part of model reports.
We evaluate the intersectional performance estimates of SYNG4ME and the baseline Dtest,f using the
Mean Absolute Error of the performance matrices compared to the oracle. The error, averaged across
3 models (i.e, RF, GBDT, MLP), of SYNG4ME (0.13 ± 0.002) is significantly lower than Dtest,f
(0.21 ± 0.002), hence demonstrating SYNG4ME provides more reliable intersectional estimates.
Takeaway. Synthetic data provides more accurate performance estimates on small subgroups
compared to just evaluating on a standard test set. This result coupled with the intersectional model
performance matrix is especially relevant from a representational bias and fairness perspective—
allowing more accurate evaluation of how models will perform on minority subgroups.

5.2      (P2) S ENSITIVITY TO DISTRIBUTIONAL SHIFTS

ML models deployed in the wild often encounter data distributed differently from the training set.
We simulate distributional shifts in order to evaluate model performance under different operating
    6
      N.B. low performance estimates by SYNG4ME only indicate poor model performance; this does not
necessarily imply that the data itself is biased for these subgroups. However, it could warrant further investigation
in potential data bias and how to improve the model.


                                                                   7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


conditions that might be encountered post-deployment. In the first experiment, we assume no prior
knowledge of the shift, whereas in the second we assume some target data is available.

5.2.1   N O PRIOR KNOWLEDGE : CHARACTERIZING SENSITIVITY ACROSS OPERATING RANGES

Methodology. Assume we have no prior information about the future model deployment environment
or how it might change. In this case, we still wish to characterize model behavior and sensitivity for
different potential operating conditions, such that a practitioner understands trends of model behavior
under different conditions, which can guide as to when the model can and cannot be used.
Set-up. We consider shifts in the marginal of some feature Xi , keeping p(X̃¬i |Xi ) fixed (see
Sec. 3). We consider a shift in the marginal’s mean (see Sec. 4.2). We name the resulting shift-
performance plots model sensitivity curves; analogous to component characteristic curves widely used
in engineering fields. To assess the validity of the behavioral trends captured by model sensitivity
curves, we compare estimated performance w.r.t. a pseudo-oracle test set. As in Sec. 5.1, oracle
consists of a large unseen test set, which we shift using rejection sampling (see Appendix B).
Analysis. To showcase the                                                                 GBDT (SYNG4ME) #1
                                                                                          GBDT (Oracle) #1
                                                                                                                          0.900
                                                                                                                                   GBDT (SYNG4ME) #1
                                                                                                                                   GBDT (Oracle) #1
                                                                                                                          0.875
potential utility, we produce                  0.90                                       MLP (SYNG4ME) #2
                                                                                          MLP (Oracle) #2
                                                                                                                                   MLP (SYNG4ME) #2
                                                                                                                                   MLP (Oracle) #2
                                                                                          RF (SYNG4ME) #3                 0.850    RF (SYNG4ME) #3
model sensitivity curves vs or-                0.85
                                                                                          RF (Oracle) #3
                                                                                          Original Mean
                                                                                                                                   RF (Oracle) #3
                                                                                                                                   Original Mean
                                                                                                                          0.825
acle (Fig. 5) on two datasets:
                                    Accuracy


                                                                                                               Accuracy
                                               0.80                                                                       0.800
SEER and Adult. We demon-
                                                                                                                          0.775
strate the use of SYNG4ME                      0.75
                                                                                                                          0.750
to understand the potential ef-                0.70                                                                       0.725
fect on model performance if                          25   30       35           40            45         50
                                                                                                                              10       20         30           40        50   60
                                                                Mean age (Distribution)
the age (Adult) or PSA severity                                                                                                                Mean PSA (Distribution)


score (SEER) distributions were           (a) Adult: Age curve                (b) SEER: PSA curve
to shift in mean. The synthetic Figure 5: Model sensitivity curves. SYNG4ME (solid) closely approxi-
data curve closely captures the mates the trends of the oracle (dotted). Model performance ranks to the
true performance trends across oracle are retained. Error bars represent variation in performance on data
the range of feature shifts. This generated over 5 runs. (a) Adult (Age): Performance decreases as mean
insight into model performance age increases. (b) SEER (PSA): Performance decreases at lower cancer
trends goes much further than severity levels (PSA). The x-axis represents marginal’s mean.
“shift = degradation”(Koh et al.,
2021), e.g. some shifts lead to better predictions. We also capture the correct model performance
ranking, which could help practitioners better understand which model is best for their setting.
Takeaway. Synthetic data can be used to generate model sensitivity curves to characterize model
performance across the operating range, closely capturing the trends reflected in the oracle data.

5.2.2   I NCORPORATING PRIOR KNOWLEDGE ON SHIFT

Methodology. Consider the scenario where we have some knowledge of the shifted distribution.
Specifically, here we assume we only observe a few of the features, e.g. age and gender, from the
target domain. We sample from this data and generate the other features conditionally (Sec. 4.2).
Set-up. We use datasets SEER (US) and CUTRACT (UK), two cancer datasets with the same
features, but with shifted distributions. We train models f and G on data from the source domain
(SEER). We then wish to estimate likely model performance in the shifted target domain (CUTRACT).
We assume access to data from n features in the target domain (features Xc ), sample Xc from this
empirical marginal, conditionally generate Xc̄ |Xc and evaluate performance on the resulting Dsyn .
To validate our estimate, we use the actual CUTRACT dataset (Target) as ground-truth. As baselines,
we use estimates on the source test set, along with Source Rejection Sampling (RS), which achieves a
distributional shift through rejection sampling the source data using the observed target features (see
Appendix B for details).
Analysis. In Fig. 6a, we show the model ranking of the different predictive models based on
performance estimates of the different methods. Using the synthetic data from SYNG4ME, we
determine the same model ranking as the true ranking on the target—showcasing how SYNG4ME
can be used for model selection with distributional shifts. On the other hand, baselines provide
incorrect rankings. Fig. 6b shows the average estimated performance of f , as a function of the number


                                                                    8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                              age       #1+psa               #2+treatments           #3+stages
                                                           1.00
                                                                                                             Target
                                                           0.95                                              Source (All)
                                                                                                             Source (RS)
                                                           0.90
                 1        2       3                                                                          SYNG4ME
                                                           0.85

                 1        2       3                        0.80

                                                           0.75
                 3        1       2                        0.70

                                                           0.65
                 3        2       1
                                                           0.60
                                                               1          2                         3                       4
                                                                          n features (Prior knowledge)

     (a) Model performance rank compared.               (b) Average accuracy vs increased prior knowledge
Figure 6: Incorporating prior knowledge of the shift. We showcase in (a) Dsyn is able to match the performance
rank of the true target domain, which can help to select which model is best to use in the target domain and (b)
Dsyn is better able to approximate performance in the target domain compared to baselines and that performance
improves as more prior knowledge is incorporated via added features. Points are connected to highlight trends.

of features observed from the target dataset. We see that the SYNG4ME estimates are closer to the
oracle across the board compared to baselines. Furthermore, for increasing number of features (i.e.
increasing prior knowledge), we observe that SYNG4ME estimates converge to the oracle. This is
unsurprising: the more features we observe in the target data, the better we can model the true shifted
distribution. Source RS does so too, but more slowly and with major variance issues.
Takeaway: Synthetic data can approximate target domain model performance as well as select the
best model to use on shifted data when we have high-level information about the potential shift.

6    D ISCUSSION
Synthetic data for model evaluation. Many datasets contain representational bias, in which some
sensitive groups (e.g. minority race groups) are poorly represented. In addition, we often wish to
understand how models would perform under distributional shifts. We have shown that it is difficult
to accurately assess model performance for such subgroups and shifts using available test data, due to
a lack of samples. Instead, we have shown that synthetic data can be used to more accurately (and
with lower variance) evaluate the performance of a prediction model, even when the generative model
is trained on the same test set. This result is surprising and shows the potential value of synthetic
data—e.g. SYNG4ME—for model evaluation purposes.
Model reports. We envision performance estimates using synthetic data could be published alongside
models to give insight into when a model should and should not be used. In particular, SYNG4ME
could be used to complete model evaluation templates such as Model Cards for Model Reporting
(Gebru et al., 2021). Appendix E illustrates an example model report using SYNG4ME.
Limitations. Though we have shown that SYNG4ME usually leads to better evaluation compared
to simply using a test set, there are limitations to its application. Firstly, SYNG4ME is limited to
tabular data. Extending this to other modalities (e.g. text and image) is non-trivial unless annotations
are available for meaningfully defining subgroups or shifts, since individual features (e.g. pixels)
carry little high-level meaning. Secondly, evaluating the performance under distributional shifts
requires assumptions on the shift. These assumptions affect model evaluation and require careful
consideration from the end-user. This is especially true for large shifts or other scenarios where we
do not have enough training data to describe the shifted distribution well enough. However, even if
absolute estimates are inaccurate, we can still provide insight into trend behavior (Fig. 5) and model
ranking (Fig. 6). Thirdly, training and tuning a generative model is non-trivial. To counter this, we
have included an automatic tuning step in the training process, see Appendix C.
Including uncertainty in downstream predictions. Generative models usually do not perfectly
approximate the underlying distribution. An interesting avenue for further research is to estimate
SYNG4ME’s confidence in the performance evaluation, such that an end-user knows when to trust the
estimates. In Appendix C.3 we include preliminary results using an ensemble of generative models.
Training data availability. In general, we assume no access to any data other than Dtest,f . However,
in some scenarios Dtrain,f , the training data of the predictive models, will be available and could be
used to improve the generative model. Even though using this data to train the generative model may
induce some bias, this may outweigh the reduced variance. We include results in Appendix D.2.


                                                       9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E THICS STATEMENT

Like all methods, SYNG4ME relies on the performance of the underlying method - in this case G.
We have highlighted settings where SYNG4ME should not be used or might not be needed in practice.
Assessment of the quality and reliability of the synthetic data is also important, which we cover in
Appendix B in terms of both metrics and uncertainty estimates. In this work, we evaluate SYNG4ME
using multiple real-world datasets. The Adult dataset is provided by UCI. The three medical datasets
namely SEER, CUTRACT and COVID are de-identified and used in accordance with the guidance of
the respective data providers.

R EPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT

Further details of the method, experimental setup and datasets are included in Appendices B and C.
Code will be released upon acceptance.

R EFERENCES
Ahmed Alaa, Boris Van Breugel, Evgeny S Saveliev, and Mihaela van der Schaar. How faithful
  is your synthetic data? sample-level metrics for evaluating and auditing generative models. In
 International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 290–306. PMLR, 2022.

Dario Amodei, Chris Olah, Jacob Steinhardt, Paul Christiano, John Schulman, and Dan Mané.
  Concrete problems in ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565, 2016.

Antreas Antoniou, Amos Storkey, and Harrison Edwards. Data augmentation generative adversarial
  networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.04340, 2017.

Samuel A Assefa, Danial Dervovic, Mahmoud Mahfouz, Robert E Tillman, Prashant Reddy, and
  Manuela Veloso. Generating synthetic data in finance: opportunities, challenges and pitfalls. In
  Proceedings of the First ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, pp. 1–8, 2020.

Arthur Asuncion and David Newman. Uci machine learning repository, 2007.

Susan Athey, Guido W. Imbens, Jonas Metzger, and Evan Munro. Using wasserstein generative
  adversarial networks for the design of monte carlo simulations. Journal of Econometrics, 2021.
  ISSN 0304-4076. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2020.09.013. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304407621000440.

Pedro Baqui, Ioana Bica, Valerio Marra, Ari Ercole, and Mihaela van Der Schaar. Ethnic and regional
  variations in hospital mortality from covid-19 in brazil: a cross-sectional observational study. The
  Lancet Global Health, 8(8):e1018–e1026, 2020.

Simon Bing, Andrea Dittadi, Stefan Bauer, and Patrick Schwab. Conditional generation of medical
  time series for extrapolation to underrepresented populations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08186,
  2022.

Vadim Borisov, Tobias Leemann, Kathrin Seßler, Johannes Haug, Martin Pawelczyk, and Gjergji
  Kasneci. Deep neural networks and tabular data: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.01889,
  2021.

Ali Borji. Pros and cons of gan evaluation measures. Computer Vision and Image Understanding,
  179:41–65, 2019.

Wacha Bounliphone, Eugene Belilovsky, Matthew B Blaschko, Ioannis Antonoglou, and Arthur
 Gretton. A test of relative similarity for model selection in generative models. In International
 Conference on Learning Representations, 2016.

SIVEP Brazil Ministry of Health. Ministry of health sivep-gripe public dataset. URL http:
  //plataforma.saude.gov.br/coronavirus/dados-abertos/.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ángel Alexander Cabrera, Will Epperson, Fred Hohman, Minsuk Kahng, Jamie Morgenstern, and
   Duen Horng Chau. Fairvis: Visual analytics for discovering intersectional bias in machine learning.
   In 2019 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST), pp. 46–56. IEEE,
   2019a.
Angel Alexander Cabrera, Minsuk Kahng, Fred Hohman, Jamie Morgenstern, and Duen Horng Chau.
  Discovery of intersectional bias in machine learning using automatic subgroup generation. 2019b.
Alex Chan, Ioana Bica, Alihan Hüyük, Daniel Jarrett, and Mihaela van der Schaar. The medkit-learn
  (ing) environment: Medical decision modelling through simulation. In Thirty-fifth Conference on
  Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2), 2021.
Joseph Paul Cohen, Tianshi Cao, Joseph D Viviano, Chin-Wei Huang, Michael Fralick, Marzyeh
  Ghassemi, Muhammad Mamdani, Russell Greiner, and Yoshua Bengio. Problems in the deploy-
  ment of machine-learned models in health care. CMAJ, 193(35):E1391–E1394, 2021.
Kimberley Crenshaw. Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A black feminist critique of
  antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory, and antiracist politics. the university of chicago legal
  forum, 1989 (1), 139-167. Chicago, IL, 1989.
Alexander D’Amour, Katherine Heller, Dan Moldovan, Ben Adlam, Babak Alipanahi, Alex Beutel,
  Christina Chen, Jonathan Deaton, Jacob Eisenstein, Matthew D Hoffman, et al. Underspecification
  presents challenges for credibility in modern machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.03395,
  2020.
Hari Prasanna Das, Ryan Tran, Japjot Singh, Xiangyu Yue, Geoffrey Tison, Alberto Sangiovanni-
  Vincentelli, and Costas J Spanos. Conditional synthetic data generation for robust machine learning
  applications with limited pandemic data. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, volume 36, pp. 11792–11800, 2022.
Rahul C Deo. Machine learning in medicine. Circulation, 132(20):1920–1930, 2015.
Ayesha S Dina, AB Siddique, and D Manivannan. Effect of balancing data using synthetic data on the
  performance of machine learning classifiers for intrusion detection in computer networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2204.00144, 2022.
Máire A Duggan, William F Anderson, Sean Altekruse, Lynne Penberthy, and Mark E Sherman. The
  surveillance, epidemiology and end results (seer) program and pathology: towards strengthening
  the critical relationship. The American journal of surgical pathology, 40(12):e94, 2016.
Peter Flach. Performance evaluation in machine learning: the good, the bad, the ugly, and the
  way forward. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 33, pp.
  9808–9814, 2019.
Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
  Hal Daumé Iii, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Communications of the ACM, 64(12):
  86–92, 2021.
Karan Goel, Albert Gu, Yixuan Li, and Christopher Re. Model patching: Closing the subgroup
  performance gap with data augmentation. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2020.
Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair,
  Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information
  processing systems, 27, 2014.
Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A
  kernel two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 13(1):723–773, 2012.
Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common
  corruptions and perturbations. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Bill Howe, Julia Stoyanovich, Haoyue Ping, Bernease Herman, and Matt Gee. Synthetic data for
  social good. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.08874, 2017.


                                                  11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


James Jordon, Jinsung Yoon, and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Pate-gan: Generating synthetic data with
  differential privacy guarantees. In International conference on learning representations, 2018.
Samin Khan, Buu Phan, Rick Salay, and Krzysztof Czarnecki. Procsy: Procedural synthetic dataset
  generation towards influence factor studies of semantic segmentation networks. In CVPR work-
  shops, pp. 88–96, 2019.
Pang Wei Koh, Shiori Sagawa, Henrik Marklund, Sang Michael Xie, Marvin Zhang, Akshay Bal-
  subramani, Weihua Hu, Michihiro Yasunaga, Richard Lanas Phillips, Irena Gao, et al. Wilds: A
  benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 5637–5664. PMLR, 2021.
Adam Kortylewski, Bernhard Egger, Andreas Schneider, Thomas Gerig, Andreas Morel-Forster,
  and Thomas Vetter. Analyzing and reducing the damage of dataset bias to face recognition with
  synthetic data. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
 Recognition Workshops, pp. 0–0, 2019.
Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive
  uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach,
  R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
  cc/paper/2017/file/9ef2ed4b7fd2c810847ffa5fa85bce38-Paper.pdf.
Zhiheng Li and Chenliang Xu. Discover the unknown biased attribute of an image classifier. In
  Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 14970–14979,
  2021.
Ekaterina Lobacheva, Nadezhda Chirkova, Maxim Kodryan, and Dmitry P Vetrov. On power laws in
  deep ensembles. Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:2375–2385, 2020.
Daniel McDuff, Shuang Ma, Yale Song, and Ashish Kapoor. Characterizing bias in classifiers using
  generative models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Jose G Moreno-Torres, Troy Raeder, Rocı́o Alaiz-Rodrı́guez, Nitesh V Chawla, and Francisco
  Herrera. A unifying view on dataset shift in classification. Pattern recognition, 45(1):521–530,
  2012.
Brady Neal, Chin-Wei Huang, and Sunand Raghupathi. Realcause: Realistic causal inference
  benchmarking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.15007, 2020.
Milad Zafar Nezhad, Dongxiao Zhu, Najibesadat Sadati, Kai Yang, and Phillip Levi. Subic: A
 supervised bi-clustering approach for precision medicine. In 2017 16th IEEE International
 Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), pp. 755–760. IEEE, 2017.
Andrew Ng, Lora Aroyo, Cody Coleman, Greg Diamos, Vijay Janapa Reddi, Joaquin Vanschoren,
  Carole-Jean Wu, and Sharon Zhou. Neurips data-centric ai workshop, 2021. URL https:
 //datacentricai.org/.
Luke Oakden-Rayner, Jared Dunnmon, Gustavo Carneiro, and Christopher Ré. Hidden stratification
  causes clinically meaningful failures in machine learning for medical imaging. In Proceedings of
  the ACM conference on health, inference, and learning, pp. 151–159, 2020.
Harsh Parikh, Carlos Varjao, Louise Xu, and Eric Tchetgen Tchetgen. Validating causal inference
  methods. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 17346–17358. PMLR, 2022.
Kayur Patel, James Fogarty, James A Landay, and Beverly Harrison. Investigating statistical machine
  learning as a tool for software development. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
  Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 667–676, 2008.
Oleg S Pianykh, Georg Langs, Marc Dewey, Dieter R Enzmann, Christian J Herold, Stefan O
  Schoenberg, and James A Brink. Continuous learning ai in radiology: implementation principles
  and early applications. Radiology, 297(1):6–14, 2020.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Neoklis Polyzotis and Matei Zaharia. What can data-centric ai learn from data and ml engineering?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.06439, 2021.
CUTRACT Prostate Cancer UK. Prostate cancer uk. URL https://prostatecanceruk.
 org/.
Joaquin Quinonero-Candela, Masashi Sugiyama, Anton Schwaighofer, and Neil D Lawrence. Dataset
  shift in machine learning. Mit Press, 2008.
Rahul Rahaman et al. Uncertainty quantification and deep ensembles. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:20063–20075, 2021.
Benjamin Recht, Rebecca Roelofs, Ludwig Schmidt, and Vaishaal Shankar. Do imagenet classifiers
  generalize to imagenet? In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 5389–5400. PMLR,
  2019.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro and Scott Lundberg. Adaptive testing and debugging of nlp models. In
 Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
 1: Long Papers), pp. 3253–3267, 2022.
Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Tongshuang Wu, Carlos Guestrin, and Sameer Singh. Beyond accuracy:
 Behavioral testing of nlp models with checklist. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the
 Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 4902–4912, 2020.
Paul Röttger, Bertie Vidgen, Dong Nguyen, Zeerak Waseem, Helen Margetts, Janet Pierrehumbert,
  et al. Hatecheck: Functional tests for hate speech detection models. In Proceedings of the 59th
  Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
  Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 41. Association for
  Computational Linguistics, 2021.
Nataniel Ruiz, Adam Kortylewski, Weichao Qiu, Cihang Xie, Sarah Adel Bargal, Alan Yuille, and
  Stan Sclaroff. Simulated adversarial testing of face recognition models. In Proceedings of the
  IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4145–4155, 2022.
Marco Saerens, Patrice Latinne, and Christine Decaestecker. Adjusting the outputs of a classifier to
 new a priori probabilities: a simple procedure. Neural computation, 14(1):21–41, 2002.
Diptikalyan Saha, Aniya Aggarwal, and Sandeep Hans. Data synthesis for testing black-box machine
  learning models. In 5th Joint International Conference on Data Science & Management of Data
  (9th ACM IKDD CODS and 27th COMAD), pp. 110–114, 2022.
Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highfill, Diana Akrong, Praveen Paritosh, and Lora M
  Aroyo. “everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work”: Data cascades in high-stakes ai.
  In proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1–15,
  2021.
Suchi Saria and Adarsh Subbaswamy. Tutorial: safe and reliable machine learning. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1904.07204, 2019.
Neil Savage. Better medicine through machine learning. Communications of the ACM, 55(1):17–19,
  2012.
Hidetoshi Shimodaira. Improving predictive inference under covariate shift by weighting the log-
  likelihood function. Journal of statistical planning and inference, 90(2):227–244, 2000.
Harini Suresh and John V Guttag. A framework for understanding unintended consequences of
  machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.10002, 2:8, 2019.
Harini Suresh, Jen J Gong, and John V Guttag. Learning tasks for multitask learning: Heterogenous
  patient populations in the icu. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference
  on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp. 802–810, 2018.
Dougal J Sutherland, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Heiko Strathmann, Soumyajit De, Aaditya Ramdas, Alexander J
  Smola, and Arthur Gretton. Generative models and model criticism via optimized maximum mean
  discrepancy. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.


                                                13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Daniel Sáez Trigueros, Li Meng, and Margaret Hartnett. Generating photo-realistic training data to
  improve face recognition accuracy. Neural Networks, 134:86–94, 2021.
Boris van Breugel, Trent Kyono, Jeroen Berrevoets, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Decaf: Generating
  fair synthetic data using causally-aware generative networks. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 34:22221–22233, 2021.
Qi Wang, Junyu Gao, Wei Lin, and Yuan Yuan. Learning from synthetic data for crowd counting in
  the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
  pp. 8198–8207, 2019.
Olivia Wiles, Sven Gowal, Florian Stimberg, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuffi, Ira Ktena, Krishnamurthy Dj
  Dvijotham, and Ali Taylan Cemgil. A fine-grained analysis on distribution shift. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
Ruihan Wu, Chuan Guo, Yi Su, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Online adaptation to label distribution
  shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:11340–11351, 2021.
Depeng Xu, Yongkai Wu, Shuhan Yuan, Lu Zhang, and Xintao Wu. Achieving causal fairness
  through generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019a.
Lei Xu, Maria Skoularidou, Alfredo Cuesta-Infante, and Kalyan Veeramachaneni. Modeling tabular
  data using conditional gan. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019b.


                                                14
