Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


BATCH N ORMALIZATION E XPLAINED
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                           A BSTRACT
         A critically important, ubiquitous, and yet poorly understood ingredient in modern
         deep networks (DNs) is batch normalization (BN), which centers and normalizes
         the feature maps. To date, only limited progress has been made understanding
         why BN boosts DN learning and inference performance; work has focused ex-
         clusively on showing that BN smooths a DN’s loss landscape. In this paper, we
         study BN theoretically from the perspective of function approximation; we exploit
         the fact that most of today’s state-of-the-art DNs are continuous piecewise affine
         (CPA) splines that fit a predictor to the training data via affine mappings defined
         over a partition of the input space (the so-called “linear regions”). We demon-
         strate that BN is an unsupervised learning technique that – independent of the
         DN’s weights or gradient-based learning – adapts the geometry of a DN’s spline
         partition to match the data. BN provides a “smart initialization” that boosts the
         performance of DN learning, because it adapts even a DN initialized with random
         weights to align its spline partition with the data. We also show that the variation
         of BN statistics between mini-batches introduces a dropout-like random perturba-
         tion to the partition boundaries and hence the decision boundary for classification
         problems. This per mini-batch perturbation reduces overfitting and improves gen-
         eralization by increasing the margin between the training samples and the decision
         boundary.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Deep learning has made major impacts in a wide range of applications. Mathematically, a deep
(neural) network (DN) maps an input vector x to a sequence of L feature maps zℓ , ℓ = 1, . . . , L by
successively applying the simple nonlinear transformation (termed a DN layer)
                            zℓ+1 = a (Wℓ zℓ + cℓ ) ,    ℓ = 0, . . . , L − 1                       (1)
with z0 = x, Wℓ the weight matrix, cℓ the bias vector, and a an activation operator that applies a
scalar nonlinear activation function a to each element of its vector input. The structure of Wℓ , cℓ
controls the type of layer (e.g., circulant matrix for convolutional layer). For regression tasks, the
DN prediction is simply zL , while for classification tasks, zL is often processed through a softmax
operator Goodfellow et al. (2016). The DN parameters Wℓ , cℓ are learned from a collection of
training data samples X = {xi , i = 1, . . . , n} (augmented with the corresponding ground-truth
labels yi in supervised settings) by optimizing an objective function (e.g., squared error or cross-
entropy). Learning is typically performed via some flavor of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) over
randomized mini-batches of training data samples B ⊂ X Goodfellow et al. (2016).
While a host of different DN architectures have been developed over the past several years, mod-
ern, high-performing DNs nearly universally employ batch normalization (BN) Ioffe & Szegedy
(2015) to center and normalize the entries of the feature maps using four additional parameters
µℓ , σℓ , βℓ , γℓ . Define zℓ,k as k th entry of feature map zℓ of length Dℓ , wℓ,k as the k th row of
the weight matrix Wℓ , and µℓ,k , σℓ,k , βℓ,k , γℓ,k as the k th entries of the BN parameter vectors
µℓ , σℓ , βℓ , γℓ , respectively. Then we can write the BN-equipped layer ℓ mapping extending (1)
as
                                     ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ ⟩ − µℓ,k
                       zℓ+1,k = a                        γℓ,k + βℓ,k , k = 1, . . . , Dℓ .         (2)
                                             σℓ,k
The parameters µℓ , σℓ are computed as the element-wise mean and standard deviation of Wℓ zℓ for
each mini-batch during training and for the entire training set during testing. The parameters βℓ , γℓ


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        layer 0                   layer 1                   layer 2            layer 3

without BN
with BN


Figure 1: Visualization of the input-space spline partition (“linear regions”) of a four-layer DN with 2D input
space, 6 units per layer, leaky-ReLU activation function, and random weights Wℓ . The training data samples
are denoted with black dots. In each plot, blue lines correspond to folded hyperplanes introduced by the units
of the corresponding layer, while gray lines correspond to (folded) hyperplanes introduced by previous layers.
Top row: Without BN (i.e., using (1)), the folded hyperplanes are spread throughout the input space, resulting in
a spline partition that is agnostic to the data. Bottom row: With BN (i.e., using (2)), the folded hyperplanes are
drawn towards the data, resulting in an adaptive spline partition that – even with random weights – minimizes
the distance between the partition boundaries and the data and thus increases the density of partition regions
around the data.



are learned along with Wℓ via SGD.1 The empirical fact that BN significantly improves both training
speed and generalization performance of a DN in a wide range of tasks has made it ubiquitous, as
evidenced by the 40,000 citations of the originating paper Ioffe & Szegedy (2015).
Only limited progress has been made to date explaining BN, primarily in the context of optimiza-
tion. By studying how backpropagation updates the layer weights, LeCun et al. (1998) observed that
unnormalized feature maps are constrained to live on a low-dimensional subspace that limits the ca-
pacity of gradient-based learning. By slightly altering the BN formula (2), Salimans & Kingma
(2016) showed that renormalization via σℓ smooths the optimization landscape and enables faster
training. Similarly, Bjorck et al. (2018); Santurkar et al. (2018); Kohler et al. (2019) confirmed BN’s
impact on the gradient distribution and optimization landscape through large-scale experiments. Us-
ing mean field theory, Yang et al. (2019) characterized the gradient statistics of BN in fully connected
feed-forward networks with random weights to show that it regularizes the gradients and improves
the optimization landscape conditioning.
One should not take away from the above analyses that BN’s only effect is to smooth the optimization
loss surface or stabilize gradients. If this were the case, then BN would be redundant in advanced
architectures like residual Li et al. (2017) and mollifying networks Gulcehre et al. (2016) that have
been proven to have improved optimization landscapes Li et al. (2018); Riedi et al. (2022) and
have been coupled with advanced optimization techniques like Adam Kingma & Ba (2014). Quite
to the contrary, BN significantly improves the performance of even these advanced networks and
techniques.
In this paper, we study BN theoretically from a different perspective that provides new insights into
how it boosts DN optimization and inference performance. Our perspective is function approxima-
tion; we exploit the fact that most of today’s state-of-the-art DNs are continuous piecewise affine
(CPA) splines that fit a predictor to the training data via affine mappings defined over a partition of
the input space (the so-called “linear regions”); see Balestriero & Baraniuk (2021; 2018); Balestriero
et al. (2019) and Appendix B for more details.


             1
                 Note that the DN bias cℓ from (1) has been subsumed into µℓ and βℓ .


                                                                 2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The key finding of our study is that BN is an unsupervised learning technique that – independent
of the DN’s weights or gradient-based learning – adapts the geometry of a DN’s spline partition
to match the data. Our three main theoretical contributions are as follows:
• BN adapts the layer/DN input space spline partition to minimize the total least squares (TLS)
  distance between the spline partition boundaries and the layer/DN inputs, thereby increasing the
  number of partition regions around the training data and enabling finer approximation (see Fig-
  ure 1). The BN parameter µℓ translates the boundaries towards the data, while the parameter σℓ
  folds the boundaries towards the data (see Sections 2 and 3).
• BN’s adaptation of the spline partition provides a “smart initialization” that boosts the perfor-
  mance of DN learning, because it adapts even a DN initialized with random weights Wℓ to align
  the spline partition to the data (see Section 4).
• BN’s statistics vary between mini-batches, which introduces a dropout-like random jitter pertur-
  bation to the partition boundaries and hence the decision boundary for classification problems.
  This jitter reduces overfitting and improves generalization by increasing the margin between the
  training samples and the decision boundary (see Section 5).
The proofs for our results are provided in the Appendices; the codebase will be released upon com-
pletion of the review process to reproduce all the figures and results of the study.


2       S INGLE -L AYER A NALYSIS OF BATCH N ORMALIZATION

In this section, we investigate how BN impacts one individual DN layer. Our analysis leverages
the identification that DN layers using continuous piecewise linear activation functions a in (1) and
(2) are splines that partition their input space into convex polytopal regions. We show that the BN
parameter µℓ translates the regions such that they concentrate around the training data.

2.1       BATCH NORMALIZATION DETAILS

The BN parameters βℓ , γℓ , along with the DN weights Wℓ , are learned directly through the opti-
mization of the DN’s objective function (e.g., squared error or cross-entropy) evaluated at the train-
ing data samples X = {xi , i = 1, . . . , n} and labels (if available). Current practice performs the
optimization using some flavor of stochastic gradient descent (SGD) over randomized mini-batches
of training data samples B ⊂ X . Our first new result is that we can set γℓ = 1 and βℓ = 0 with no
or negligible impact on DN performance for current architectures, training datasets, and tasks. First,
we prove in Appendix D that we can set γℓ = 1 both in theory and in practice.
Proposition 1. The BN parameter γℓ ̸= 0 does not impact the approximation expressivity of a DN,
because its value can be absorbed into Wℓ+1 , βℓ .

Second, we demonstrate numerically in Appendix D that setting βℓ = 0 has negligible impact on
DN performance. Henceforth, we will assume for our theoretical analysis that γℓ = 1, βℓ = 0 and
will clarify for each experiment whether or not we enforce these constraints.
Let Xℓ denote the collection of feature maps zℓ at the input to layer ℓ produced by all inputs x in the
entire training data set X , and similarly let Bℓ denote the collection of feature maps zℓ at the input
to layer ℓ produced by all inputs x in the mini-batch B.
For each mini-batch B during training, the BN parameters µℓ , σℓ are calculated directly as the mean
and standard deviation of the current mini-batch feature maps Bℓ
                                                         s
                     1 X                                     1 X                     2
             µℓ ←              Wℓ zℓ ,             σℓ ←                 Wℓ zℓ − µℓ ,             (3)
                    |Bℓ |                                  |Bℓ |
                              zℓ ∈Bℓ                                    zℓ ∈Bℓ

where the right-hand side square is taken element-wise. After SGD learning is complete, a final
fixed “test time” mean µℓ and standard deviation σ ℓ are computed using the above formulae over all
of the training data,2 i.e., with Bℓ = Xℓ . Note that no label information enters into the calculation
of µℓ , σℓ .
    2
        or more commonly as an exponential moving average of the training mini-batch values.


                                                        3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2.2   D EEP NETWORK SPLINE PARTITION ( ONE LAYER )

We focus on the lionshare of modern DNs that employ continuous piecewise-linear activation
functions a in (1) and (2). To streamline our notation, but without loss of generality, we as-
sume that a consists of exactly two linear pieces that connect at the origin, such as the ubiqui-
tous ReLU (a(u) = max(0, u)), leaky-ReLU (a(u) = max(α, u), α > 0), and absolute value
(a(u) = max(−u, u)). The extension to more general continuous piecewise-linear activation func-
tions is straightforward Balestriero & Baraniuk (2018; 2021); moreover, the extension to an infinite
class of smooth activation functions (including the sigmoid gated learning unit, among others) fol-
lows from a simple probabilistic argument Balestriero & Baraniuk (2019). Inserting pooling opera-
tors Goodfellow et al. (2016) between layers does not impact our results (see Appendix B).
A DN layer ℓ equipped with BN and employing such a piecewise-linear activation function is a
continuous piecewise-affine (CPA) spline operator defined by a partition Ωℓ of the layer’s input
space RDℓ into a collection of convex polytopal regions and a corresponding collection of affine
transformations (one for each region) mapping layer inputs zℓ to layer outputs zℓ+1 . Here we
explain how the partition regions in Ωℓ are formed; then in Section 2.3 we begin our investigation
of how these regions are transformed by BN.
Define the pre-activation of layer ℓ by hℓ such that the layer output zℓ+1 = a(hℓ ); from (2) its k th
entry is given by
                                               ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ ⟩ − µℓ,k
                                     hℓ,k =                        .                               (4)
                                                       σℓ,k
Note from (3) that σℓ,k > 0 as long as ∥wℓ,k ∥22 > 0 and as long as not all inputs are orthogonal to
wℓ,k . With typical CPA nonlinearities a, the k th feature map output zℓ+1,k = a(hℓ,k ) is linear in
hℓ,k for all inputs with same sign. The separation between those two linear regimes is formed by
the collection of layer inputs zℓ that produce pre-activations with hℓ,k = 0, hence lie on the Dℓ − 1
dimensional hyperplane
                Hℓ,k = zℓ ∈ RDℓ : hℓ,k = 0 = zℓ ∈ RDℓ : ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ ⟩ = µℓ,k .

                                                                                                  (5)
Note that Hℓ,k is independent of the value of σℓ,k . The boundary ∂Ωℓ of the layer’s input space parti-
tion Ωℓ is obtained simply by combining all of the Hℓ,k into the hyperplane arrangement Zaslavsky
(1975)
                                            ∂Ωℓ = ∪D
                                                   k=1 Hℓ,k .
                                                    ℓ
                                                                                                   (6)
For additional results on the DN spline partition, see Montufar et al. (2014); Raghu et al. (2017);
Serra et al. (2018); Balestriero et al. (2019); the only property of interest here is that, for all
inputsPlying in the same region ω ∈ Ωℓ , the layer mapping is a simple affine transformation
zℓ = ω∈Ω (Aℓ (ω)zℓ−1 + bℓ (ω))1{zℓ−1 ∈ω} (see Appendix B).

2.3   BATCH NORMALIZATION PARAMETER µ TRANSLATES THE SPLINE PARTITION
      BOUNDARIES TOWARDS THE TRAINING DATA (PART 1)

With the above background in place, we now demonstrate that the BN parameter µℓ impacts the
spline partition Ωℓ of the input space of DN layer ℓ by translating its boundaries ∂Ωℓ towards the
current mini-batch training data Xℓ .
We begin with some definitions. The Euclidean distance from a point v in layer ℓ’s input space to
the layer’s k th hyperplane Hℓ,k is easily calculated as (e.g., Eq. 1 in Amaldi & Coniglio (2013))
                                                  |⟨wℓ,k , v⟩ − µℓ,k |
                                  d(v, Hℓ,k ) =                                                    (7)
                                                      ∥wℓ,k ∥2
as long as ∥wℓ,k ∥ > 0. Then, the average squared distance between Hℓ,k and a collection of points
V in layer ℓ’s input space is given by
                                                                  2
                                             1 X             2   σℓ,k
                          Lk (µℓ,k , V) =        d (v, Hℓ,k ) =           ,                        (8)
                                            |V|                 ∥wℓ,k ∥22
                                               v∈V



                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where we have made explicit the dependency of Lk on µℓ,k through Hℓ,k . Going one step further, the
total least squares (TLS) distance (Samuelson, 1942; Golub & Van Loan, 1980) between a collection
of points V in layer ℓ’s input space and layer ℓ’s partition Ωℓ is given by
                                                         Dℓ
                                                         X
                                           L(µℓ , V) =         Lk (µℓ,k , V).                                    (9)
                                                         k=1


In Appendix E.1, we prove that the BN parameter µℓ as computed in (3) is the unique solution of
the strictly convex optimization problem of minimizing the average TLS distance (9) between the
training data and layer ℓ’s hyperplanes Hℓ,k and hence spline partition region boundaries ∂Ωℓ .
Theorem 1. Consider layer ℓ of a DN as described in (2) and a mini-batch of layer inputs Bℓ ⊂ Xℓ .
Then µℓ in (3) is the unique minimizer of L(µℓ , Bℓ ), and µℓ is the unique minimizer of L(µℓ , Xℓ ).

In words, at each layer ℓ of a DN, BN explicitly adapts the input-space partition Ωℓ by using µℓ to
translate its boundaries Hℓ,1 , Hℓ,2 , . . . to minimize the TLS distance to the training data. Figure 1
demonstrates empirically in two dimensions how this translation focuses the layer’s spline partition
on the data. Moreover, this translation takes on a very special form. We prove in Appendix E.2 that
BN transforms the spline partition boundary ∂Ωℓ into a central hyperplane arrangement Stanley
et al. (2004).
It is worth noting that the above results do not involve any data label information, and so – at least
as far as µ and σ are concerned – BN can be interpreted as an unsupervised learning technique.


3       M ULTIPLE L AYER A NALYSIS OF BATCH N ORMALIZATION

We now extend the single-layer analysis of the previous section to the composition of two or more
DN layers. We begin by showing that the layers’ µℓ continue to translate the hyperplanes that
comprise the spline partition boundary such that they concentrate around the training data. We then
show that the layers’ σℓ fold those same hyperplanes with the same goal.

3.1       D EEP NETWORK SPLINE PARTITION ( MULTIPLE LAYERS )

Taking advantage of the fact that a composition of multiple CPA splines is itself a CPA spline,
we now extend the results from Section 2.2 regarding one DN layer to the composition of layers
1, . . . , ℓ, ℓ > 1 that maps the DN input x to the feature map zℓ+1 .3 The denote partition of this
mapping by Ω|ℓ , where we introduce the shorthand |ℓ to denote the mapping through layers 1, . . . , ℓ.
Appendix B provides closed-form formulas for the per-region affine mappings.
As in Section 2.2, we are primarily interested in the boundary ∂Ω|ℓ of the spline partition Ω|ℓ .
Recall that the boundary of the spline partition of a single layer was easily found in (4)–(6) as the
rearrangement of the hyperplanes formed where the layer’s pre-activation equals zero. With multiple
layers, the situation is almost the same as in (5)
                                                Dj
                                              ℓ [
                                              [
                                                         x ∈ RD1 : hj,k = 0 ;

                                     ∂Ω|ℓ =                                                                     (10)
                                              j=1 k=1

further details are provided in Appendix B. The salient result of interest to us is that ∂Ω|ℓ is con-
structed from the hyperplanes Hj,k pulled back through the preceding layer(s). This process folds
those hyperplanes (toy depiction given in Figure 8) based on the preceding layers’ partitions such
that the folded Hj,k consist of a collection of facets
                  Fj,k,ω = {x ∈ ω : hj,k = 0} = {x ∈ ω : ⟨wj,k , zj ⟩ = µj,k },                ω ∈ Ω|j ,        (11)
                                        Sℓ       SDj                            S
which simplifies (10) to ∂Ω|ℓ =            j=1    k=1 Fj,k , where Fℓ,k ≜           ω∈Ω|j Fj,k,ω .

    3
        Our analysis applies to any composition of ℓ DN layers; we focus on the first ℓ layers only for concreteness.


                                                           5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H2,k varying µ2,k F2,k varying µ2,k F2,k varying σ1    Figure 2: Translation and folding effected by the
                                                       BN parameters µℓ , σℓ on a two-layer DN with 8
                                                       units per layer, 2D input space, and random weights.
                                                       (a) Varying µ2,k translates the layer 2, unit k hy-
                                                       perplane H2,k (recall (5)) viewed in a 2D slice of
                                                       its own input space. (b) Translation of that same
                                                       hyperplane but now viewed in the DN input space,
                                                       where it becomes the folded hyperplane F2,k (recall
       (a)               (b)               (c)         (11)). (c) Fixing µ2,k and varying σ1 folds the next
                                                       layer(s) hyperplanes, viewed in the DN input space.


3.2   BATCH NORMALIZATION PARAMETER µ TRANSLATES THE SPLINE PARTITION
      BOUNDARIES TOWARDS THE TRAINING DATA (PART 2)

In the one-layer case, we saw in Theorem 1 that BN independently translates each DN layer’s hy-
perplanes Hℓ,k towards the training data to minimize the TLS distance. In the multilayer case, as
we have just seen, those hyperplanes Hℓ,k become folded hyperplanes Fℓ,k (recall (10)).
We now demonstrate that the BN parameter µℓ translates the folded hyperplanes Fℓ,k – and thus
adapts Ω|ℓ – towards the input-space training data X . To this end, denote the squared distance from
a point x in the DN input space to the folded hyperplane Fℓ,k by
                                   d(x, Fℓ,k ) = ′min ∥x − x′ ∥2 .                                    (12)
                                                 x ∈Fℓ,k

Theorem 2. Consider layer ℓ > 1 of a layer as described in (2) with fixed weight matrices and
BN parameters from layers 1 through ℓ − 1 and fixed weights Wℓ . Let µℓ and µ′ℓ yield the hyper-
                   ′                                                       ′
planes Hℓ,k and Hℓ,k  and their corresponding folded hyperplanes Fℓ,k and Fℓ,k . Then we have that
                              ′                              ′
d(zℓ (x), Hℓ,k ) < d(zℓ (x), Hℓ,k ) =⇒ d(x, Fℓ,k ) < d(x, Fℓ,k ).

In words, translating a hyperplane closer to zℓ in layer ℓ’s input space moves the corresponding
folded hyperplane closer to the DN input x that produced zℓ , which is of particular interest for
inputs xi from the training data X . We also have the following corollary.
Corollary 1. Consider layer ℓ > 1 of a trained BN-equipped DN as described in Theorem 2. Then
zℓ (x) lies on hyperplane Hℓ,k for some k if and only x lies on the corresponding folded hyperplane
Fℓ,k in the DN input space; that is, d(zℓ−1 (x), Hℓ,k ) = 0 ⇐⇒ d(x, Fℓ,k ) = 0.

Figure 2(b) illustrates empirically how µ2 translates the folded hyperplanes F2,k realized by the
second layer of a toy DN. The impact of the BN parameters σ, is also crucial albeit not as crucial as
µ. For completeness, we study how this parameter translates and folds adjacent facets composing
the folded hyperplanes Fℓ,k in Figure 2 and Appendix C.

3.3   BATCH -N ORMALIZATION I NCREASES THE D ENSITY OF PARTITION R EGIONS A ROUND
      THE T RAINING DATA

We now extend the toy DN numerical experiments reported in Figures 1 to more realistic DN archi-
tectures and higher-dimensional settings. We focus on three settings all involving random weights
Wℓ : (i) zero bias cℓ = 0 in (1), (ii) random bias cℓ in (1), and (iii) BN in (2).
2D Toy Dataset. We continue visualizing the effect of BN in a 2D input space by reproducing the
experiment of Figure 1 but with a more realistic DN with 11 layers of width 1024 and training
data consisting of 50 samples from a star shape in 2D (see the leftmost plots in Figure 3). For
each of the above three settings, Figure 3 visualizes in the 2D input space the concentration of
the contribution to the partition boundary (recall (11)) from three specific layers (j = 1, 7, 11).
The concentration at each point in the input space corresponds to the number of folded hyperplane
facets Fj,k,ω passing through an ϵ-ball centered on that point. This concentration calculation can be
performed efficiently via the technique of Harman & Lacko (2010) that is analyzed in Voelker et al.
(2017). Three conclusions are evident from the figure: (i) BN clearly focuses the spline partition on
the data; (ii) random bias creates a random partition that is diffused over the entire input space; (iii)
zero bias creates a (more or less) central hyperplane arrangement that does not focus on the data.

                                                   6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              data          F3,k , ∀k       F7,k , ∀k        F11,k , ∀k
                                      0.2              0.2           0.2
                                                                           Figure 3: Visualization in the 2D input space of
BN                                                                         the contribution ∂Ω1j to the spline partition bound-
                                                                           ary Ω1 from layers j = 1, 7, 11 of an 11-layer DN
                                                                           of width 1024. The training data set X consists
                                      0.0              0.0           0.0   of 50 samples from a star-shaped distribution (left
random



                                                                           plots). We plot the concentration of the folded hy-
                                                                           perplane facets in an ϵ-ball around each 2D input
                                                                           space point for the three initialization settings de-
                                                                           scribed in the text: zero bias, random bias, and BN.
                                      1.0              0.7           0.7
                                                                           Darker color indicates more partition boundaries
zero bias


                                                                           crossing through that location. Each plot is normal-
                                                                           ized by the maximum concentration attained, the
                                                                           value of which is noted.


             around CIFAR10 images around random images
   30000                                                                   Figure 4: Average concentration of the spline par-
                                                    random                tition boundary Ω1 of Resnet9 DN in ϵ-balls around
                                                    zero                  CIFAR images and around random images. The
   20000                                            bn
                                                                          vertical axis is the average number of folded hy-
   10000                                                                  perplane facets in Ω1 that pass through an epsilon
                                                                          ball centered on each kind of image. As in Fig-
            0 0.005     0.010 0.015   0.020 0.005     0.010 0.015   0.020 ure 3, we see that – in contrast to zero and random
                      radius (ϵ)                    radius (ϵ)            bias initialization – BN aligns the spline partition
                                                                          with the data.


CIFAR Images. We now consider a high-dimensional input space (CIFAR images) with a Resnet9
architecture (random weights). Since we cannot visualize the spline partition in the 3072D input
space, we present a summary of the same concentration analysis carried out in Figure 3 for the par-
tition boundary by measuring the number of folded hyperplanes passing through an ϵ-ball centered
around 100 randomly sampled training images (BN statistics are obtained from the full training set).
We report these observation in Figure 4 (left) and again clearly see that – in contrast to zero and
random bias initialization – BN focuses the spline partition to lie close to the data points. To quan-
tify the concentration of regions away from the training data, we repeat the same measurement but
for 100 iid random Gaussian images that are scaled to the same mean and variance as the CIFAR
images. For this case, we observe in Figure 4 (right) that BN only focused the partition around the
CIFAR images and not around the random ones. This is in concurrence with the low-dimensional
experiment in Figure 3.

4           B ENEFIT O NE : BATCH N ORMALIZATION IS A S MART I NITIALIZATION
Up to this point, our analysis has revealed that BN effects a task-independent, unsupervised learn-
ing that aligns a DN’s spline partition with the training data independent of any labels. We now
demonstrate that BN’s utility extends to supervised learning tasks like regression and classification
that feature both data and labels. In particular, BN can be viewed as providing a “smart initializa-
tion” that expedites SGD-based supervised learning. Our results augment recent empirical work
on the importance of initialization on DN performance from the perspective of slope variance con-
straints Mishkin & Matas (2015); Xie et al. (2017), singular value constraints Jia et al. (2017), and
orthogonality constraints Saxe et al. (2013); Bansal et al. (2018).
First, BN translates and folds the hyperplanes and facets that construct the DN’s spline partition Ω
so that they are closer to the data. This creates more granular partition regions around the training
data, which enables better approximation of complicated regression functions DeVore & Lorentz
(1993) and richer classification boundaries Balestriero et al. (2019); Chen et al. (2021). For binary
classification, for example, this result follows from the fact that the decision boundary created by an
L-layer DN is precisely the folded hyperplane FL,1 generated by the final layer. We also prove in
Proposition 3 in Appendix E.4 that BN primes SGD learning so that the decision boundary passes
through the data in every mini-batch.
We now empirically demonstrate the benefits of BN’s smart initialization for learning by a com-
paring the same three initialization strategies from Section 3.3 in a classification problem using a


                                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Top-1 test accuracy


                                                learning epochs
Figure 5: Image classification using a Resnet50 on Imagenet. Standard data augmentation was used during
SGD training but no BN was employed. Instead, the DN was initialized with random weights (blue) or with
random weights and warmed-up BN statistics () across the entire training set (recall Figure 3 and (3)). Each
column corresponds to different learning rate used by SGD and multiple runs are produced for the right cases.
BN’s “smart initialization” reaches a higher-performing solution faster because it provides SGD with a spline
partition that is already adapted to the training dataset. This findings provides a novel and complementary
understanding of BN that was previously studied solely when continuously employed during training as a mean
to better condition a DN’s loss landscape. We also show in Figure 5 in the Appendix a similar observation on
CIFAR100.


ResNet9 with random weights. In each experiment, the weights and biases are initialized accord-
ing to one of the three strategies (zero bias, random bias, and BN over the entire training set), and
then standard SGD is performed over mini-batches. Importantly, in the BN case, the BN parameters
µℓ , βℓ computed for the initialization are frozen for all SGD iterations; this will showcase BN’s role
as a smart initialization. As we see from Figure 5, SGD with BN initialization converges faster and
to an higher-performing classifier. Since BN is only used as an initializer here, the performance gain
can be attributed to the better positioning of the ResNet’s initial spline partition Ω.
This result showcases the importance of DN initialization and how a good initialization alone plays
a crucial role in performance, as has also been empirically studied with slope variance constraints
Mishkin & Matas (2015); Xie et al. (2017), singular values constraints Jia et al. (2017) or with
orthogonal constraints Saxe et al. (2013); Bansal et al. (2018).

5                     B ENEFIT T WO : BATCH N ORMALIZATION I NCREASES M ARGINS
The BN parameters µℓ , σℓ are re-calculated for each mini-batch Bℓ and hence can be interpreted
as stochastic estimators of the mean and standard deviation of the complete training data set Xℓ . A
direct calculation Von Mises (2014) yields the following result.
Proposition 2. Consider layer ℓ > 1 of a BN-equipped DN as described in (2). Assume that the
layer input zℓ follows an arbitrary iid distribution with zero mean and diagonal covariance matrix
diag(mρ). Then we have that
                                                                                              !
                 2               2                                        2
              ⟨wℓ,k , mρ⟩    ∥wℓ,k  ∥ ∥mρ∥           2      1     4
                                                                       ⟨wℓ,k , ρ⟩2 (|Bℓ | − 3)
  var(µℓ,k )=             ≤                  , var(σℓ,k )=       ϕ −                            . (13)
                  |Bℓ |            |Bℓ |                   |Bℓ | ℓ,k          |Bℓ | − 1

with ϕ4ℓ,k the fourth-order central moment of ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ ⟩ and wℓ,k
                                                                2
                                                                    the coordinate-wise square.

Consequently, during learning, BN’s centering and scaling introduces both additive and multiplica-
tive noise to the feature maps whose variance increases as the mini-batch size |Bℓ | decreases. This
noise becomes detrimental for small mini-batches, which has been empirically observed in Ioffe
(2017). We illustrate this result in Figure 6, where we depict the DN decision boundary realizations
from different mini-batches. We also provide in Figure 7 the empirical, analytical, and controlled
parameter distributions of BN applied on a Gaussian input with varying mean and variance.
Figure 6 suggests the interpretation that BN noise induces “jitter” in the DN decision boundary.
Small amounts of jitter can be beneficial, since it forces the DN to learn a representation with an
increased margin around the decision boundary. Large amounts of jitter can be detrimental, since
the increased margin around the decision boundary might be too large for the classification task.
This jitter noise is reminiscent of dropout and other techniques that artificially add noise in the DN


                                                     8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        initialization     learned    initialization    learned     Figure 6: Realizations of the classifica-
           |Bℓ |=16        |Bℓ |=16     |Bℓ |=256      |Bℓ |=256    tion decision boundary on a toy 2D binary
                                                                    classification (red vs green) problem ob-
                                                                    tained solely by sampling different mini-
                                                                    batches and thus observing different real-
                                                                    izations of µℓ , σℓ (recall (3)) at initializa-
                                                                    tion and after training. Each mini-batch
                                                                    produces a different decision boundary de-
                                                                    picted in blue. For two different mini-batch
                                                                    sizes |Bℓ | = 16, 256, we change the vari-
                                                                    ance as per Proposition 2. Larger batch
                                                                    sizes clearly produce smaller variability in
                                                                    the decision boundary both at initialization
                                                                    and after training; µℓ , σℓ distributions are
                                                                    provided in Figure 7.
distrib. of µℓ,k


                                                         Figure 7: Distributions of µℓ,k (top row) and σℓ,k (bot-
                                                         tom row) for three units in a DN layer with Wℓ zℓ−1 ∼
                                                         N ([1, 0, −1], diag([1, 3, 0.1])) (ℓ is not relevant in this
                                                         context). The empirical distributions in black are ob-
                                                         tained by repeatedly sampling mini-batches of size 64
                                                         from a training set of size 1000. The analytical distri-
                                                         butions in green are from (13). The empirical distribu-
                                                         tions in red are of the noise-controlled BN, where we
distrib. of σℓ,k


                                                         increase the variances of the BN parameters to match
                                                         the variances that would result from a virtual mini-batch
                                                         size (32) that is smaller than the actual size (64), hence
                                                         producing more regularizing jitter perturbations. The
                                                         different realizations of µℓ and σℓ for each mini-batch
                                                         affect the geometry of the DN partition and decision
                     k=1        k=2           k=3        boundary (see Figure 2) of the current mini-batch.


input and/or feature maps to improve generalization performance Srivastava (2013); Pham et al.
(2014); Molchanov et al. (2017); Wang et al. (2018). We focus on the effect of BN jitter on DNs for
classification problems here, but jitter will also improve DN performance on regression problems.
To further demonstrate that jitter noise increases the margin between the learned decision boundary
and the training set (and hence improves generalization), we conducted an experiment where we fed
additional Gaussian additive noise and Chi-square multiplicative noise to the layer pre-activations
of a DN to increase the variances of µℓ and σℓ as desired (as in Figure 7), in addition to the BN-
induced noise. For a Resnet9, we observed that increasing these variances about 15% increased the
classification accuracies (averaged over 5 runs) from 93.34% to 93.68% (CIFAR10), from 72.22%
to 72.74% (CIFAR100) and from 96.16% to 96.41% (SVHN). Note that this performance boost
comes in addition to that obtained from BN’s smart initialization (recall Section 4).

6                  C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, our theoretical analysis of BN shed light and explained two novel crucial ways on
how BN boosts DNs performances. First, BN provides a “smart initialization” that solve a total least
squares (TLS) optimization to adapt the DN input space spline partition to the data to improve learn-
ing and ultimately function approximation. Second, for classification applications, BN introduces
a random jitter perturbation to the DN decision boundary that forces the model to learn boundaries
with increased margins to the closest training samples. From the results that we derived one can
directly see how to further improve batch-normalization. For example, by controlling the strength
of the noise standard deviation of the batch-normalization parameters to further control the decision
boundary margin, or by altering the optimization problem that batch-normalization minimizes to
enforce a specific adaptivity of the DN partition to the dataset at hand. We hope that this work will
motivate researchers to further extend BN into task-specific methods leveraging a priori knowledge
of the properties one desires to enforce into their DN.


                                                         9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


7   R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
The proofs and further derivations of the theoretical results provided throughout the main text are
given in the Appendix. Additional explanatory figures are also provided. The codebase to repro-
duce not only the quantitative experiments e.g. the performances without learnable γ and β or the
performance of BN used as an initialization only, but also the qualitative ones will be released upon
completion of the review process in the hope to increase the theoretical study around BN and to fur-
ther improve this eponymous technique. We did not consider any sensitive dataset and focused on
the standard computer vision ones which are CIFAR variants and Imagenet. For the architectures we
also used the standard Resnet50 and Resnet9, additional details are also provided in the Appendix.

R EFERENCES
Edoardo Amaldi and Stefano Coniglio. A distance-based point-reassignment heuristic for the
  k-hyperplane clustering problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 227(1):22–29,
  2013. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2012.09.026. URL https://www.
  sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037722171200690X.
R. Balestriero and R. G. Baraniuk. A spline theory of deep networks. In Proc. Int. Conf. Mach.
  Learn., volume 80, pp. 374–383, Jul. 2018.
Randall Balestriero and Richard Baraniuk. From hard to soft: Understanding deep network nonlin-
  earities via vector quantization and statistical inference. In International Conference on Learning
  Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Syxt2jC5FX.
Randall Balestriero and Richard G. Baraniuk. Mad max: Affine spline insights into deep learning.
  Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5):704–727, 2021. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2020.3042100.
Randall Balestriero, Romain Cosentino, Behnaam Aazhang, and Richard Baraniuk. The geometry
  of deep networks: Power diagram subdivision. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.08443, 2019.
Nitin Bansal, Xiaohan Chen, and Zhangyang Wang. Can we gain more from orthogonality regular-
  izations in training deep networks? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  4261–4271, 2018.
Nils Bjorck, Carla P Gomes, Bart Selman, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Understanding batch normal-
  ization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 7694–7705, 2018.
Wuyang Chen, Xinyu Gong, and Zhangyang Wang. Neural architecture search on imagenet in four
 GPU hours: A theoretically inspired perspective. CoRR, abs/2102.11535, 2021. URL https:
 //arxiv.org/abs/2102.11535.
Ronald A DeVore and George G Lorentz. Constructive approximation, volume 303. Springer
  Science & Business Media, 1993.
Gene H Golub and Charles F Van Loan. An analysis of the total least squares problem. SIAM journal
  on numerical analysis, 17(6):883–893, 1980.
I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville. Deep Learning, volume 1. MIT Press, 2016. http:
   //www.deeplearningbook.org.
Caglar Gulcehre, Marcin Moczulski, Francesco Visin, and Yoshua Bengio. Mollifying networks.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.04980, 2016.
Radoslav Harman and Vladimı́r Lacko. On decompositional algorithms for uniform sampling from
  n-spheres and n-balls. Journal of Multivariate Analysis, 101(10):2297–2304, 2010.
S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
   internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
Sergey Ioffe. Batch renormalization: Towards reducing minibatch dependence in batch-normalized
  models. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp. 1945–1953, 2017.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Kui Jia, Dacheng Tao, Shenghua Gao, and Xiangmin Xu. Improving training of deep neural net-
  works via singular value bounding. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition, pp. 4344–4352, 2017.
Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Jonas Kohler, Hadi Daneshmand, Aurelien Lucchi, Thomas Hofmann, Ming Zhou, and Klaus
  Neymeyr. Exponential convergence rates for batch normalization: The power of length-direction
  decoupling in non-convex optimization. In The 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intel-
  ligence and Statistics, pp. 806–815, 2019.
Y LeCun, L Bottou, G Orr, and K Muller. Efficient backprop, neural networks: Tricks of the trade.
  Lecture notes in computer sciences, 1524:5–50, 1998.
Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the loss land-
  scape of neural nets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.09913, 2017.
Hao Li, Zheng Xu, Gavin Taylor, Christoph Studer, and Tom Goldstein. Visualizing the loss land-
  scape of neural nets. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
Dmytro Mishkin and Jiri Matas. All you need is a good init. arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.06422,
 2015.
Dmitry Molchanov, Arsenii Ashukha, and Dmitry Vetrov. Variational dropout sparsifies deep neural
 networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.05369, 2017.
Guido F Montufar, Razvan Pascanu, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. On the number of linear
  regions of deep neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pp.
  2924–2932, 2014.
Vu Pham, Théodore Bluche, Christopher Kermorvant, and Jérôme Louradour. Dropout improves
  recurrent neural networks for handwriting recognition. In 2014 14th international conference on
  frontiers in handwriting recognition, pp. 285–290. IEEE, 2014.
Maithra Raghu, Ben Poole, Jon Kleinberg, Surya Ganguli, and Jascha Sohl Dickstein. On the
 expressive power of deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
 on Machine Learning-Volume 70, pp. 2847–2854. JMLR. org, 2017.
Rudolf H Riedi, Randall Balestriero, and Richard G Baraniuk. Singular value perturbation and deep
  network optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03099, 2022.
Tim Salimans and Durk P Kingma. Weight normalization: A simple reparameterization to accelerate
  training of deep neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  901–909, 2016.
Paul A Samuelson. A note on alternative regressions. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
  Society, pp. 80–83, 1942.
Shibani Santurkar, Dimitris Tsipras, Andrew Ilyas, and Aleksander Madry. How does batch nor-
  malization help optimization? In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 2483–
  2493, 2018.
Andrew M Saxe, James L McClelland, and Surya Ganguli. Exact solutions to the nonlinear dynam-
  ics of learning in deep linear neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6120, 2013.
Thiago Serra, Christian Tjandraatmadja, and Srikumar Ramalingam. Bounding and counting linear
  regions of deep neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4558–
  4566. PMLR, 2018.
Nitish Srivastava. Improving neural networks with dropout. University of Toronto, 182(566):7,
  2013.
Richard P Stanley et al. An introduction to hyperplane arrangements. Geometric combinatorics, 13:
  389–496, 2004.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Aaron R Voelker, Jan Gosmann, and Terrence C Stewart. Efficiently sampling vectors and coor-
  dinates from the n-sphere and n-ball. Technical report, Tech. Rep.) Waterloo, ON: Centre for
  Theoretical Neuroscience. doi: 10.13140 . . . , 2017.
Richard Von Mises. Mathematical theory of probability and statistics. Academic Press, 2014.
Zichao Wang, Randall Balestriero, and Richard Baraniuk. A max-affine spline perspective of recur-
  rent neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Di Xie, Jiang Xiong, and Shiliang Pu. All you need is beyond a good init: Exploring better solution
  for training extremely deep convolutional neural networks with orthonormality and modulation.
  In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 6176–
  6185, 2017.
Greg Yang, Jeffrey Pennington, Vinay Rao, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, and Samuel S Schoenholz. A
  mean field theory of batch normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.08129, 2019.
Thomas Zaslavsky. Facing up to arrangements: Face-count formulas for partitions of space by
  hyperplanes: Face-count formulas for partitions of space by hyperplanes, volume 154. American
  Mathematical Soc., 1975.


A    A PPENDIX
We provide in the following appendices details on the Max-Affine Spline formulation of DNs
(Sec. B) and the proofs of the various theoretical results from the main text (Sec. E).

B    D ETAILS ON C ONTINUOUS P IECEWISE A FFINE D EEP N ETWORKS
The goal of this section is to provide additional details into the forming of the per-region affine
mappings of CPA DNs.
As mentioned in the main text, any DN that is formed from CPA nonlinearities can be expressed
itself as a CPA operator. The per-region affine mappings are thus entirely defined by the state of
the DN nonlinearities. For an activation function such as ReLU, leaky-ReLU or absolute value,
the nonlinearity state is completely determined by the sign of the activation input as it determines
which of the two linear mapping to apply to produce its output. Let denote this code as qℓ (zℓ−1 ) ∈
{α, 1}Dℓ given by

                                               α, [Wℓ zℓ−1 + bℓ ]i ≤ 0
                             [qℓ (zℓ−1 )]i =                                                    (14)
                                               1, [Wℓ zℓ−1 + bℓ ]i > 0
where the pre-activation formula above can be replaced with the one from (2) if BN is employed.
For a max-pooling type of nonlinearity the state corresponds to the argmax obtained in each pooling
regions, for details on how to generalize the below in that case we refer the reader to Balestriero &
Baraniuk (2018). Based on the above, the layer input-output mapping can be written as
                                   zℓ = Qℓ (zℓ−1 )(Wℓ zℓ−1 + bℓ ).                              (15)
where Qℓ produces a diagonal matrix from the vector qℓ , and one has α = 0 for ReLU, α = −1 for
absolute value and α > 0 for leaky-ReLU; see Balestriero & Baraniuk (2018) for additional details.
The up-to-layer-ℓ mapping can thus be easily written as
                                     zℓ = A1|ℓ (x)x + B1|ℓ (x)                                  (16)
with the following slope and bias parameters
                      A1|ℓ (x) =Qℓ Wℓ Qℓ−1 Wℓ−1 . . . Q1 W1 ,                                   (17)
                                   ℓ
                                   X
                      B1|ℓ (x) =         (Qℓ Wℓ Qℓ−1 Wℓ−1 . . . Qi+1 Wi+1 ) bi ,                (18)
                                   i=1

where for clarity we abbreviated Qℓ (zℓ−1 ) as Qℓ .


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


From the above formulation, it is clear that whenever the codes qℓ stay the same for different inputs,
the layer input-output mapping remains linear. This defines a region ωℓ of Ωℓ from (6), the layer-
input-space partition region, as

                       ωℓq = {zℓ−1 ∈ RDℓ−1 : qℓ (zℓ−1 ) = q}, q ∈ {α, 1}Dl .                      (19)

In a similar way, the up-to-layer-ℓ input space partition region can be defined.
The multilayer region is defined as
                                      ℓ
                                      \
                       q1 ,...,qℓ
                      ω1|ℓ        =       {x ∈ RD : qi (x) = qi }, qi ∈ {α, 1}Dl .                (20)
                                      i=1

Definition 1 (Layer/DN partition). The layer ℓ (resp. -up-to-layer-ℓ) input space partition is given
by

                               Ωℓ = {ωℓq , q ∈ {α, 1}Dl } \ ∅,                                    (21)
                                      q1 ,...,qℓ
                             Ω1|ℓ = {ω1|ℓ        , qi ∈ {α, 1}Di , ∀i} \ ∅.                       (22)

Note that Ω1|L forms the entire DN input space partition. Both unit and layer input space partitioning
can be rewritten as Power Diagrams, a generalization of Voronoi Diagrams Balestriero et al. (2019).
Composing layers then simply refines successively the previously build input space partitioning via
a subdivision process to obtain the -up to layer ℓ- input space partitioning Ω|ℓ .


C    BATCH NORMALIZATION PARAMETER σ FOLDS THE PARTITION REGIONS
     TOWARDS THE TRAINING DATA

We are now in a position to describe the effect of the BN parameter σℓ , which has no effect on the
spline partition of an individual DN layer but comes into play for a composition of two or more
layers. In contrast to the hyperplane translation effected by µℓ , σℓ optimizes the dihedral angles
between adjacent facets of the folded hyperplanes in subsequent layers in order to swing them closer
to the training data.
Define Qℓ as the square diagonal matrix whose diagonal entry i is determined by the sign of the
pre-activation hℓ,i . That is,

                                            α/σℓ,i , hℓ,i < 0
                               [Qℓ ]i,i =                                                  (23)
                                            1/σℓ,i , hℓ,i ≥ 0,

with α = 0 for ReLU, α > 0 for leaky-ReLU, and α = −1 for absolute value (recall the definition
of the activation function from Section 2.2; see Balestriero & Baraniuk (2019) for additional non-
linearities). Note that Qℓ is constant across each region ω in the layer’s spline partition Ωℓ since,
by definition, none of the pre-activations hℓ,i change sign within region ω. We will use Qℓ (ω) to
denote the dependency on the region ω; to compute Qℓ (ω) given ω, one merely samples a layer
input from ω, computes the pre-activations hℓ,i , and applies (23).
In Appendix ?? we prove that the BN parameter σℓ adjusts the dihedral folding angles of adjacent
facets of each folded hyperplane created by layer ℓ + 1 in order to align the facets with the training
data. Figure 2(c) illustrates empirically how σ1 folds the facets of F2,k realized by the second layer
of a toy DN. Since the relevant expressions quickly (but predictably) grow in length with the number
of layers, to expose the salient points, but without loss of generality, we will focus the next theorem
on the composition of the first two DN layers (layers ℓ = 1, 2). In this case, there are two geometric
quantities of interest that combine to create the input space spline partition Ω = Ω|2 : layer 1’s
hyperplanes H1,i and layer 2’s folded hyperplanes F2,k .
Theorem 3. Given a 2-layer (ℓ = 1, 2) BN-equipped DN employing a leaky-ReLU or absolute value
activation function, consider two adjacent regions ω, ω ′ from the spline partition Ω whose bound-
aries contain the facets F2,k,ω , F2,k,ω′ created by folding across the boundaries’ shared hyperplane


                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


             Figure 8: Sketch of the situation in Theorem 3 for a two-dimensional input space.



H1,i (see Figure 8). The dihedral angles between these three (partial) hyperplanes are given by:

                                                                             
                                                   ⊤
                                                  w2,k Q1 (ω)W1 w1,i
               θ (F2,k,ω , H1,i ) = arccos                                   ,                    (24)
                                                 ⊤ Q (ω)W
                                                w2,k                ∥w1,i ∥
                                                     1   1

                                                                              
                                                   ⊤
                                                  w2,k Q1 (ω ′ )W1 w1,i
               θ (F2,k,ω′ , H1,i ) = arccos                                   ,                   (25)
                                                 ⊤ Q (ω ′ )W
                                                w2,k                 ∥w1,i ∥
                                                     1      1

                                                                                         
                                                   ⊤
                                                  w2,k Q1 (ω)W1 W1⊤ Q1 (ω ′ )w2,k
             θ (F2,k,ω , F2,k,ω′ ) = arccos                                              .        (26)
                                                 ⊤ Q (ω)W
                                                w2,k                   ⊤ Q (ω ′ )W
                                                                      w2,k
                                                     1   1                 1      1


In (24)–(26), Q1 (ω) and Q1 (ω ′ ) differ by only one diagonal entry at index (i, i): one ma-
                         1
trix takes the value σ1,i    and the other the value σα1,i , as per Eq. 23. Since (8) implies that
  2
σℓ,i ∝ minµℓ,i L(µℓ,i , Bℓ ), we have the following two insights that we state for ℓ = 1. (These
results extend in a straightforward fashion for more than two layers as well as for more complicated
piecewise linear activation functions.)
On the one hand, if H1,i is well-aligned with the training data B1 , then the TLS error, and hence
  2
σ1,i , will be small. For the absolute value activation function, formulae (24) and (25) then tell us
that both θ (F2,k,ω , H1,i ) ≈ 0 and θ (F2,k,ω′ , H1,i ) ≈ 0, meaning that F2,k,ω and F2,k,ω′ will be
                                                                                   2
folded to closely align with H1,i (and hence the data). The connection between σℓ,i   and (24,25) lies
in the entries of the Q matrix. Basically, the σℓ are used in the denominator of Q and thus bend
more or less the angles. For the ReLU/leaky-ReLU activation function, either F2,k,ω or F2,k,ω′ will
be folded to closely align with H1,i ; the other facet will be unchanged/mildly folded.
On the other hand, if H1,i is not well-aligned with the training data B1 , then the TLS error, and hence
  2
σ1,i , will be large. This will force Q1 (ω) ≈ Q1 (ω ′ ) and thus θ (F2,k,ω , F2,k,ω′ ) ≈ π, meaning that
a poorly aligned layer-1 hyperplane H1,i will not appreciably fold intersecting layer-2 facets.
Figure 9 illustrates empirically how the BN parameter σℓ,k measures the quality of the fit of the
(folded) hyperplanes to the data in the TLS error sense for a toy DN.
In summary, and extrapolating to the general case, the effect of the BN parameter σℓ is to fold the
layer-(ℓ + 1) hyperplanes (also the ℓ + 2 and subsequent hyperplanes) that contribute to the spline
partition boundary Ω in order to align them with the layer-ℓ hyperplanes that match the data well.
Hence, not only µℓ but also σℓ plays a crucial role in aligning the DN spline partition with the
training data (recall Figure 1).


                                                    14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        H1,k                   F4,k
                                            Figure 9: Layer-1 hyperplanes H1,k (left) and layer-4 folded
                                            hyperplanes F4,k (right) depicted in the 2D input space of a toy
                                            4-layer DN trained on the data points denoted with black dots.
                                            The (folded) hyperplanes are colored based on the correspond-
                                                        2
                                            ing value σℓ,k /∥wℓ,k ∥2 , which is proportional to the total least
                                            squares (TLS) fitting error to the data (blue: small error, close to
                                            the data points; green: large error, far from the data points).



D    ROLE OF THE BN PARAMETERS β, γ AND P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Without loss of generality, consider a simple two-layer DN to illustrate. Then, it is clear that γ1
simply rescales the rows of W2 and the entries of β1

                                           ⟨w1,k ,x⟩−µ1,k
                     PD                                                                        
                           1
                          k=1 [w 2,r ]k a       σ1,k      γ 1,k + β 1,k   − µ2,r
           z2,r = a                                                               γ2,r + β2,r            (27)
                                                 σ2,r

                                              ⟨w1,k ,x⟩−µ1,k
                     PD                                       β1,k
                                                                                                 
                           1
                             γ
                          k=1 1,k [w    ]
                                     2,r k a       σ1,k      + γ1,k − µ2,r
                = a                                                               γ2,r + β2,r            (28)
                                                 σ2,r

                                           ⟨w1,k ,x⟩−µ1,k
                     PD                                                                   
                           1     ′                            ′
                          k=1 [w 2,r ]k a       σ1,k      + β 1,k − µ2,r
                = a                                                          γ2,r + β2,r                 (29)
                                              σ2,r

and so does not need to be optimized separately. Here, [w2,r ]k denotes the k-th entry of the r-th
row of W2 . We obtain (28), because standard activation and pooling functions (e.g., (leaky-)ReLU,
absolute value, max-pooling) are such that a(cu) = c a(u). This leaves βℓ as the only learnable
parameter that needs to be considered.
Now, our BN theoretical analysis relies on setting βℓ = 0, which corresponds to the standard
initialization of BN. In this setting, we saw that BN “fits” the partition boundaries to the data samples
exactly. Now, by observing the form of (2), it is clear that learning βℓ enables to “undo” this fitting
if needed to better solve the task-at-hand. However, we have found that in most practical scenarios,
fixing βℓ = 0 throughout training actually does not alter final performances. In fact, on Imagenet,
the top1 accuracy of a Resnet18 goes from 67.60% to 65.93% when doing such a change, and on a
Resnet34, from 68.71% to 67.21%. The drop seems to remain the same even on more complicated
architecture as for a Resnet50, the top1 test accuracy goes down from 77.11% to 74.98%, where
again we emphasize that the exact same hyper-parameters are employed for both situations i.e. the
drop could potentially be reduced by tuning the hyper-parameters. Obviously those numbers might
vary depending on optimizers and other hyper-parameters, we used here the standard ones for those
architectures since our point is merely that all our theoretical results relying on βℓ = 0, γℓ = 1 still
applies to high performing models.
In addition to the above Imagenet results, we provide in Table 1 the results for the classification
accuracy on various dataset and with two architectures. This set of results simply demonstrates that
the learnable parameters of BN (γ, β) have very little impact of performances.


Table 1: Test accuracy of various models when employing (yes) or not (no) the BN learnable param-
eters, as was demonstrated in the main paper, those parameters have very little impact on the final
test accuracy (no data-augmentation is used).
                             imagenette       cifar10    cifar100         svhn
                              No    Yes    No       Yes No Yes         No      Yes
                RESNET 79.2 78.8 83. 86.2 50. 54.8 94.2 95.3
                   CNN       77.7 77.6 87.5 87.6 54. 55.2 96. 95.9


                                                     15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We provide below the descriptions of the DN architectures. For the Residual Networks, the notation
Resnet4-10 for example defines the width factor and depth of each block. We provide an example
below for Resnet2-2.

                                         Residual Network
Conv2D(layer[-1], 32, (5, 5), pad="SAME", b=None))
BatchNorm(layer[-1])
leaky_relu(layer[-1])
MaxPool2D(layer[-1], (2, 2))
Dropout(layer[-1], 0.9)

for width in [64, 128, 256, 512]:
    for repeat in range(2):
        Conv2D(layer[-1], width, (3, 3), b=None, pad="SAME")
        BatchNorm(layer[-1])
        leaky_relu(layer[-1])
        Conv2D(layer[-1], width, (3, 3), b=None, pad="SAME")
        BatchNorm(layer)
        if layer[-6].shape == layer[-1].shape:
            leaky_relu(layer[-1]) + layer[-6])
        else:
            leaky_relu(layer[-1])
                + Conv2D(layer[-6], width, (3, 3),
                b=None, pad="SAME")

      AvgPool2D(layer[-1], (2, 2))
      Conv2D(layer[-1], 512, (1, 1), b=None))
      BatchNorm(layer)
      leaky_relu(layer[-1])

GlobalAvgPool2D(layer[-1])
Dense(layer[-1], N_CLASSES)

We now describe the CNN model that we employed. Notice that if the considered dataset is ima-
genette or other (smaller spatial dimension) dataset there is an additional first layer of convolution
plus spatial pooling to reduce the spatial dimensions of the feature maps.

                                      Convolutional Network
Conv2D(layer[-1], 32, (5, 5), pad="SAME", b=None)
BatchNorm(layer)
leaky_relu(layer[-1]))
MaxPool2D(layer[-1], (2, 2))

if args.dataset == "imagenette":
    Conv2D(layer[-1], 64, (5, 5), pad="SAME", b=None)
    BatchNorm(layer)
    leaky_relu(layer[-1])
    MaxPool2D(layer[-1], (2, 2))

for k in range(3):
    Conv2D(layer[-1], 96, (5, 5), b=None, pad="SAME")
    BatchNorm(layer)
    leaky_relu(layer[-1])
    Conv2D(layer[-1], 96, (1, 1), b=None)
    BatchNorm(layer)
    leaky_relu(layer[-1])
    Conv2D(layer[-1], 96, (1, 1), b=None)
    BatchNorm(layer)


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


      leaky_relu(layer[-1])

Dropout(layer[-1], 0.7)
MaxPool2D(layer[-1], (2, 2))

for k in range(3):
    Conv2D(layer[-1], 192, (5, 5), b=None, pad="SAME")
    BatchNorm(layer)
    leaky_relu(layer[-1])
    Conv2D(layer[-1], 192, (1, 1), b=None)
    BatchNorm(layer)
    leaky_relu(layer[-1])
    Conv2D(layer[-1], 192, (1, 1), b=None)
    BatchNorm(layer)
    leaky_relu(layer[-1])

Dropout(layer[-1], 0.7)
MaxPool2D(layer[-1], (2, 2))

Conv2D(layer[-1], 192, (3, 3), b=None)
BatchNorm(layer)
leaky_relu(layer[-1])
Conv2D(layer[-1], 192, (1, 1), b=None))
BatchNorm(layer)
leaky_relu(layer[-1])

GlobalAvgPool2D(layer[-1])
Dense(layer[-1], N_CLASSES)


E     P ROOFS

We propose in this section the various proofs supporting the diverse theoretical claims from the main
part of the paper.

E.1   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1

Proof. In order to prove the theorem we will demonstrate below that the optimum of the total least
square optimization problem is reached at the unique global optimum given by the average of the
data, hence corresponding to the batch-normalization mean parameter. Then we demonstrate that at
this minimum, the value of the total least square loss is given by the variance parameter of batch-
normalization.
The optimization problem is given by
                             Dℓ X                          Dℓ X                        2
                             X                     2
                                                           X    |⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩ − µk |
                 L(µ; Z) =             d (z, Hℓ,k ) =                                           (30)
                                                                         ∥wℓ,k ∥22
                             k=1 z∈Z                       k=1 z∈Z

it is clear that the optimization problem
                                               min L(µ, Z),                                     (31)
                                              µ∈RDℓ

can be decomposed into multiple independent optimization problem for each dimension of the vector
µ, since we are working with an unconstrained optimization problem with separable sum. We thus
focus on a single µk for now. The optimization problem becomes
                                            X |⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩ − µk |2
                                   min                                                          (32)
                                   µk ∈R               ∥wℓ,k ∥22
                                           z∈Z



                                                      17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


taking the first derivative leads to
                X |⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩ − µk |2           X (⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩ − µk )
            ∂                               =−2                                                       (33)
                          ∥wℓ,k ∥22                              ∥wℓ,k ∥22
                z∈Z                               z∈Z
                                                    X ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩                    µk
                                            =−2                          + 2Card(Z)                   (34)
                                                            ∥wℓ,k ∥22                 ∥wℓ,k ∥22
                                                  z∈Z
                                                                                                      (35)
the above first derivative of the total least square (quadratic) loss function is thus a linear function of
µk being 0 at the unique point given by
                                                                             P
             X ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩                      µk                               ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩
        −2                  2    + 2Card(Z)            2 = 0 ⇐⇒ µk = z∈Z                               (36)
                    ∥wℓ,k ∥2                    ∥wℓ,k ∥2                           Card(Z)
             z∈Z

confirming that the average of the pre-activation feature maps (per-dimension) is indeed the optimum
of the optimization problem. One can verify easily that it is indeed a minimum by taking the second
derivative of the total least square which indeed positive and given by 2Card(Z)
                                                                          ∥wℓ,k ∥22
                                                                                    . The above can be
done for each dimension k in a similar manner. Now, by inserting this optimal value back into the
total least square loss, we obtain the desired result.

E.2   P ROOF OF C ENTRAL H YPERPLANE A RRANGEMENT

Corollary 2. BN constrains the input space partition boundaries ∂Ωℓ of each layer ℓ of a BN-
equipped DN to be a central hyperplane arrangement; indeed, the average of the layer’s training
data inputs
                                                     Dℓ
                                                     \
                                             zℓ ∈         Hℓ,k                                        (37)
                                                    k=1

as long as ∥wℓ,k ∥ > 0.


Proof. In order to prove the desired result i.e. that there exists a nonempty intersection between all
the hyperplanes, we first demonstrate that the layer input centroid z ℓ−1 indeed to one hyperplane,
say k. Then it will be direct to see that this holds regardless of k and thus the intersection of all
hyperplanes contains at least z ℓ−1 which is enough to prove the statement.
For a data point (in our case z ℓ−1 ) to belong to the k th (unit) hyperplane Hℓ,k of layer ℓ, we must
ensure that this point belong to the set of the hyperplane defined as (recall (5))

                          Hℓ,k = zℓ−1 ∈ RDℓ−1 : ⟨wℓ,k , zℓ−1 ⟩ = [µℓ ]k ,

                                                                                                  (38)
in our case we can simply use the data centroid and ensure that it fulfils the hyperplane equality
                                           P          X
                                              z∈Z z           ⟨wℓ,k , z⟩
                  ⟨wℓ,k , z ℓ−1 ⟩ = wℓ,k ,             =                    = [µ∗ℓ ]k             (39)
                                           Card(Z)            Card(Z)
                                                                 z∈Z

where the last equation gives in fact the batch-normalization mean parameter. So now, recalling the
equation of Hℓ,k we see that the point z ℓ−1 makes plane projection [µ∗ℓ ]k which equals the bias of
the hyperplane effectively making z ℓ−1 part of the (batch-normalized) hyperplane Hℓ,k . Doing the
above for each k ∈ Dℓ we see that the layer input centroid belongs to all the unit hyperplane that
are shifted by the correct batch-normalization parameter, hence we directly obtain the desired result
                                                   \
                                          z ℓ−1 ⊂     Hℓ,k ,                                     (40)
                                                     k∈Dℓ

concluding the proof.


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


E.3   P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2

Proof. Define by x∗ the shortest point in Pℓ,k from x defined by

                                      x∗ = arg min ∥x − u∥2 .
                                                 u∈Pℓ,k



The path from x to x∗ is a straight line in the input space which we define by

                                  l(θ) = x∗ θ + (1 − θ)x, θ ∈ [0, 1],                                 (41)

s.t. l(0) = x, our original point, and l(1) is the shortest point on the kinked hyperplane. Now, in the
input space of layer ℓ, this parametric line becomes a continuous piecewise affine parametric line
defined as

                                   zℓ−1 (θ) = (fℓ−1 ◦ · · · ◦ f1 )(l(θ).                              (42)


By definition, if Pℓ,k is brought closer to x, it means that ∃θ < 1 s.t. l(θ) ∈ Pℓ,k . Similarly this can
be defined in the layer input space as follows.



                    ∃θ′ < 1 s.t. zℓ−1 (θ) ∈ Hℓ,k =⇒ ∃θ < 1 s.t. l(θ) ∈ Pℓ,k


this demonstrates that when moving the layer hyperplane s.t. it intersects the kinked path zℓ−1 at
a point zℓ−1 (θ′ ) with θ′ < 1, then the distance in the input space is also reduced. Now, the BN
fitting is greedy and tried to minimize the length of the straight line between zℓ−1 (0) a.k.a zℓ−1 (x)
and the hyperplane Hℓ,k . However, notice that if the length of this straight line decreases by brining
the hyperplane closer to zℓ−1 (x) then this also decreases the θ′ s.t. zℓ−1 (θ′ ) ∈ H≪,k in turn
reducing the distance between x and Pℓ,k in the DN input space, giving the desired (second) result.
Conversely, if zℓ−1 (0) ∈ Hℓ,k then the point x lies in the zero-set of the unit, in turn making it
belong to the kinked hyperplane Pℓ,k which corresponds to this exact set.


E.4   P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3

Proposition 3. Consider an L-layer DN configured to learn a binary classifier from the labeled
training data X using a leaky-ReLU activation function, arbitrary weights Wℓ at all layers, BN at
layers 1, . . . , L − 1, and layer L configured as in (1) with cL = 0. Then, for any training mini-batch
from X , there will be at least one data point on either side of the decision boundary.


Proof. When using leaky-ReLU the input to the last layer will have positive and negative values in
each dimension for at least 1 in the current minibatch. That means that each dimension will have at
least 1 negative value and all the other positive or vice-versa. As the last layer is initialized with zero
bias, the decision boundary is defined in the last layer input space as the hyperplanes (or zero-set)
of each output unit. Also, being on one side or the other of the decision boundary in the DN input
space is equivalent to being on one side or the other of the linear decision boundary in the last layer
input space. Combining those two results we obtain that at initialization, there has to be at least 1
sample one side of the decision boundary and the others on the other side.


                                                    19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                40
                                     Figure 10: Image classification using a Resnet9 on CIFAR100. No BN or data
test accuracy   30                augmentation was used during SGD training. Instead, the DN was initialized with
                                  random weights and zero bias (blue), random bias (orange), or via BN across the
                20                entire data set as in Figure 3 (green). Each training was repeated 10 times with
                10                learning rate cross-validation, and we plot the average test accuracy (of the best valid
                                  set learning rate) vs. learning epoch. BN’s “smart initialization” reaches a higher-
                  1      50    90 performing solution faster because it provides SGD with a spline partition that is
                 learning epochs already adapted to the training dataset.


E.5                  P ROOF OF BN S TATISTICS VARIANCE

Proof. Let’s consider a random variable with E(z) = m and Cov(z) = diag(ρ2 ). Then we directly
have that
                         E(⟨w, z⟩) =⟨w, m⟩
                       V ar(⟨w, z⟩) =E((⟨w, z⟩ − E(⟨w, z⟩))2 )
                                     =E((⟨w, z⟩ − ⟨w, m⟩)2 )
                                     =E(⟨w, z − m⟩2 )
                                                                                             
                                          X                    X
                                     =E     wd2 (zd − md )2 +   wd (zd − md )wd′ (zd′ − md′ )
                                              d                       d̸=d′
                                                                                                            
                                              X                       X
                                     =E          wd2 (zd − md )2 +           wd (zd − md )wd′ (zd′ − md′ )
                                              d                       d̸=d′
                                         X
                                     =       wd2 ρ2d
                                         d
                                     =⟨w2 , ρ2d ⟩
now given the known variance and mean of the ⟨w, z⟩ random variable, the desired result is obtained
by using the standard empirical variance estimator.



F                DATASET D ESCRIPTIONS

MNISTThe MNIST database (Modified National Institute of Standards and Technology database)
is a large database of handwritten digits that is commonly used for training various image processing
systems. The database is also widely used for training and testing in the field of machine learning.
It was created by ”re-mixing” the samples from NIST’s original datasets. The creators felt that
since NIST’s training dataset was taken from American Census Bureau employees, while the testing
dataset was taken from American high school students, it was not well-suited for machine learning
experiments. Furthermore, the black and white images from NIST were normalized to fit into a
28x28 pixel bounding box and anti-aliased, which introduced grayscale levels.
The MNIST database contains 60, 000 training images and 10, 000 testing images. Half of the
training set and half of the test set were taken from NIST’s training dataset, while the other half of
the training set and the other half of the test set were taken from NIST’s testing dataset. The original
creators of the database keep a list of some of the methods tested on it. In their original paper, they
use a support-vector machine to get an error rate of 0.8%.
SVHNSVHN is a real-world image dataset for developing machine learning and object recognition
algorithms with minimal requirement on data preprocessing and formatting. It can be seen as similar
in flavor to MNIST (e.g., the images are of small cropped digits), but incorporates an order of
magnitude more labeled data (over 600, 000 digit images) and comes from a significantly harder,
unsolved, real world problem (recognizing digits and numbers in natural scene images). SVHN is
obtained from house numbers in Google Street View images.


                                                                 20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


CIFAR10The CIFAR-10 dataset (Canadian Institute For Advanced Research) is a collection of im-
ages that are commonly used to train machine learning and computer vision algorithms. It is one
of the most widely used datasets for machine learning research. The CIFAR-10 dataset contains
60, 000 32x32 color images in 10 different classes. The 10 different classes represent airplanes,
cars, birds, cats, deer, dogs, frogs, horses, ships, and trucks. There are 6,000 images of each class.
Computer algorithms for recognizing objects in photos often learn by example. CIFAR-10 is a set of
images that can be used to teach a computer how to recognize objects. Since the images in CIFAR-
10 are low-resolution (32x32), this dataset can allow researchers to quickly try different algorithms
to see what works. Various kinds of convolutional neural networks tend to be the best at recognizing
the images in CIFAR-10.
CIFAR100This dataset is just like the CIFAR-10, except it has 100 classes containing 600 images
each. There are 500 training images and 100 testing images per class. The 100 classes in the CIFAR-
100 are grouped into 20 superclasses. Each image comes with a ”fine” label (the class to which it
belongs) and a ”coarse” label (the superclass to which it belongs).


                                                 21
