Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


D EALING WITH MISSING DATA USING ATTENTION AND
LATENT SPACE REGULARIZATION

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT

         Most practical data science problems encounter missing data. A wide variety
         of solutions exist, each with strengths and weaknesses that depend upon the
         missingness-generating process. Here we develop a theoretical framework for
         training and inference using only observed variables enabling modeling of incom-
         plete datasets without imputation. Using an information and measure-theoretic
         argument we construct models with latent space representations that regularize
         against the potential bias introduced by missing data. The theoretical properties of
         this approach are demonstrated empirically using a synthetic dataset. The perfor-
         mance of this approach is tested on 11 benchmarking datasets with missingness and
         18 datasets corrupted across three missingness patterns with comparison against
         a state-of-the-art model and industry-standard imputation. We show that our pro-
         posed method overcomes the weaknesses of imputation methods and outperforms
         the current state-of-the-art with statistical significance.


1     I NTRODUCTION
Missing data is a common problem encountered by the data scientist. The consequences of missing
data are often not straightforward and depend on the missingness generating process (Little and
Rubin 2002). Choosing the best strategy to deal with missingness is critical when designing statistical
or machine learning models that rely on incomplete datasets. A frequent complication is that the
missingness generating process is often unknown, leading to assumptions about the missingness and
potentially the introduction of bias into model training and inference (Davey and Dai 2020). The
two most commonly employed strategies for dealing with missing data are to either drop data points
where missing data exists or impute the values (Bertsimas et al. 2021). Both strategies can potentially
introduce bias into a model if applied incorrectly (Little and Rubin 2002).
The ‘impute and regress’ strategy has been recently critiqued in the setting of machine learning
predictors with the finding that an imputation method leads to a consistent prediction model if that
model can almost surely undo the imputation, which questions the need for sophisticated imputation
strategies (Bertsimas et al. 2018, 2021). The best case scenario for an imputation method is to replace
missing unobserved variables with values that do not corrupt the model’s predictive distribution from
the true predictive distribution given only the observed variables. The worst case would be introducing
a significant bias during training that increases the divergence of the model’s predictive distribution
from the true distribution. Indeed, Jeong et al. (2022) proved with an information-theoretic argument
that there is no universally fair imputation method for different downstream learning tasks.
While practitioners continue to develop novel machine learning and statistical methods for imputation,
relatively less effort has been made to create a framework to reason about models that can fit
incomplete data with the notable exception of decision tree models (Gavankar and Sawarkar 2015;
Jeong et al. 2022). In this paper, we consider the question of designing a model that trains and
performs inference on only the observed variables, without imputation or data deletion.

1.1   R ELATED W ORK

Most recent work has focused on developing novel imputation techniques, such as auto-encoders, in
order to build better imputations based on the structure of the data (Abiri et al. 2019). A consideration
of learning and inference without imputation has been considered recently by Bertsimas et al. (2021)


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


who provided a theoretical approach to the deficiencies of imputation in predictive modeling, drawing
an important distinction between statistical inference and prediction. They build on this approach to
develop an adaptive hierarchical linear regression model that is capable of performing prediction in
the presence of any missingness pattern. Similarly, Jeong et al. (2022) provide a method of inference
without imputation using a decision tree approach, with a fairness-regularized loss function. Our
work differs substantially from these approaches, whereby we show that training and inference using
only the observed data is feasible using latent space representations and an entropy-based objective
which ensures regularization against the potential bias of missingness.

1.2   S UMMARY OF CONTRIBUTIONS

      1. Introduce a novel method of dealing with missingness by establishing a simple framework
         for reasoning about a model that fits and infers from the observed variables only.
      2. Interpret the latent space representations in this framework with a measure- and information
         theoretic argument.
      3. Empirically validate the theoretical properties of the latent space on a synthetic dataset with
         a latent space attention model.
      4. Demonstrate the effectiveness of this model on benchmark datasets with corrupted data and
         real world datasets with missingness.


2     I NTERPRETING MISSINGNESS IN A MEASURABLE SPACE

We first describe a sample space Ω that is defined by an unknown data generating process and
unknown missingness generating process. We then define three random variables:
                                             Xd : Ω 7→ R

                                             Y : Ω 7→ R
                                          Md : Ω 7→ {0, 1}

Where d ∈ {1, ..., D} is the total number of possibly observed variables.
We can further specify, X = {X1 , ..., XD }, which is the random variable X : Ω 7→ RD , and
M = {M1 , ..., MD }, which is the random variable M : Ω 7→ {0, 1}D . A realization of X is a
vector representation of possibly observed variables and Y is the outcome variable of interest. M is a
missingness vector where a value of 1 indicates a missing value and 0 an observed value.
If we consider the power set U = P(X), then we can define a measurable space (X, U). The impact
of missingness results in a smaller σ-algebra such that U = {i : i ∈ U ∧ j ∈ M ∧ 1 ∈     / j}, where
M = P(M ). Finally, we can define a probability space (X, U, µ) where a measure maps each
combination of possible variables in X, defined in U , to a probability whereby µ : u 7→ [0, 1], where
u ∈ U.
An implication of our definition of the measure, µ, is that where no missingness exists, each subset is
equally likely, and the distribution is uniform. In the presence of a missingness generating process,
some subsets are more likely than others and the distribution diverges from uniform.
How the probability distribution diverges from uniform can be considered with reference to the
definitions of missingness originally described by Little and Rubin (2002). If Xobs = {x : x ∈
X ∧ m ∈ M ∧ m = 0} and Xmis = {x : x ∈ X ∧ m ∈ M ∧ m = 1} and we consider M to
be defined by some unknown parameter β, with a conditional distribution f (M |X, β), then we can
define three types of missingness:
Definition 1. If f (M |X, β) = f (M |β) then M ⊥ X|β and data is considered to be missing com-
pletely at random (MCAR)
Definition 2. If f (M |X, β) = f (M |Xobs , β) then M ⊥ Xmis |Xobs , β and data is considered to be
missing at random (MAR)
Definition 3. If f (M |X, β) ̸= f (M |β) and f (M |X, β) ̸= f (M |Xobs , β), then data is considered
to be missing not at random (MNAR)


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We can extend these definitions to define conditional versions of µ with µU |X and µU |Xobs . If µ(U ) =
µU |X (U |X) then missing data can be considered MCAR. If µU |X (U |X) = µU |Xobs (U |Xobs ) then
missing data can be considered MAR. Finally, if µ(U ) ̸= µU |X (U |X) ̸= µU |Xobs (U |Xobs ) then data
is MNAR.
From this initial description of missingness, we can consider a naı̈ve first attempt at predicting Y
from X in the presence of missingness.

3    U SING AN ENSEMBLE TO LEARN THE POWER SET OF FEATURES
As a starting point to developing our proposed method, we first consider a simple ensemble approach.
We construct a hypothetical ensemble of K models, parameterized by θk ∈ Θ, which performs the
mapping for each combination of variables to our outcome space, fθk : Uk 7→ Y , where Uk ∈ U ,
k ∈ {1, ...K} and K = |U |. If the input vector x ∼ X contains missing values then only the
complete subsets in u ∼ U with no missing values are used to update the models. To perform
inference, we could simply choose the output of the function with the highest cardinality set. This
strategy presupposes that all input data contains information related to the outcome, and feature
selection has already occurred prior to model creation. In this setting, this model definition allows us
to make a prediction, ŷ, given any subset of available variables from X.
This approach is only valid for datasets with missingness defined as MCAR as there are two implicit
strategies occurring. The first is simply excluding the variable with missing data from our model by
defining our subsets in U which exclude that variable. This is always a valid strategy as it carries no
risk of introducing bias into the remaining data, at the cost of losing information associated with that
variable. The second implicit strategy is that in subsets that include variables with missing values, we
remove all items in that subset that have a missing value. This is akin to dropping rows in a tabular
dataset. By dropping missing data that is either MAR or MNAR, bias is introduced into the remaining
data and the resultant model that is fitted to that data will incorporate that bias. In the “ensemble of
K” models described above, models fitted on subsets with missing data will incorporate the biases of
a dropping data strategy.

4    I NCORPORATING MISSINGNESS IN A LATENT SPACE TO OVERCOME BIAS
In order to overcome the deficiencies of the previous formulation we could try to introduce a latent
space representation for U in our model and attempt to incorporate missingness into this latent space.
We redefine fθk to map each input vector in U to a latent space Z, fθk : Uk 7→ Z, which is shared
across all possible subsets and define a second model, parameterized by Φ that maps Z to our output
space, gΦ : Z 7→ Y . We have now defined an “ensemble of compositions”, gΦ ◦ fθk .
Previous work by Boudiaf et al. (2020) has derived the result that when a latent space model is fit
with a cross-entropy objective, H(Y ; Ŷ |Ẑ), this is equivalent to maximizing the mutual information
I(Ẑ; Y ).
Using this result, we can reason about the representations of subsets in the latent space. Consider two
subsets Ui , Uj ∈ U , which have identical variables, but one has an additional variable |Ui − Uj | = 1.
If both Ui and Uj contain the same amount of information with respect to the outcome, then they will
be clustered to the same location in latent space.
To formalize this clustering effect in terms of a measurable space, we can define a measure space for
our dataset (D, A, I), such that D = {{x, y} : x ∈ X ∧ y ∈ Y }, A = {{u, y} : u ∈ U ∧ y ∈ Y },
and I is a measure based on mutual information defined as I = I(f (Uk ); Y ), where f is a general
function that maps a subset, Uk ∈ U to the latent space Z.
Mutual information is a correct basis for a measure in this measurable space as it satisfies the
properties of non-negativity, mapping to zero for the empty set, and countable additivity across
the subsets defined in U . The property of countable additivity relies on the independence of their
latent space representations of Uk . This independence arises in two ways. Firstly, although we do
not guarantee Xi ⊥ Xj for Xi , Xj ∈ X there is an independence across subsets of X based on
the construction of U , such that Ui ⊥ Uj for Ui , Uj ∈ U . The independence of the subsets Uk
guarantees the independence of their latent space representations. Secondly, we can notice that I is


                                                   3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


really measuring the mutual information of Z|Uk , and in the conditional universe of the latent space
Z|Ui ⊥ Z|Uj .
Using our measure, I, and model definition we can formally define the effect of the mutual information
on the latent space.
Proposition 1. If I(Ui ; Y ) = I(Uj ; Y ) where i, j ∈ {1, ..., K} and |Ui − Uj | = 1, then f (Ui ) =
f (Uj ) = Ẑ|Ui = Ẑ|Uj .

We can broaden this equality with a geometric interpretation.
Proposition 2. |I(Ui ; Y ) − I(Uj ; Y )| ∝ d(f (Ui ), f (Uj )) where i, j ∈ {1, ..., K}, |Ui − Uj | = 1,
and d is a distance metric in the latent space, such as the Euclidean distance.

The effect of Proposition 2 is that the latent space representations for each Uk in our “ensemble
of compositions” cluster according to the mutual information. Additionally, there is a guarantee
that the model learns representations for high cardinality subsets that are regularized to the highest
information but lowest cardinality subset. This obviates the need for explicit feature selection, as
non-informative features are not represented in the latent space.
Remark 1. If Y is a Bernoulli-distributed variable parameterized by the output of g, Y =
Bern(g(fk (Uk ))), then in the extreme case where no input features carry information with re-
spect to our outcome all subsets will cluster to the latent space representation of the empty set, which
is mapped to the point of highest entropy in Y .

In order to understand how the latent space representation can help with missingness, we need only
consider what happens to I = I(f (Uk ); Y ) as missingness affects Uk . If an unknown missingness
generating process affects Uk , then I = I(f (Uk ); Y ) will decrease. This will be true whether the
missingness is MCAR, MAR or MNAR. This reduction is directly represented in the latent space.
When missingness is present in Uk , the representation in Z is then regularized to the lowest cardinality
and highest information subset.
Finally, it is interesting to note that there are many cases where missingness generating processes
of the previously described patterns may also provide information related to the outcome (Li et al.
2018). This is commonly encountered, for example, in healthcare datasets where healthy people often
have missing data because there was no indication to perform a test. We can define this property as
arising when I(Md ; Y ) > 0. In our latent space model, I = I(f (Uk ); Y ) for a subset Uk which is
affected by informative missingness may actually increase.

5    O UR APPROACH : USING ATTENTION TO MODEL THE LATENT SPACE
There is an obvious limitation to the ensemble approach, which is poor computational scaling as the
number of models in the ensemble, K, increases exponentially with the dimensions of the dataset.
Rather than defining a set of functions fθk for each k ∈ 1, ..., K, we can define a general function fθ ,
which can map each Uk to the latent space, as we did in Propositions 1 and 2. A natural choice for
such a model that can take heterogeneous length inputs is to adapt an attention based model normally
used to solve sequence tasks.
Scaled dot product attention has been used to construct state-of-the-art sequence models such as the
Transformer (Vaswani et al. 2017). The Transformer maps an input sequence (x1 , ..., xd ) to a latent
space representation (z1 , ..., zd ), from which a decoder outputs a sequence of (y1 , ..., ym ). Here
each x, y, z ∈ Rembed , which is the embedding dimensionality. The similarity to the aforementioned
“ensemble of compositions” can begin to be appreciated at this point. To approximate the ensemble
with a Transformer architecture we must add two components. Firstly we add a feature specific
embedding network that maps our input vector to some higher dimensional embedding space,
fd : R 7→ Rembed . Then we apply a Transformer-style model where the output is instead z ∈ Rembed ,
which is then mapped to the output space, gϕ : Rembed 7→ Rout . In this model, the output of the
Transformer model z ∈ Rembed , is analogous to the latent space in the previously compositional
model and the function gϕ is serving the same purpose in both models.
It is important to note that while the compositional ensemble explicitly trains a separate model for
each subset, the Transformer must train on randomly generated subsets at each training step. This


                                                   4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


can be achieved using dropout to stochastically create a mask for the input features applied at each
attention module. Concrete dropout has been shown to enable feature ranking and applying it at the
feature level as a subset sampling process means that more informative features are included in the
subsets more frequently (Chang et al. 2018). This choice of model design helps further regularize the
output of the model toward the lowest cardinality, highest information subset.
Finally, we introduce our method as a latent space attention model (LSAM), which can deal with
missingness ‘out-of-the-box’. In summary, this approach uses a neural network to embed each feature,
then maps the set of available embeddings to a latent space using a Transformer-style network. It
is the latent space representation which is regularized against missingness as it trains. The latent
space representation is then mapped to an outcome space using a neural network. The pseudocode
for the training procedure is demonstrated in Algorithm 1 and training details can be found in the
supplementary materials.

Algorithm 1: Latent space attention model training procedure. A stochastically generated mask,
drawn from a concrete distribution at each training step, ensures the model learns from different
subsets of variables.
Initialize network parameters ρ, ψ, θ, ϕ;
for epoch in Epochs do
     for x, y in batched(X ∈ Rn×d , Y ∈ Rn×out ) do
         mask ∼ Concrete(ρ) ; /* Sampling feature mask for subsetting */
         e ← f (ψ, x) ;                /* Embedding network fψ : Rd → Rd×embed */
         z ← t(θ, e, mask) ;       /* Attention network tθ : Rd×embed → Rembed */
         ŷ ← g(ϕ, z) ;                      /* Output network gϕ : Rembed → Rout */
         g ← ∇ρ,ψ,θ,ϕ l(y, ŷ) ;            /* Gradient of cross-entropy loss */
         ρ, ψ, θ, ϕ ← update(g, ρ, ψ, θ, ϕ)
     end
end



6     E XPERIMENTS

Models are built using JAX and trained using adaptive stochastic gradient optimization with early
stopping (Kingma and Ba 2017; Bradbury et al. 2018; Zhuang et al. 2020).
Descriptions of hyperparameter optimization and model training can be found in the supplementary
materials. Code for the model and experiments is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/
Missingness-AF94/README.md.

6.1     M ODEL C HARACTERISTICS

We first explore the properties of our proposed model with regard to the previously defined latent
space using a toy dataset. Our aim is to show the effect of both the mutual information of a predictor
on the latent space representations, and the effect of missingness on these representations.

6.1.1    L ATENT SPACE REPRESENTATION
In order to explore the representation of input variables in the latent space, we use the classic 2-
dimensional synthetic spiral dataset. This is a non-linear binary classification problem with two
input variables, x1 and x2, representing the x and y axes respectively. The 2 dimensional dataset
is augmented with 2 additional variables. The first, x3, is random noise from a standard Gaussian
carrying no information of the outcome, x3 ∼ N (0, 1). The second, x4, is the outcome variable
corrupted with random noise from a uniform distribution and therefore carrying some information
about the outcome, x4 = y + ϵ, ϵ ∼ U[0,1] .
Both the LSAM and compositional ensemble model are trained on the 4-dimensional dataset. Out-
come measures are then bootstrapped with experiments repeated 30 times. We can obtain a statistical
measure of distance between groups reported using a Student t-test and measure the p-value.


                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                 LSAM                     Ensemble
                           uk             {}           p-value      {}          p-value

                         {x1}            3.69    3.95 × 10−10     0.29      4.43 × 10−5
                         {x2}            4.18    2.16 × 10−11     0.38      3.40 × 10−4
                       {x1, x2}          5.10    4.13 × 10−14     2.74      6.78 × 10−5
                     {x3 (noise)}        3.44     1.14 × 10−8     0.04      1.04 × 10−3
                     {x4 (signal)}       5.15    3.77 × 10−14     4.37      6.08 × 10−5

Table 1: Euclidean distance between latent space representations of uk and the empty set for the LSAM and
Ensemble based models. The p-value represents the distributional difference. The difference is greatest where
the signal is strongest, and least where there is only random noise.


We first explore the Euclidean distance for various subsets compared to the empty set. From
Propositions 1 and 2, we would predict that the distance is shorter when the subset is only random
noise, x3, compared to carrying some information about the outcome. Table 1 shows that this is
indeed the case, with the distance between the empty set and noise being the smallest value for both
the ensemble and the LSAM. The statistical difference between the bootstrapped distributions is
much less for the non-informative noise compared to subsets carrying information.
We can then explore the Euclidean distance between uk , where uk ⊆ {x1, x2}, and uk + x, where
x ⊂ {x3, x4}. From Propositions 1 and 2, we predict that the distance is shorter when x is random
noise, as in x3, compared to carrying information about the outcome, as in x4. This is confirmed in
Table 2 where we see that adding noise changes the location of the mapping in latent space less than
adding an informative variable across both models.

                                   LSAM                                        Ensemble
        uk       +{noise}       +{signal}         p-value        +{noise}     +{signal}      p-value
     {x1}           0.43          4.16          3.09 × 10−12       0.16         2.41      8.24 × 10−5
     {x2}           0.37          3.18          1.02 × 10−11       0.14         3.92      1.80 × 10−4
    {x1, x2}        0.21          1.09          3.77 × 10−7        2.63         3.79      1.43 × 10−2
       {}           3.44          5.15          2.02 × 10−7        0.04         4.37      6.28 × 10−5

Table 2: Euclidean distance between latent space representations of uk and uk + either a noise variable or an
informative variable for both a LSAM or Ensemble based model. The location in latent space moves the most
when an informative variable is added to a subset.


6.1.2    M ISSINGNESS REGULARIZATION

We now explore the effect of the level of missingness on the latent space representation. In order
to do this we measure the Euclidean distance between uk , where uk ⊆ {x1, x2}, and uk + {x4},
where the degree of missingness is increased in x4 from 0% of the data to 99% of the data. From
Proposition 2, we would predict that as missingness in x4 increases, the distance between uk and
uk + {x4} decreases. Table 3 empirically demonstrates this effect where the location in latent space
converges to approximately the same location by 99% missingness.

6.1.3    M ISSINGNESS , FEATURE IMPORTANCE AND CONCRETE DROPOUT

Finally, we explore the effect of missingness on the concrete distribution learned during training.
Specifically, we can look at how the probability of dropping x4 from subsets during training changes
as the level of missingness increases from 0% to 99% of the variable. Table 4 shows that the
probability of dropout increases toward 0.5, the point of maximum entropy, as missingness increases
to 99%. The implication of this finding is that the model assigns more importance to variables with
less missing data, even when the variable with missing data is an informative variable.


                                                       6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                   uk       0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 99%
                                 {x1} 7.84 5.93 4.62 2.88 1.48 0.07
                                 {x2} 6.11 4.42 3.40 2.24 1.05 0.05
                               {x1, x2} 2.07 0.79 0.57 0.23 0.13 0.01
                                  {}    9.13 6.88 5.42 3.45 1.77 0.09

Table 3: Euclidean distance between latent space representations of uk and uk + an informative variable (x4) for
varying levels of missingness in the informative variable (x4). The location of the subset in latent space moves
less when the missingness in the added informative variable increases.

                          Variable        0%      20%        40%    60%     80%      99%
                             x1          0.34     0.33       0.32   0.33    0.33     0.34
                             x2          0.32     0.32       0.32   0.32    0.31     0.33
                         x3 (noise)      0.50     0.49       0.49   0.49    0.48     0.49
                         x4 (signal)     0.40     0.38       0.37   0.38    0.40     0.46

Table 4: Learned probabilities, from a concrete distribution, of dropping variables during training across different
levels of missingness in the informative variable (x4). The probability of dropping x4 from training approaches
that of random noise (x3) as the missingness increases in that variable.


6.2     B ENCHMARKING P ERFORMANCE

The OpenML-CC18 classification benchmarking suite is used to assess performance in two settings
(Vanschoren et al. 2013).

6.2.1    DATASET SELECTION
In the first set of experiments, we only select datasets with complete data availability, so we can
controllably corrupt them with specific missingness patterns. In the second set of experiments, we
select datasets with missingness, however the missingness pattern is unknown. For all experiments,
we select tabular datasets with a maximum number of 250 features and rows between 1000 and 10000
for computability. For datasets with pre-existing missingness we included datasets with greater than
or equal to 5% of the data missing. Our final collection includes 18 complete datasets and 11 datasets
with missingness. Details on the methods used to corrupt the datasets with missingness are available
in the supplementary materials.

6.2.2    C OMPARATOR MODELS
In all experiments, we compare ‘out-of-the-box’ performance with missingness against industry
standard data processing pipelines with imputation. We compare our LSAM approach against a high
performing ensemble decision tree model, LightGBM, which is also capable of dealing with missing
data natively (Ke et al. 2017).
Imputation can be broadly grouped into simple imputation strategies or regression methods. Simple
imputation can be the replacement of a missing value by a statistic, a pre-specified value, or encoding
the missingness as a new variable. Examples include mean or mode imputation. This strategy can
lead to consistent predictions in the setting of MCAR, but is not appropriate where data is MAR or
MNAR (Bertsimas et al. 2021). Despite the strong assumption needed, the benefit to this approach is
computational efficiency and ease of implementation.
Regression strategies are often combined with multiple imputation techniques, which involves
regressing multiple times with many models in order to generate a sample distribution of imputed
values (Rubin 1987; Buuren and Groothuis-Oudshoorn 2011). Multiple imputation can be performed
with linear regression, decision tree, or even random forest models and can provide unbiased estimates
in the setting of data MCAR and MAR (Stekhoven and Buhlmann 2011). Although this approach can
require significant computational resources, especially in the setting of large datasets, it has become
the gold standard for most modeling tasks that require imputation. In our experiments, we compare


                                                         7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    (a) Performance when data is MCAR


                                     (b) Performance when data is MAR


                                    (c) Performance when data is MNAR

Figure 1: Critical difference diagrams comparing performance for different missingness regimes, demonstrating
improved performance for the LSAM without imputation. Points are labelled by the type of model as well as
the imputation strategy if used. The performance metric is the change in negative log-likelihood from baseline
performance with complete data. Further right in the diagram indicates better performance. A break in the solid
bar underneath demonstrates statistical significance.


native model performance against 3 imputation strategies: simple imputation with mode or mean
imputation based on data type, an iterative multivariate imputation strategy, and multiple imputation
with random forests (MiceForest) (Pedregosa et al. 2011; Stekhoven and Buhlmann 2011).

6.2.3    P ERFORMANCE ON COMPLETE AND CORRUPTED REAL - WORLD DATASETS
We first report the performance on the baseline complete datasets. For the metric of accuracy, the
LSAM performs better with 13/18 wins. For the metric of negative log-likelihood (NLL) the LSAM
is better with 12/18 wins.
To statistically compare the performance of all possible approaches we use critical difference di-
agrams with a Nemenyi two-tailed test (Demšar 2006). Figure 1 shows these plots in the context
of the negative log-likelihood and demonstrates that the LSAM, using out-of-the-box performance,
outperforms or performs as well as an ‘impute and regress’ strategy when data is MCAR or MNAR.
Additionally, the LSAM outperforms LightGBM in most settings, with the exception of data MAR.
Critical difference diagrams with the metric of accuracy are in the supplementary materials, and
demonstrate similar findings.

6.2.4    P ERFORMANCE ON REAL - WORLD DATASETS WITH MISSINGNESS
Again, we compare the results of all possible approaches using a critical difference diagram. Figure 2
shows these plots for both metrics of accuracy and negative log-likelihood. Performance as measured


                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


by the negative log-likelihood showed a higher performance of the LSAM using out-of-the-box
performance. Performance as measured by the accuracy showed a higher performance of LightGBM
models. These results indicate that the LSAM model is better calibrated at the expense of accuracy.


Figure 2: Critical difference diagram comparing performance with negative log-likelihood on datasets with
unknown missingness pattern, demonstrating improved performance of the LSAM model.


6.2.5   M ETA - LEARNING
Finally, to explore the effect of dataset characteristics when LSAM outperforms the comparators,
we train a random forest model to predict an LSAM win from the known features of each dataset.
Full experiment details and results are available in the supplementary materials. Datasets with higher
dimensionality, a greater number of rows, and a greater proportion of numeric variables tended to
favor LSAM.

7    C ONCLUSION
To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first description and theoretical justification for utilizing
an attention based latent space model for dealing with missingness in tabular datasets. We have
shown that regularization occurs in the latent space both theoretically and empirically using a LSAM
and compositional ensemble architecture. The regularization acts to cluster representations in the
latent space toward the lowest cardinality and highest mutually informative subset of variables. We
have shown this approach to outperform imputation and LightGBM.
Our results suggest that when data is MCAR and MAR, there is less of a clear advantage of avoiding
imputation. Importantly, when data is MNAR, our experiments suggest a potential advantage of out-
of-the-box methods to avoid the bias of imputation methods in this setting. This finding is predicted
from our theoretical derivation of latent space regularization. Performance on unknown, and likely
mixed, real-world missingness patterns corroborates the finding that latent space regularization
can avoid the bias in imputation methods. Interestingly, LightGBM also outcompetes imputation
when data is MNAR which likely arises from gradient based decision trees allocating a split with
missingness to the direction that minimizes the loss (Ke et al. 2017). We suggest that as data
MNAR contains some information about the underlying value it is likely that splitting based on loss
minimization allows LightGBM to incorporate information from data MNAR.
A limitation of our approach is that it bundles missingness with model design. Certain predictive
tasks with known missingness that is MAR or MCAR, or specific model requirements, would likely
benefit from an impute and regress strategy instead of our proposed method. Additionally, while we
have introduced latent space regularization to compositional ensemble and attention-based models,
there is no limit to possible architectures that could achieve the same effect. Future work should
further validate this latent space regularization with other model designs and explore the application
of this approach in other real world dataset domains, such as imaging or time-series data.
We conclude that for predictive tasks, attention based latent space models with concrete dropout
may be a principled model choice in the context of missing data with unknown missingness pattern.
They require no assumptions about the missingness pattern of the data and require minimal extra
computational cost compared to a similarly parameterized model.


                                                    9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES

Abiri N, Linse B, Edén P, Ohlsson M. Establishing strong imputation performance of a denoising
    autoencoder in a wide range of missing data problems. Neurocomputing [Internet]. 2019
    Nov;365:137–46. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2019.07.065
Bertsimas D, Delarue A, Pauphilet J. Prediction with missing data [Internet]. 2021. Available from:
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03158
Bertsimas D, Pawlowski C, Zhuo YD. From predictive methods to missing data imputation: An
    optimization approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research [Internet]. 2018;18(196):1–39.
    Available from: http://jmlr.org/papers/v18/17-073.html
Boudiaf M, Rony J, Ziko IM, Granger E, Pedersoli M, Piantanida P, et al. A unifying mutual
    information view of metric learning: Cross-entropy vs. Pairwise losses. In: Computer vision
    – ECCV 2020 [Internet]. Springer International Publishing; 2020. p. 548–64. Available from:
    https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58539-6 33
Bradbury J, Frostig R, Hawkins P, Johnson MJ, Leary C, Maclaurin D, et al. JAX: Composable
    transformations of Python+NumPy programs [Internet]. 2018. Available from: http://github.com/
    google/jax
Buuren S van, Groothuis-Oudshoorn K. Mice: Multivariate imputation by chained equations in
    r. Journal of Statistical Software, Articles [Internet]. 2011;45(3):1–67. Available from: https:
    //www.jstatsoft.org/v045/i03
Chang C-H, Rampasek L, Goldenberg A. Dropout feature ranking for deep learning models [Internet].
    2018. Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.08645
Davey A, Dai T. A systematic approach to identify and evaluate missing data patterns and mechanisms
    in multivariate educational, social, and behavioral research [Internet]. 2020. Available from:
    https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.14296
Demšar J. Statistical comparisons of classifiers over multiple data sets. J Mach Learn Res. 2006
    Dec;7:1–30.
Gavankar S, Sawarkar S. Decision tree: Review of techniques for missing values at training, testing
    and compatibility. In: 2015 3rd international conference on artificial intelligence, modelling and
    simulation (AIMS). 2015. p. 122–6.
Jeong H, Wang H, Calmon FP. Fairness without imputation: A decision tree approach for fair
    prediction with missing values. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
    [Internet]. 2022 Jun;36(9):9558–66. Available from: https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v36i9.21189
Ke G, Meng Q, Finley T, Wang T, Chen W, Ma W, et al. Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient
    boosting decision tree. Advances in neural information processing systems. 2017;30:3146–54.
Kingma DP, Ba J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization [Internet]. 2017. Available from:
    https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980
Li J, Wang M, Steinbach MS, Kumar V, Simon GJ. Don’t do imputation: Dealing with informative
    missing values in EHR data analysis. In: Soon OY, Chen H, Wu X, Aggarwal C, editors.
    Proceedings - 9th IEEE international conference on big knowledge, ICBK 2018. Institute of
    Electrical; Electronics Engineers Inc.; 2018. p. 415–22. (Proceedings - 9th IEEE international
    conference on big knowledge, ICBK 2018).
Little RJA, Rubin DB. Statistical analysis with missing data [Internet]. Wiley; 2002. (Wiley series in
    probability and mathematical statistics. Probability and mathematical statistics). Available from:
    http://books.google.com/books?id=aYPwAAAAMAAJ
Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine
    learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research. 2011;12:2825–30.
Rubin DB. Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. Wiley; 1987. p. 258.
Stekhoven DJ, Buhlmann P. MissForest–non-parametric missing value imputation for mixed-type
    data. Bioinformatics [Internet]. 2011 Oct;28(1):112–8. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
    bioinformatics/btr597
Vanschoren J, Rijn JN van, Bischl B, Torgo L. OpenML: Networked science in machine learning.
    SIGKDD Explorations [Internet]. 2013;15(2):49–60. Available from: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
    2641190.2641198
Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, Uszkoreit J, Jones L, Gomez AN, et al. Attention is all you need. In:
    Guyon I, Luxburg UV, Bengio S, Wallach H, Fergus R, Vishwanathan S, et al., editors. Advances
    in neural information processing systems [Internet]. Curran Associates, Inc.; 2017. Available
    from: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.
    pdf


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Zhuang J, Tang T, Ding Y, Tatikonda S, Dvornek NC, Papademetris X, et al. AdaBelief optimizer:
   Adapting stepsizes by the belief in observed gradients. CoRR [Internet]. 2020;abs/2010.07468.
   Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.07468


                                              11
