Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I N - DISTRIBUTION AND O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION
G ENERALIZATION FOR G RAPH N EURAL N ETWORKS
 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                               A BSTRACT
         Graph neural networks (GNNs) are models that allow learning with structured data of
         varying size. Despite their popularity, theoretical understanding of the generalization of
         GNNs is an under-explored topic. In this work, we expand the theoretical understanding of
         both in-distribution and out-of-distribution generalization of GNNs. Firstly, we improve
         upon the state-of-the-art PAC-Bayes (in-distribution) generalization bound primarily by
         reducing an exponential dependency on the node degree to a linear dependency. Secondly,
         utilizing tools from spectral graph theory, we prove some rigorous guarantees about the
         out-of-distribution (OOD) size generalization of GNNs, where graphs in the training set
         have different numbers of nodes and edges from those in the test set. To empirically
         verify our theoretical findings, we conduct experiments on both synthetic and real-world
         graph datasets. Our computed generalization gaps for the in-distribution case significantly
         improve the state-of-the-art PAC-Bayes results. For the OOD case, experiments on com-
         munity classification tasks in large social networks show that GNNs achieve strong size
         generalization performance in cases guaranteed by our theory.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Graph neural networks (GNNs), firstly proposed in Scarselli et al. (2008), generalize artificial neural net-
works from processing fixed-size data to processing arbitrary graph-structured or relational data, which can
vary in terms of the number of nodes, the number of edges, and so on. GNNs and their modern variants
(Bronstein et al., 2017; Battaglia et al., 2018) have achieved state-of-the-art results in a wide range of ap-
plication domains, including social networks (Hamilton et al., 2017), material sciences (Xie & Grossman,
2018), drug discovery (Wieder et al., 2020), autonomous driving (Liang et al., 2020), quantum chemistry
(Gilmer et al., 2020), and particle physics (Shlomi et al., 2020).
Despite their empirical successes, the theoretical understanding of GNNs are somewhat limited. Existing
works largely focus on analyzing the expressiveness of GNNs. In particular, Xu et al. (2018) show that
GNNs are as powerful as the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) graph isomorphism test (Weisfeiler & Leman, 1968)
in distinguishing graphs. Chen et al. (2019) further demonstrate an equivalence between graph isomorphism
testing and universal approximation of permutation-invariant functions. Loukas (2019) show that GNNs
with certain conditions (e.g., on depth and width) are Turing universal. Chen et al. (2020) and Xu et al.
(2020a) respectively examine whether GNNs can count substructures and perform algorithmic reasoning.
In the vein of statistical learning theory, generalization analyses for GNNs have been developed to bound the
gap between training and testing errors using VC-dimension (Vapnik & Chervonenkis, 1971), Rademacher
complexity (Bartlett & Mendelson, 2002), algorithmic stability (Bousquet & Elisseeff, 2002), and PAC-
Bayes (McAllester, 2003) (a Bayesian extension of PAC learning (Valiant, 1984)). Depending on whether
the problem setup is in-distribution (ID) or out-of-distribution (OOD), i.e., whether test data comes from the
same distribution as training data, we categorize the literature into two groups.

                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ID Generalization Bounds. Scarselli et al. (2018) provide a VC-dimension based generalization bound
for GNNs whereas Verma & Zhang (2019) present the stability-based generalization analysis for single-
layer graph convolutional networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016). Both consider node classification and
assume the node features are independent and identically-distributed (IID), which conflicts with the common
relational learning setup (e.g., semi-supervised node classification) at which GNNs excel. Relying on the
neural tangent kernel (NTK) approach (Jacot et al., 2018), Du et al. (2019) characterize the generalization
bound of infinite-width GNNs on graph classification. Garg et al. (2020) derive the Rademacher complexity
based bound for message passsing GNNs on graph classification. Lv (2021) establish results for GCNs on
node classification using Rademacher complexity as well. Based on PAC-Bayes, Liao et al. (2020) obtain
a tighter bound for both GCNs and message passsing GNNs on graph classification compared to (Garg
et al., 2020; Scarselli et al., 2018). Subsequently, Ma et al. (2021) also leverage PAC-Bayes and show
generalization guarantees of GNNs on subgroups of nodes for node classification. More recently, Li et al.
(2022) study the effect of graph subsampling in the generalization of GCNs.
OOD Generalization Yehudai et al. (2021) study size generalization for GNNs — this is a specific OOD
setting where training and testing graphs differ in the number of nodes and edges. They show negative results
that specific GNNs can perfectly fit training graphs but fails on OOD testing ones. Baranwal et al. (2021)
consider specific graph generative models, i.e., the contextual stochastic block model (CSBM) (Deshpande
et al., 2018), where CSBMs during training and testing are of the same means but different number of
nodes, intra-, and inter-class edge probabilities. They present generalization guarantees for single-layer
GCNs on binary node classification tasks. Later, Maskey et al. (2022) assume yet another class of graph
generative models, i.e., graphons, where the kernel is shared across training and testing but the number
of nodes and edges could vary. They obtain generalization bounds of message passing GNNs on graph
classification and regression that depend on the Minkowski dimension of the node feature space. Relying
on a connection of over-parameterized networks and neural tangent kernel, Xu et al. (2020b) find that task-
specific architecture/feature designs help GNNs extrapolate to OOD algorithmic tasks.
Wu et al. (2022a) propose explore-to-extrapolate risk minimization framework, for which the solution is
proven to provide an optimal OOD model under the invariance and heterogeneity assumptions. Yang et al.
(2022) propose a two-stage model that both infers the latent environment and makes predictions to generalize
to OOD data. Empirical studies suggest it works well on real-world molecule datasets. Wu et al. (2022b)
study a new objective that can learn invariant and causal graph features that generalize well to OOD data
empirically. All above works follow the spirit of invariant risk minimization (Arjovsky et al., 2019) and
focus on designing new learning objectives. Instead, we provide generalization bound analysis from the
traditional statistical learning theory perspective.
Our Contributions. In this paper, we study both in-distribution and out-of-distribution generalization for
GNNs. For in-distribution graph classification tasks, we significantly improve the previous state-of-the-art
PAC-Bayes results in (Liao et al., 2020) by decreasing an exponential dependency on the maximum node
degree to a linear dependency. For OOD node classification tasks, we do not assume any known graph
generative models which is in sharp contrast to the existing work. We instead assume GNNs are trained
and tested on subgraphs that are sampled via random walks from a single large underlying graph, as an
efficient means to generate a connected subgraph. We identify interesting cases where a graph classification
task is theoretically guaranteed to perform well at size generalization, and derive generalization bounds.
We validate our theoretical results by conducting experiments on synthetic graphs, and also explore size
generalization on a collection of real-world social network datasets. In the in-distribution case, we observe
an improvement of several orders of magnitude in numerical calculations of the generalization bound. In the
out-of-distribution case, we validate that, in cases where the theory guarantees that size generalization works
well, the prediction accuracy on large subgraphs is always comparable to the accuracy on small subgraphs,
and in many cases is actually better.


                                                  2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(a) An example of a small expander graph. Any (b) Example of a small barbell graph. If a labelling is exactly
labelling of its nodes cannot exhibit homophily. differentiated between the two groups, then it exhibits homophily.
2    BACKGROUND INFORMATION
A graph G is an abstract mathematical model for pairwise relationships, with a set of vertices V and a set of
edges E ⊆ V × V . Two vertices v1 , v2 are said to be connected if (v1 , v2 ) ∈ E. For a given graph G ∈ G
we can also denote its vertices by V (G) and edges E(G). Unless otherwise specified, we assume graphs
are undirected and without multi-edges. In machine learning, a graph (or graph-structured data) typically
come with a set of node features. Common graph based machine learning tasks include node classification
(or regression) and graph classification (or regression). We use the following notation.

       • Graph data {Gi = (Vi , Ei )}m
                                     i=1 ∈ G, where G is the set of all graphs. The neighborhood of a vertex
         v is denoted N (v) = {u ∈ V (Gi ) : (v, u) ∈ E(Gi )}.
       • Node feature xv : V → X , with X being the feature space, e.g., X = Rdv .
       • Node labels y : V → Y, with Y being the set of labels, e.g., Y = [n].

Graph neural networks (GNNs). GNNs generalize regular neural networks to process data with varying
structures and dependencies. GNNs achieve this flexibility via a message passing computational process. In
                                                                                          (k+1)
particular, at the k-th step (or layer) of message passing, we update the representation hu     of node u as
follows,
                         h(k+1)
                          u      = UPDATE(h(k)                       (k)
                                               u , AGGREGATE({hv |v ∈ N (u)})).                          (1)
This update happens for all nodes in parallel within each message passing step. Moreover, the UPDATE
and AGGREGATE operators are shared by all nodes, which enables the same GNN to process varying-
sized graphs. Once we have finished the finite-step message passing process, we can use the output node
representations to make predictions on nodes, edges, and the graph via additionally parameterized readout
functions. This message passing framework is quite general since one can instantiate the UPDATE and
AGGREGATE operators by different neural networks. For example, the widely used Graph Convolutional
Networks (GCNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2016), which are the main interest of our work, have the form
                                                                                
                                                                    (k)
                                                    X              hv
                              h(k+1)
                               u      = σ Wk               p         p                                 (2)
                                                v∈N (u)∪{u}
                                                              |N (u)|    |N (v)|

where one applies a linear transformation (Wk ) to all node representations, a weighted-sum over the neigh-
borhood, and an element-wise nonlinearity (e.g., ReLU activation). Note that the learnable weights Wk are
different from layer to layer.
Homophily. A concept studied in network science, homophily (McPherson et al., 2001) is the property
that similar nodes group together. For node classification (or node labelling), this means that neighbouring
nodes tend to have the same label. Size generalization is plausible when the labelling of the nodes exhibits
homophily. The presence of a homophilic graph labelling implies that the labels of the nodes are unlikely to
change during the course of a long random walk on the graph.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


It is important to note that homophily is also a concept that relates to the graph topology, as not every
possible graph structure can be given a labelling that exhibits homophilic properties. An example of one
such topology where homophily is impossible is an expander graph (Hoory et al., 2006), as shown in Figure
1a, where nodes have either random or random-like edges connected to a constant number of other nodes
in the entire graph. In this case, any labelling of the nodes is far from homophilic, as can be shown using
the expansion property. A setting with more homophily is akin to a barbell graph, as shown in Figure 1b,
where there are two densely connected components, and comparatively few edges connecting the two dense
regions. If the graph labelling of interest lines up with these divisions inherent in the topology, then it is
natural to say that it exhibits a homophilic property.
Cheeger’s Inequality. A mathematical description of homophily can be given using concepts from spectral
graph theory. Cheeger’s inequality (Hoory et al., 2006) is a theorem that pertains to partitions of graphs, or
equivalently binary-valued labellings on graphs (one side of the partition is labelled 0, the other 1). A crucial
definition is the conductance, defined by
                                   |E(S, S̄)|
                          ϕ(S) =                 ∀S ⊆ V       and       ϕ(G) = min ϕ(S).
                                      |S|                                            |V |
                                                                                 |S|≤ 2

Here E(S, S̄) is the set of edges connecting a node in S to a node outside of S. Cheeger’s inequality states
                                                             p
                                         λ2 /2 ≤ ϕ(G) ≤        2λ2 ,

where λ2 is the second-smallest eigenvalue of the normalized Laplacian1 L̃. This inequality links the real-
valued quantity λ2 to the concept of homophily. If λ2 is small then the conductance of G must also be
low, by Cheeger’s inequality. If a labelling on graph nodes f : V (G) → {0, 1} roughly agrees with a
low-conductance partition (i.e., one side of the partition S is generally labelled 0 and the complement S̄ is
generally labelled 1) then the labelling f exhibits homophily.

3       I MPROVEMENT OF I N -D ISTRIBUTION PAC-BAYES BOUND

The state-of-the-art generalization bounds for GNNs in the in-distribution case were formulated by Liao et al.
(2020) using the PAC-Bayes theory. Specifically, they build upon the PAC-Bayes theorem in (Neyshabur
et al., 2018) that pertains to homogeneous feedforward neural networks.
We denote one sample as z = (X, A, y) where X ∈ X , A ∈ G, and y ∈ Y are the node features, the adja-
cency matrix, and the graph label respectively. Each sample is drawn from some unknown data distribution
D (with support X × G × Y) in an i.i.d. fashion. Since both training and testing samples are drawn from the
same distribution, this is the in-distribution setup. Following (Liao et al., 2020), we consider a margin loss
for multi-class graph classifications as below,

                   LD,γ = LD,γ (fw ) = Pz∼D fw (X, A)[y] ≤ γ + max fw (X, A)[j]                            (3)
                                                                             j̸=y

where γ > 0 is the margin parameter and fw is the model (hypothesis) parameterized by weights w. Since
D is unknown, we can not compute this true loss (risk). We instead minimize the empirical loss (risk) that
is defined on the sampled training set S as below,

                                       1 X
                LS,γ = LS,γ (fw ) =          1 fw (Xi , Ai )[y] ≤ γ + max fw (Xi , Ai )[j] ,           (4)
                                      m                               j̸=y
                                                z∈S

    1
        Here L̃ = D−1/2 (D − A)D−1/2 , where D is the diagonal matrix of vertex degrees and A is the adjacency matrix.


                                                       4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where m is the number of training samples. For simplicity, we abbreviate LD,γ (fw ) and LS,γ (fw ) as LD,γ
and LS,γ respectively from now on.
Our main in-distribution result bounds the gap between true and empirical risks for GCNs, shown in the
following theorem. The proof is in Appendix A.1.
Theorem 3.1. For any B > 0, l > 1, let fw ∈ H : X × G → Rk be an l-layer GCN. Then with probability
≥ 1 − δ over the choice of an iid size-m training set S from the data distribution D, we have for any w:
                          v                                                                      
                            u
                                  2    2
                                                     Ql          2
                                                                   Pl           2       2       m
                          t B d l (h + ln l)          i=1 ∥Wi ∥2    i=1 (∥Wi ∥F /∥Wi ∥2 ) + ln δ 
                            u
       LD,0 ≤ LS,γ + O                                                                                 (5)
                                                              γ2m                                


Here d equals to one plus the maximum node degree that can be achieved by the data distribution. l is the
depth, i.e., the number of layers, of GCNs. Wi is the weight matrix of GCNs in the i-th layer. B is the radius
of the minimal ℓ2 ball that contains all node features, i.e., ∀v, ∥xv ∥2 ≤ B. This improves the bound in (Liao
et al., 2020), which is provided below for a better comparison,
                        v                                                                          
                          u
                          u B 2 dl−1 l2 h log(lh) Ql ∥W ∥2 Pl (∥W ∥2 /∥W ∥2 ) + log ml
                        t                              i=1      i 2   i=1    i F     i 2         δ 
    LD,0 ≤ LS,γ + O                                              2
                                                                                                    .     (6)
                                                               γ m                                 


The proof of the theorem from (Liao et al., 2020) is an induction over the l layers, in which the spectral
norm of the weights and a maximum degree term is multiplied at each step. We observe that it is possible
to avoid passing the maximum degree term via a refined argument. This leads to a tightening of one of
the main inequalities used in the induction proof, thus in turn resulting in substantial improvements to the
overall bound. As can be seen above, we reduce the exponential term dl−1 to a linear term d, which is a
significant improvement for graphs even with small node degrees.

4   T OWARDS DEVELOPING A THEORY FOR SIZE GENERALIZATON
In this section, we develop an out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization theory for GNNs. Since we adopt a
statistical learning viewpoint, there must necessarily be some assumptions relating the training and testing
graphs (otherwise the No-Free Lunch theorem applies). There is a tradeoff between assumptions that are
practically relevant, and those for which rigorous guarantees are provable. We have chosen assumptions that
we believe strike a balance between those objectives, at least for applications like social networks.
Size Generalization Assumptions. We consider the following setup. First, we assume that there exists
an extremely large graph G like the user network in Twitter so that one needs to sample subgraphs (e.g.,
via random walks) for training and testing machine learning models. This is akin to the practical setups
of (Grover & Leskovec, 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017). To generate training and testing subgraphs, we run
random walks of length N and M respectively on this single large graph, where M ≫ N , and collect
the subgraphs induced by these walks. GNNs are then trained on the subgraphs induced by the shorter
(length-N ) walks. In testing, we assume a procedure where a length-M random walk induced subgraph
is sampled from the large subgraph. Random walks are initiated by choosing an initial node uniformly at
random from all the nodes in the graph, and at each step there is an equal probability of selecting any of the
current node’s neighbors. This is an interesting OOD problem where training and testing graphs come from
different distributions determined by the underlying large graph and the random walk sampling with specific
length. We consider the graph classification problem and assume that the graph label is determined by the
majority of node labels within the graph, which is reasonable for many applications that involve homophilic
graphs. For the node labeling, we assume it is binary but have no assumptions on how labels are generated.

                                                  5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Crucially, we assume nothing about the underlying large graph. Therefore, our setup has advantages over
some OOD setups in the literature where a generative model of graphs and labels is explicitly assumed.
Relation with In-Distribution Result. We know the relationship between true error defined on the unknown
data distribution D and empirical error defined on the size-m training set S. Specifically, for any GCN f ,
with probability at least 1 − δ, we have a general bound as follows,
                                        LD,0 ≤ LS,γ + A(f, δ, m),                                          (7)
where we abbreviate the bound as A(f, δ, m) and omit specific parameters like maximum node degree d.
In the size generalization problem, we use random walks with lengths N and M for collecting training and
testing subgraphs (data) respectively. We are interested in proving a statement of the following form: for
any GCN f , we have with probability at least 1 − δ,
                                   LDM ,0 ≤ LSN ,γ + B(f, δ, m, M, N ).                                    (8)
The key detail is that DM is the distribution of subgraphs induced by random walks with length M and SN
is the training set of subgraphs induced by random walks with length N . Comparing these two losses is the
essence of our OOD result. The final term B(f, δ, m, M, N ) is a general bound involving these parameters.
Based on the in-distribution result like in Theorem 3.1, we can similarly obtain,
                                      LDN ,0 ≤ LSN ,γ + AN (f, δ, m),                                      (9)
where DN is the distribution of subgraphs induced by random walks with length N and AN is the general
bound. The key question boils down to: what is the relationship between LDN ,0 to LDM ,0 ? This question
will be answered in the following sections.

4.1   A PROBABILITY BOUND FOR PARTITION CROSSES

The above size generalization problem involves the distributions of random-walk-induced subgraphs from a
large graph G with two lengths: N for training and M for testing. Also, M is much larger than N . Before
we state our results, we would like to explain the simple intuition that motivates our theory:
If the random walk always stays within the same partition, then the graph label of the random-walk-induced
subgraph can be well predicted, no matter how long the random walk is.
Here a partition means the subset of nodes with the same node label. The goal of this section is to find
bounds on M for which we can provide OOD guarantees. We begin by considering a special labelling.
Special Node Labeling: Sparsest Cut. A set S that minimizes ϕ(S) (and has |S| ≤ |V |/2) is called
a sparsest cut. For simplicity assume that S is unique. Using Cheeger’s inequality, we first prove the
following probability bounds related to this sampling procedure, thereby identifying the length M for which
a random walk is likely to stay within the sparsest cut for d-regular graphs. The theorems are as follows.
Theorem 4.1. Let UM = [u1 , u2 , . . . , uM ] be a length-M random walk over a connected, d-regular
                                                                                          √         graph
G, with u1 chosen from the stationary distribution of the nodes of G. If M ≤ d/(25/2 λ2 ), then the
probability that UM crosses the sparsest-cut partition at least once is under 1/2.

Here crossing the sparsest-cut partition S means that there exists an edge (u, v) of the random walk satisfies
u ∈ S and v ∈ S̄. λ2 is the second-smallest eigenvalue of the normalized Laplacian. We can easily
generalize the previous theorem to an arbitrary probability δ > 0 as below.
                                       √
Corollary 4.1.1. If M ≤ (δd)/23/2 λ2 , the probability of the above random walk UM crossing over the
sparsest-cut partition at least once is at most δ.

                                                  6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


General Node Labeling. Theorem 4.1 is restrictive in that it requires the partition S to be the sparsest cut.
We now modify the proof to yield a quantity that can work for any node labelling f . Specifically, let φ be
any boolean (i.e., {0, 1}-valued) labelling on the vertices of the graph. Let the positive node labelling of φ
be S = {v ∈ V (G) : φ(v) = 1}. We are interested in bounding the probability that a random walk of length
M includes an edge that crosses the positive node labelling S, i.e., an edge (u, v) satisfies u ∈ S and v ∈ S̄.
Theorem 4.2. Let φ be a boolean labelling on the nodes of a connected, d-regular graph G with positive
node labelling S (0-1 valued vector with φ[i] = 1 if vi ∈ S). Let UM = [u1 , u2 , . . . , uM ] be a length-M
random walk over G, with u1 chosen from the stationary distribution of the nodes        of G. Let Xi be    the
indicator variable of the event that the i-th edge of UM crosses S, i.e., Xi = 1 ui ∈ S, ui+1 ∈ S̄ and
      Pk
Yk = i=1 Xi is the number of times that UM crosses S in the first k steps. Let φ′ = φ − 1(|S|/|V |) and
α = φ′⊤ Lφ′ /∥φ′ ∥22 . The conclusion is that:
                                             d                                   1
                            if    M ≤ 5/2 √             then      Pr [YM ≥ 1] ≤ .
                                         2      α                                2
                                  3/2
                                      √
Corollary 4.2.1. If M ≤ (δd)/2          α, the probability of the above random walk UM at least crosses over
the positive node labelling of f once is at most δ, i.e., Pr [YM ≥ 1] ≤ δ.
The formula for α arises from an alternative formulation of Cheeger’s inequality which expresses λ2 using
a Rayleigh quotient (Spielman, 2015), in which y may be viewed as a real-valued labelling on the vertices.
                                         λ2 = min(y ⊤ Ly)/(y ⊤ Dy)
                                               y⊥d

4.2 S IZE G ENERALIZATION E RROR
Recall that, in the size generalization setup, we first train a GNN model f on subgraphs induced by many
length-N random walks on G. Then during testing, given a large testing subgraph GM induced by a length-
M random walk on G, we sample a subgraph GN via a length-N random walk on GM and feed it to f to
compute the empirical (classification) error for GM . If all nodes of GM are within a single positive node
labelling, then all of their labels are the same. Therefore, no matter which subgraph GN is sampled, the
generalization error (i.e., the probability of making a wrong prediction) for GM should be the same as the
one for GN . Based on this reasoning, we have the following result.
Theorem 4.3 (Size Generalization Error). For any δ ∈ [0, 1), if we restrict M , the size of the large random
                                                     √
walk-induced subgraph, such that M ≤ (δd)/23/2 α, then the in-distribution generalization error LDM ,0 ,
i.e., the probability of a wrong prediction on length-M -random-walk induced subgraphs, satisfies
                                             LDM ,0 ≤ δ + LDN ,0 .                                       (10)
where LDN ,0 is the in-distribution generalization error of f on length-N random-walk-induced subgraphs.
Note that this theorem explicitly constrains M , whereas the only condition on N is that LDN ,0 is small.

Proof. Observe that, for any events F and E, we have Pr [F ] ≤ Pr [E] + Pr F |Ē . Let E be the event
that a length-M random walk crosses the positive node labelling of the ground truth labels, and let F be
the event  that  we make a wrong prediction on the induced subgraph GM . Theorem 3.1 bounds the second
term, Pr F |Ē , because the generalization error on GM is the same as the one on GN (subgraphs induced
by length-N random walks) when GM does not cross the positive node labelling. Corollary 4.2.1 bounds
the first term. Substituting the values from the previous two theorems yields the claimed inequality.

We already know the bound of the in-distribution generalization error LDN ,0 due to Theorem 3.1 — let us
call this quantity δ̂. Using this we can obtain the final result for GCNs under our OOD setup. Theorem 4.3
                                                  √
simply states that, if the length M ≤ (δd)/23/2 α, with probability at least 1 − δ̂, the OOD generalization
error on large subgraphs (induced by length-M random walks) is the sum of error δ and the in-distribution
generalization bound on small subgraphs (induced by length-N random walks).

                                                  7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                 (a)                                 (b)                               (c)


                 (d)                                 (e)                               (f)
Figure 2: Log-generalization gap values for in-distribution experiments: (a) l = 4, Synthetic (b) l = 6,
Synthetic (d) l = 4, Real-world (e) l = 6, Real-world. Accuracies for OOD experiments: (c) Synthetic
(including both homophilic (Homo) and non-homophilic (NonHomo) graphs) (f) Real-world (Twitch data).

5     E XPERIMENTS

5.1   I N - DISTRIBUTION : N UMERICAL PAC-BAYES BOUND COMPUTATION

We conduct multi-class graph classification experiments to compare our improved bound to the original
PAC-Bayes bound in (Liao et al., 2020). We use the same GCN model, adopt the same datasets, i.e., 6
synthetic datasets obtained from random graph models and 3 real world graph datasets used in (Yanardag
& Vishwanathan, 2015), and follow the same experimental protocol. After training a GCN on each dataset,
we compute the theoretical bounds using final model. The numerical comparisons of log bound values are
shown in Figure 2. It is clear that our new bounds are significantly tighter and reduce the bound values by
several orders of magnitude. The gap is further increased as the depth increases. The tables of bound values
and the specific equations to compute them are provided in Appendix B.1.

5.2   O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION : E FFICACY OF SIZE GENERALIZATION

We performed OOD experiments to validate the values of the upper bound on the size of large subgraphs M
that was set in Theorem 4.1 and its related theorems, for synthetic graphs. We also performed experiments on
synthetic graphs that were non-homophilic with the same values of M and N , to examine size generalization


                                                 8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


in this case. We also examined the general feasibility of size generalization in real-world social network data.
For synthetic graphs, we calculated this theoretical value for the upper bound, and selected large subgraph
size M and small subgraph size N ≪ M accordingly. For the real-world case, we chose constant values of
N = 10 and M = 50. For each subgraph, we assign as its graph label the label observed most often among
its nodes. After sampling datasets of subgraphs of sizes M and N , we train GCN models on the dataset
with N -length random walks and measure their performance on the training set, the validation set (a smaller
data set generated the same way as the train set), and the testing set (a set of subgraphs inuced by length-M
random walks). On the test set we record both the performance when inputting the whole large subgraph
(Test error), as well as when performing the sampling procedure used for Theorem 4.3, in which we sample
an induced subgraph from an N -length random walk for each data item (Sampling-test error).
Synthetic Graphs. We adopt the CSBMs (Deshpande et al., 2018) to generate graphs that exhibit the ho-
mophily property. We use two blocks with much higher probability of connections inside the same block
than between blocks, which leads to barbell-like graphs. In the non-homophilic case, we set these probabili-
ties to be equal. We generate binary node labellings via the sparsest cut. CSBMs generate node features via
a Gaussian mixture where individual choices of the component are determined by the node label.
Real-world Graphs. We used social network data for Twitch streamers from (Rozemberczki et al., 2019).
Each node is a streamer (Twitch user), and nodes are connected to mutual friendships. Node features are
3,169 different binary indicators of a wide array of attributes, including games liked, location, etc. Each node
is labelled with a boolean value of whether the livestreamer has indicated that they use explicit language.
In all cases, the GCN model achieves OOD test accuracy on large-subgraph that was comparable to ID
accuracy on small-subgraph if not outright better. This is even the case when some of the constraints are
violated: no d-regularity constraint was imposed for any of the datasets, and performance was still good for
the test error which did not involve further subgraph sampling. This indicates that the theory is promising in
practice for more general forms of size generalization. The accuracy on the train set, test set with subgraph
sampling, and unaltered test set are shown in Figure 2, and the numerical values are in Appendix B.2.
For many cases including all real-world cases, the test accuracy was actually higher than the training accu-
racy. This could potentially indicate that in the cases where size generalization can be guaranteed to work
well, the GCN model benefits significantly from extra node information. It is also possible that because of
the sampling procedure, there is overlap in nodes between the training and test sets, since they come from
random-walk sampling procedures that naively select a uniformly random node as the initial node.

6   D ISCUSSION
In this work we have expanded the theoretical understanding of the generalizations of GNNs in both in-
distribution and out-of-distribution settings, deriving new theoretical guarantees in each setting. The results
for in-distribution learning improve upon the state-of-the art PAC-Bayes bounds in (Liao et al., 2020), and the
results for out-of-distribution learning provide insight into a practical learning setting under which GNNs are
guaranteed to perform effective size generalization. Future directions for the in-distribution understanding
would involve lowering the dependencies of other variables like the spectral norm of weights. Generalizing
the results to other problems like node classification would also be interesting. In the out-of-distribution
case, a number of different observations in experimentation indicate that the theory can still be very much
expanded. We have identified cases in real-world datasets where well beyond the bounds on size set forth
in the theory, and in all experiments the d-regularity assumption is violated, yet GCN size generalization is
still effective in these cases. Expansions to the theory, including generalizing to non-d-regular graphs, can
be explored to explain cases like these.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.
Aseem Baranwal, Kimon Fountoulakis, and Aukosh Jagannath. Graph convolution for semi-supervised
  classification: Improved linear separability and out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2102.06966, 2021.
Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural
  results. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3(Nov):463–482, 2002.
Peter W Battaglia, Jessica B Hamrick, Victor Bapst, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, Vinicius Zambaldi, Mateusz
  Malinowski, Andrea Tacchetti, David Raposo, Adam Santoro, Ryan Faulkner, et al. Relational inductive
  biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.01261, 2018.
Olivier Bousquet and André Elisseeff. Stability and generalization. The Journal of Machine Learning
  Research, 2:499–526, 2002.
Michael M Bronstein, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, Arthur Szlam, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Geometric deep
 learning: going beyond euclidean data. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 34(4):18–42, 2017.
Zhengdao Chen, Soledad Villar, Lei Chen, and Joan Bruna. On the equivalence between graph isomorphism
  testing and function approximation with GNNs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32,
  2019.
Zhengdao Chen, Lei Chen, Soledad Villar, and Joan Bruna. Can graph neural networks count substructures?
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:10383–10395, 2020.
Yash Deshpande, Subhabrata Sen, Andrea Montanari, and Elchanan Mossel. Contextual stochastic block
  models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Simon S Du, Kangcheng Hou, Russ R Salakhutdinov, Barnabas Poczos, Ruosong Wang, and Keyulu Xu.
  Graph neural tangent kernel: Fusing graph neural networks with graph kernels. Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Matthias Fey and Jan E. Lenssen. Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric. In ICLR
 Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds, 2019.
Vikas Garg, Stefanie Jegelka, and Tommi Jaakkola. Generalization and representational limits of graph
  neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 3419–3430. PMLR, 2020.
Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Message passing
  neural networks. In Machine learning meets quantum physics, pp. 199–214. Springer, 2020.
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In Proceedings of the
  22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 855–864,
  2016.
Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large graphs. Advances
 in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
Shlomo Hoory, Nathan Linial, and Avi Wigderson. Expander graphs and their applications. Bulletin of the
  American Mathematical Society, 43(4):439–561, 2006.

                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neural tangent kernel: Convergence and generalization
  in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In ICLR (Poster), 2015.
  URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional networks. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.
Hongkang Li, Meng Wang, Sijia Liu, Pin-Yu Chen, and Jinjun Xiong. Generalization guarantee of training
  graph convolutional networks with graph topology sampling. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 13014–13051. PMLR, 2022.
Ming Liang, Bin Yang, Rui Hu, Yun Chen, Renjie Liao, Song Feng, and Raquel Urtasun. Learning lane
 graph representations for motion forecasting. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 541–556.
 Springer, 2020.
Renjie Liao, Raquel Urtasun, and Richard Zemel. A PAC-Bayesian approach to generalization bounds for
  graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07690, 2020.
Andreas Loukas.     What graph neural networks cannot learn:         depth vs width.      arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1907.03199, 2019.
Shaogao Lv. Generalization bounds for graph convolutional neural networks via rademacher complexity.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.10234, 2021.
Jiaqi Ma, Junwei Deng, and Qiaozhu Mei. Subgroup generalization and fairness of graph neural networks.
   Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:1048–1061, 2021.
Sohir Maskey, Ron Levie, Yunseok Lee, and Gitta Kutyniok. Generalization analysis of message passing
  neural networks on large random graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00645, 2022.
David McAllester. Simplified PAC-Bayesian margin bounds. In Learning theory and Kernel machines, pp.
  203–215. Springer, 2003.
Miller McPherson, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and James M Cook. Birds of a feather: Homophily in social networks.
 Annual review of sociology, pp. 415–444, 2001.
Behnam Neyshabur, Srinadh Bhojanapalli, and Nathan Srebro. A PAC-bayesian approach to spectrally-
  normalized margin bounds for neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Skz_WfbCZ.
Benedek Rozemberczki, Carl Allen, and Rik Sarkar. Multi-scale attributed node embedding, 2019.
Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini. The graph
  neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks, 20(1):61–80, 2008.
Franco Scarselli, Ah Chung Tsoi, and Markus Hagenbuchner. The Vapnik–Chervonenkis dimension of
  graph and recursive neural networks. Neural Networks, 108:248–259, 2018.
Jonathan Shlomi, Peter Battaglia, and Jean-Roch Vlimant. Graph neural networks in particle physics. Ma-
  chine Learning: Science and Technology, 2(2):021001, 2020.
Daniel Spielman. Spectral graph theory course notes, 2015.
  https://www.cs.yale.edu/homes/spielman/561/.

                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Leslie G Valiant. A theory of the learnable. Communications of the ACM, 27(11):1134–1142, 1984.
V. N. Vapnik and A. Ya. Chervonenkis. On the uniform convergence of relative frequencies of events to their
   probabilities. Theory of Probability & Its Applications, 16(2):264–280, 1971. doi: 10.1137/1116025.
   URL https://doi.org/10.1137/1116025.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser,
  and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30,
  2017.
Saurabh Verma and Zhi-Li Zhang. Stability and generalization of graph convolutional neural networks.
  In Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
  Mining, pp. 1539–1548, 2019.
Roman Vershynin. High-dimensional probability: An introduction with applications in data science, vol-
  ume 47. Cambridge University Press, 2018.
Boris Weisfeiler and Andrei Leman. The reduction of a graph to canonical form and the algebra which
  appears therein. NTI, Series, 2(9):12–16, 1968.
Oliver Wieder, Stefan Kohlbacher, Mélaine Kuenemann, Arthur Garon, Pierre Ducrot, Thomas Seidel, and
  Thierry Langer. A compact review of molecular property prediction with graph neural networks. Drug
  Discovery Today: Technologies, 37:1–12, 2020.
Qitian Wu, Hengrui Zhang, Junchi Yan, and David Wipf. Handling distribution shifts on graphs: An invari-
  ance perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.02466, 2022a.
Ying-Xin Wu, Xiang Wang, An Zhang, Xiangnan He, and Tat-Seng Chua. Discovering invariant rationales
  for graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12872, 2022b.
Tian Xie and Jeffrey C Grossman. Crystal graph convolutional neural networks for an accurate and inter-
  pretable prediction of material properties. Physical review letters, 120(14):145301, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural networks?
  arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00826, 2018.
Keyulu Xu, Jingling Li, Mozhi Zhang, Simon S. Du, Ken ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka. What
  can neural networks reason about?, 2020a.
Keyulu Xu, Mozhi Zhang, Jingling Li, Simon S Du, Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi, and Stefanie Jegelka.
  How neural networks extrapolate: From feedforward to graph neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2009.11848, 2020b.
Pinar Yanardag and SVN Vishwanathan. Deep graph kernels. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD
  international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp. 1365–1374, 2015.
Nianzu Yang, Kaipeng Zeng, Qitian Wu, Xiaosong Jia, and Junchi Yan. Learning substructure invariance
  for out-of-distribution molecular representations. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2022.
Gilad Yehudai, Ethan Fetaya, Eli Meirom, Gal Chechik, and Haggai Maron. From local structures to size
  generalization in graph neural networks. In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang (eds.), Proceedings of the
  38th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 139 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pp. 11975–11986. PMLR, 18–24 Jul 2021. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
  v139/yehudai21a.html.


                                                12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     M ATHEMATICAL P ROOFS
A.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3.1

The proof is as follows, and makes up the remainder of the chapter.

A.1.1      I MPROVEMENT ON DEGREE DEPENDENCY
In (Liao et al., 2020), a generalization bound is attained on graph convolutional networks; this bound is
dependent on a bound on the maximum perturbation of the function value when a perturbation U is applied
to the weights W , presented in that paper’s Lemma 3.1. The bound is as follows

                                                                              l
                                                                                             !   l
                                                                  l−1         Y                  X ∥Uk ∥2
                    |fw+u (X, A) − fw (X, A)|2 ≤ eBd               2                ∥Wi ∥2                      (11)
                                                                              i=1
                                                                                                       ∥Wk ∥2
                                                                                                 k=1

                                                                                        l−1
The primary goal of this set of improvements is to reduce the factor of d 2 . For each layer, let Hi ∈ R|V |×h
be the matrix containing the hidden embeddings of all of the nodes in its rows, with h being the hidden
dimension. In the process of the proof of Theorem 3.1, we are able to show the following:


                                                                      j
                                                              j       Y
                             Φj = max |Hj [i, :]|2 ≤ d 2 B                    ∥Wi ∥2                            (12)
                                      i
                                                                      i=1
                             Ψj = max |Hj′ [i, :] − Hj [i, :]|2
                                   i
                                          j
                                                     ! j                    j−k
                                     j  Y               X ∥Uk ∥2         1
                                ≤ Bd 2        ∥Wi ∥2                  1+                                        (13)
                                        i=1
                                                               ∥Wk ∥2    l
                                                              k=1
                                    1      ′              1
                           |∆l |2 =   1n Hl−1 (Wl + Ul ) − 1n Hl−1 Wl
                                    n                     n            2
                                               l
                                                        !" l         #
                                       l−1   Y            X  ∥Uk ∥2
                                 ≤ eBd 2         ∥Wi ∥2                                                         (11)
                                             i=1
                                                             ∥W k ∥2
                                                                        k=1

                                                                                         j
We begin to simplify these bounds by removing the dependency on d 2 , replacing it instead with a fixed
power of d1/2 that remains constant for every layer, and thus in the final result of Equation 11 as well.
Theorem A.1. For all 1 ≤ j ≤ l − 1, we have:


                                      √        k
                                               Y
                              Φj ≤        dB         ∥Wi ∥2                                                     (14)
                                               i=1
                                                        j !                     j
                                                                                                 !
                                                                      √

                                                1                               Y
                              Ψj ≤        1+ 1+                   B       d            ∥Wi ∥2                   (15)
                                                l                               i=1


Finally,

                                                     13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                              √       l
                                                                              2                       Y
                 |fw+u (X, A) − fw (X, A)|2 = |∆l |2 ≤                   e+1+             B       d         ∥Wi ∥2   (16)
                                                                              l                       i=1

The proof follows from a lemma about the 2-norm of any node representation at any layer:
Lemma A.1.1. We have, for all k ∈ [n] and for j ∈ [l]:
                                                            j
                                                                     !
                                               p          Y
                              |Hj [u, :]|2 ≤ B deg(u)         ∥Wi ∥2                                                 (17)
                                                                          i=1



Proof. We prove this by induction. By definition |H0 [u, :]|2 ≤ B and thus
                                                        p        0
                                                                 Y
                                        |H0 [u]| ≤       deg(u)B   ∥Wk ∥2 .
                                                                        k=1

We assume that for all u, we have
                                                                         j−1
                                                                         Y
                                                         p
                                       Hj−1 [u, :] ≤          deg(u)B          ∥Wi ∥2 .
                                                                         k=1
From these statements we are able to deduce

                                   X
                   |Hj [u, :]| ≤          L̃[u, v]|Hj−1 [v, :]|2 ∥Wj ∥2
                                   v∈Nu
                                                                                    j−1
                                                                "                                     #
                                   X                1               p               Y
                             ≤            p                             deg(v)B           ∥Wk ∥2 ∥Wj ∥2
                                   v∈Nu
                                              deg(u)deg(v)                          k=1
                                                              j−1
                                                                              !
                                   X           1              Y
                             =            p              B          ∥Wk ∥2        ∥Wj ∥2
                                   v∈Nu
                                              deg(u)          k=1
                                        j
                               deg(u)   Y
                             =p       B    ∥Wk ∥2
                                deg(u) k=1
                                                   j
                                                   Y
                                   p
                             =         deg(u)B           ∥Wk ∥2
                                                   k=1
                                                                                                                     (18)


                                                                 p
In these inequalities we use the fact that L̃[i, j] = (A + I)ij / deg(i)deg(j), and we assume the simple
case where there are unweighted edges so that (A + I)ij is 1 if and only if nodes i and j are connected and
0 otherwise.
                                                           √ Qj
By Lemma A.1.1, we have that Φj = maxi |Hj [i, :]|2 ≤ dB i=1 ∥Wi ∥2 , which is exactly the result of
equation (14).


                                                         14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                   p                    j  Qj            P
                                                                                          j   ∥Ui ∥

Claim A.1. For all v ∈ [n], |∆j [v, :]|2 ≤ B           deg(v) 1 + 1l        i=1 ∥W i ∥    i=1 ∥Wi ∥


Proof. Proof: We use induction assuming this is true for ∆j−1 . We then have

                    X                                                              X
                                       ′
  |∆j [v, :]|2 ≤             L̃[v, u]|Hj−1 [u, :] − Hj−1 [u, :]|2 ∥Wj + Uj ∥2 +             L̃[v, u]|Hj−1 [u, :]|2 ∥Uj ∥2
                   u∈N (v)                                                        u∈N (v)
              "        j−1 j−1         ! j−1
                                         X ∥Ui ∥2
                                                    !                     j−1
                                                                                   #
                    1         Y                                           Y
             ≤ B 1+               ∥Wi ∥               ∥Wj + Uj ∥ + B∥Uj ∥     ∥Wi ∥                                   (19)
                    l         i=1        i=1
                                             ∥Wi ∥2                       i=1
                                        
                     X            p
                         L̃[v, u] deg(u)
                              u∈N (v)
                        j−1                                      j−1
                                  "                      j−1 X               !        #
                p       Y                             1              ∥Ui ∥2
             = B deg(v)     ∥Wi ∥ ∥Wj + Uj ∥ 1 +                               + ∥Uj ∥
                        i=1
                                                      l          i=1
                                                                     ∥Wi ∥2
                         j                                        j−1
                                  "                        j−1 X              !          #
                p       Y           ∥Wj + Uj ∥2         1              ∥Ui ∥2     ∥Uj ∥2
             = B deg(v)     ∥Wi ∥                  1+                           +
                        i=1
                                      ∥Wj ∥2            l         i=1
                                                                      ∥Wi ∥2      ∥Wj ∥2
                         j                       j−1
                                  "          j X              !            #
                p       Y                 1          ∥Ui ∥2        ∥Uj ∥2
             ≤ B deg(v)     ∥Wi ∥ 1 +                           +
                        i=1
                                          l      i=1
                                                     ∥W  i ∥2      ∥W j ∥2

                         j                      j
                                           j X              !
                p       Y              1            ∥Ui ∥2
             ≤ B deg(v)     ∥Wi ∥ 1 +                                                                                 (20)
                        i=1
                                        l      i=1
                                                    ∥Wi ∥2

∆l has a slightly different formulation but it has a very similar bound:


                                   1           ′                  1
                       |∆l |2 =      1n L̃Hl−1    (Wl + Ul ) − 1n L̃Hl−1 (Wl )
                                   n                             n                    2
                                  1          ′
                                =    1n L̃(Hl−1 − Hl−1 )(Wl + Ul ) + 1n L̃Hl−1 (Ul )
                                  n                                                         2
                                      n                                   n
                                  1X                                   1X
                                ≤        |∆l−1 [i, :]|2 ∥Wl + Ul ∥2 +        |Hl−1 [i, :]|2 ∥Ul ∥2
                                  n i=1                                n i=1
                                                                               !
                                    √ l−1                           l−1
                                                             l−1 X
                                        Y                 1             ∥Ui ∥2
                                ≤B d        ∥Wi ∥ 1 +                            ∥Wl + Ul ∥
                                        i=1
                                                          l         i=1
                                                                        ∥Wi ∥2
                                        √        l−1
                                                 Y
                                     + B d∥Ul ∥2     ∥Wi ∥2
                                                    i=1
                                         l
                                                   "    l Xl−1
                                                                     !         #
                                     √   Y           1         ∥Ui ∥     ∥Ul ∥
                                ≤B d     ∥Wi ∥ 1 +                     +
                                     i=1
                                                     l    i=1
                                                               ∥Wi ∥     ∥Wl ∥
                                      l                   l
                                                                    !
                                  √ Y
                                                       l X
                                                   1          ∥Ui ∥
                                ≤B d     ∥Wi ∥ 1 +
                                     i=1
                                                   l     i=1
                                                             ∥Wi ∥


                                                        15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                  l         l
                                                             !
                              √ Y          X   ∥Ui ∥
                          ≤ eB d     ∥Wi ∥                                                              (21)
                                 i=1       i=1
                                               ∥Wi ∥


From this we have proven a tighter bound on the final output of the GNN under perturbation, which we will
use to calculate probabilistic and generalization bounds.

A.1.2   I MPROVEMENT ON PROBABILISTIC BOUNDS USING RANDOM MATRIX THEORY

In (Liao et al., 2020), for all i ∈ [l], with l being the number of layers, the prior and the distribution of
the perturbations Ui ∈ Rdi+1 ×di ,, where all hidden dimensions di are upper-bounded by a value h, were
generated by a normal distribution N (0, σ 2 I), and give probabilistic bounds on the operator norms ∥Ui ∥
as P (∀i, ∥Ui ∥ ≤ t) with probability greater than 1 − 2lh exp −t2 /2hσ 2 . We improve these bounds using
theorems on random matrices from work on high-dimensional probability, namely (Vershynin, 2018).
Theorem A.2 (Theorem 4.4.5 in (Vershynin, 2018)). Let A be a matrix in Rm×n , where the entries Aij are
independent, mean-zero, sub-Gaussian random variables. Then, for all t > 0 we have
                                                √       √
                                     ∥A∥ ≤ CK( m + n + t)
with probability ≥ 1 − exp(−t2 ), where K = maxi,j ∥Aij ∥ψ2 and C is some constant.

In the above theorem the norm ∥X∥ψ2 is defined as inf{t : E[exp(X 2 /t2 )] ≤ 2}. In Example 2.5.8 in
(V ershynin, 2018), it is shown that if X ∼ N (0, σ 2 ) then it has ∥X∥ψ2 ≤ Cσ.
Corollary A.2.1. If U ∈ Rm×n is a random matrix generated with the distribution N (0, σ 2 I) (i.e. all
entries are independent and identically distributed Gaussian random variables), then we have
                                                    √     √
                                         ∥U ∥ ≤ σ( m + n + t)
with probability at least 1 − 2 exp(−t2 ).

With a change of variable, we are able to calculate the following:


                            P (∀i.∥Ui ∥2 ≤ t) ≥ 1 − P (∃i, ∥Ui ∥ > t)
                                                      l
                                                      X
                                              ≥1−           P (∥Ui ∥ > t)
                                                      i=1
                                                                              !
                                                                          √ 2

                                                                      t
                                              ≥ 1 − 2l exp              −2 h
                                                                     Cσ

And by setting the right-hand side to 1/2, we obtain:
                                                   √  p
                                         t = Cσ(2 h + ln(4l))

Using the above equation combined with our bound we are able to get

                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                l
                                                                               !   l
                                                          √     Y                  X ∥Uk ∥2
                  |fw+u (X, A) − fw (X, A)|2 ≤ eB dl                  ∥Wi ∥2
                                                                i=1
                                                                                         ∥Wk ∥2
                                                                                   k=1

                                                         √       l
                                                                X    ∥Uk ∥2
                                                    = eB dβ l l
                                                                       β
                                                                k=1
                                                         √ l−1         √    p
                                                    ≤ eB dβ l(σ(2 h + ln(4l)))
                                                          √            √    p          γ
                                                    ≤ e2 B dβ̃ l−1 (σ(2 h + ln(4l))) ≤                         (22)
                                                                                       4

Here β̃ is an estimated of β such that |β − β̃| ≤ β/l that can be generated a priori; we discuss this in a later
subsection.
                                γ
We can set σ =             √   √   √        to satisfy the final inequality.         From this we can calculate the
                   4e2 B β̃ dC 2 h+ ln(4l)
KL-divergence between the posterior and the prior:

                                                                  √   p       2
                                            4   2    2 2(l−1)                   l
                            |w|22   16e B dl β                   2 h + ln(4l) X
                 KL(Q∥P ) =    2
                                  =                                                              ∥Wi ∥F
                            2σ                                2γ 2                         i=1
                                                           l
                                                                      !
                                 B 2 dβ 2l l2 (h + ln(l)) X ∥Wi ∥2F
                             ≤O
                                             γ2           i=1
                                                                β2
                                                        Ql             l
                                                                                   !
                                                                    2 X         2
                                                              ∥W i ∥      ∥W i ∥
                             ≤ O B 2 dl2 (h + ln(l)) i=1 2                      F
                                                                                 2
                                                                                                               (23)
                                                             γ        i=1
                                                                          ∥W i ∥

From this we are able to calculate the generalization bound and thus prove the theorem.

                              v                                                   
                                u B 2 dl2 (h + ln(l)) Ql ∥Wi ∥2 Pl ∥Wi ∥2F2 + ln m
                                u
                                                       i=1     2 i=1 ∥Wi ∥2      δ 
              LD,0 ≤ LS,γ + O 
                              t
                                                            2
                                                                                                               (24)
                                                           γ m
                                                                                   



A.1.3    S ELECTING PARAMETER β̃
The prior normal distribution’s variance parameter σ 2 is dependent on β, but β cannot be used in its calcula-
tion because that information is only known after model training. Instead, we can select a parameter β̂ such
that |β − β̂| ≤ 1l β and thus 1e β l−1 ≤ β̂ l−1 ≤ eβ l−1 (as per equation 33 in (Liao et al., 2020)).
As in (Liao et al., 2020) we only have to consider values of β in the range

                                              1/l           √  1/l
                                        γ                    γ m
                                         √         ≤β≤         √
                                     2B d                   2B d
as otherwise the generalization bound holds trivially because LD,0 ≤ 1 by definition.


                                                     17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


If we consider values of β̂ that cover this interval then by union bound we are still able to get a high
                                                      1
probability; the covering C needs to have |C| = 2l (m 2l − 1).

A.2     P ROOFS OF O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION PROBABILITY BOUNDS

A.2.1     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.1
Proof. Because u1 is chosen from the stationary distribution (uniform over vertices, because G is connected
and d-regular), then for all i ≥ 1 the distribution for ui , ui+1 follows the distribution Unif[E], where E is
the edge set of the graph.
Let S be the sparsest-cut partition of G. Let Xi be the indicator of the event that the vertex pair is in the set
of edges crossing the partition, namely 1{(ui , ui+1 ) ∈ E(S, S̄)}. By linearity of expectation, this means
that E[Xi ] = |E(S, S̄)|/|E|.
Furthermore, let Yk be the cumulative number of edges crossing the partition along the first k steps of the
random walk. This is expressed nicely as Yk = i=1 Xi . Thus E[Yk ] = k |E(S,
                                             Pk                               S̄)|
                                                                           |E|     .

Applying Markov’s inequality, we get Pr[Yk ≥ tk|E(S, S̄)|/|E|] ≤ 1/t. Suppose we wish to examine under
what conditions we can ensure that we do not cross over the partition at all in M steps, i.e. Pr[YM ≥ 1] ≤
1/2. From the inequality above, we are able to get that


                                                      |E(S, S̄)|     1
                                           Pr YM ≥ 2M              ≤
                                                        |E|          2
just by setting k = M and t = 2. We then use the following basic fact: if we have an inequality of the form
Pr[Z ≥ z] ≤ 12 , then Pr[Z ≥ z ′ ] ≤ 12 for any z ′ ≥ z.
Let E(S) denote the set of edges connected to any vertex in S. Because |E(S)| ≤ |E|, then we have
|E(S, S̄)|/|E| ≤ |E(S, S̄)|/|E(S)|. Furthermore, since we assume a connected graph, |E(S)| ≥ (d/2)|S|,
and thus |E(S, S̄)|/|E(S)| ≤ |E(S, S̄)|/[(d/2)|S|]. 2 Thus using the fact above we can deduce


                                                      |E(S, S̄)|     1
                                           Pr YM ≥ 2M              ≤
                                                       (d/2)|S|      2
Note that |E(S, S̄)|/|S| is the conductance of the graph ϕ(G), because S was defined to be the sparsest-cut
partition of G. Thus we can apply the fact again with Cheeger’s inequality to get

                                      h                 p    i 1
                                    Pr YM ≥ 2M (2/d) 2λ2 ≤
                                                                2
                                                             √
And since we are interested in Pr[YM ≥ 1], we can thus set 2M 2λ2 ≤ 1 to get a necessary condition for
M , from which we achieve

                                                                d
                                                    M≤          √
                                                            25/2    λ2
This completes the proof.
   2
     It is important to note that this specific dependency of |E(S)| on d requires G to be a d-regular graph. If the theorem
is to be expanded to more general cases, one may use the simple inequality |E(S)| ≥ |S|.


                                                       18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.2.2    P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4.2
Proof. The quantity φ′ is a transformation of φ that retains all the information contained in φ while still
being orthogonal to the all-ones vector 1, so that we can apply Cheeger’s inequality. This orthogonalization
is rather standard and can be found in (Spielman, 2015).
Let s = |S|/|V (G)|. Note that s ∈ [0, 1], and without loss of generality we can assume that s ≤ 1/2.
We observe that the vth coordinate of the vector φ′ corresponds to the mapping

                                                    1−s v ∈S
                                         φ′ (v) =                                                       (25)
                                                    −s      v∈/S
This ensures that φ′ is orthogonal to 1, as
                   n
           ′⊤
                  X
                         ′                  |S|                     |S|                   |S|
         φ 1=          φ (vi ) = |S| 1 −           + (|V | − |S|) −        = |S| − |V |          = 0.
                  i=1
                                            |V |                    |V |                  |V |
                             Pn
We then note that ∥φ′ ∥22 = i=1 φ(v)2 is equal to s(1 − s)|V |, and we can infer |S|/2 ≤ ∥φ′ ∥22 ≤ |S|; the
first inequality holds since s ≤ 1/2.
The number of edges |E(S, S̄)| crossing the labelling-partition is equal to φ′⊤ Lφ′ , as
                                      X
                        φ′⊤ Lφ′ =             ((φ(u) − s) − (φ(v) − s))2 = |E(S, S̄)|
                                    (u,v)∈E
where L is the Laplacian matrix of G.
                                          ′⊤     ′         ′⊤   ′
Thus the quantity 2M |E(S,    S̄)|        φ Lφ            φ Lφ
                         |E(S)| ≤ 2M |E(S)| ≤ 2M (d/2)|S| . We are able to get the second inequality
because we know |E(S)| ≥ (d/2)|S|. Because we know that |S| ≥ ∥φ′ ∥2 , we can then upper bound this
                φ′T Lφ′
further by 2M (d/2)∥φ ′ ∥2 . Substituting this quantity in the proof of Theorem 4.1, we achieve the desired
                         2
bound for M .

B     E XPERIMENTAL M ETHODOLOGY AND R ESULTS
B.1     I N - DISTRIBUTION EXPERIMENTS

The datasets used are a combination of synthetic (Erdos-Renyi and Stochastic Block Model) and real-world
graphs (IMDBBINARY and IMDBMULTI of data from the Internet Movie Database, and COLLAB, a
dataset of academic collaborations), and a bioinformatics dataset, PROTEINS, from (Yanardag & Vish-
wanathan, 2015).
Two different GCN network depths of of l = 4 and l = 6 were used.
We use the following formulae for the generalization bound from (Liao et al., 2020) and our new bound,
using an explicit constant factor of 42 from (Liao et al., 2020).
                                         v
                                         u                        Ql          Pl ∥W ∥2
                                         u     B 2 dl−1 l2 ln(4lh) i=1 ∥Wi ∥22 i=1 ∥Wii ∥F2
                                  l
             GenGap(B, d, l, {Wi }i=1 ) = 42 ·
                                         t                                                2
                                                                                                        (26)
                                                                   γ2m

Similarly, the formula used for the new PAC-Bayes generalization bound is

                                                     19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                         v
                                         u                        Ql          Pl ∥W ∥2
                                         u     B 2 dl2 (h + ln(l)) i=1 ∥Wi ∥22 i=1 ∥Wii ∥F2
                                  l
             GenGap(B, d, l, {Wi }i=1 ) = 42 ·
                                         t                                                2
                                                                                                           (27)
                                                                   γ2m

We remove an additive O(log m) term in the numerator within the square root after validating that it was
numerically negligible.
Tables below are for calculated bounds in the case of 4 layers (Table 1) and 6 layers (Table 2).

                        Dataset             (Liao et al., 2020)    New bound
                        ER-1                14.985735 ± 0.071      11.727639 ± 0.071
                        ER-2                15.972616 ± 0.068      12.080796 ± 0.068
                        ER-3                16.533779 ± 0.038      12.285284 ± 0.038
                        ER-4                16.869156 ± 0.000      12.391819 ± 0.000
                        SBM-1               15.859210 ± 0.080      12.030569 ± 0.080
                        SBM-2               15.503044 ± 0.066      11.892126 ± 0.066
                        IMDBBINARY          17.370839 ± 0.079      12.458184 ± 0.079
                        IMDBMULTI           16.466189 ± 0.038      11.977553 ± 0.038
                        COLLAB              19.773157 ± 0.009      13.574678 ± 0.009
                        PROTEINS            14.011104 ± 0.079      10.753008 ± 0.079

                        Table 1: Table of generalization bounds, 4 layers (log values)

                        Dataset             (Liao et al., 2020)    New bound
                        ER-1                20.123308 ± 0.046      13.607115 ± 0.046
                        ER-2                21.814967 ± 0.017      14.031327 ± 0.017
                        ER-3                22.782537 ± 0.008      14.285547 ± 0.008
                        ER-4                23.377554 ± 0.021      14.422881 ± 0.021
                        SBM-1               21.605130 ± 0.037      13.947847 ± 0.037
                        SBM-2               21.028283 ± 0.047      13.806447 ± 0.047
                        IMDBBINARY          24.648394 ± 0.058      14.823084 ± 0.058
                        IMDBMULTI           23.373624 ± 0.105      14.396352 ± 0.105
                        COLLAB              28.261012 ± 0.106      15.864055 ± 0.106
                        PROTEINS            19.421826 ± 0.059      12.905633 ± 0.059

                        Table 2: Table of generalization bounds, 6 layers (log values)


B.2     O UT- OF - DISTRIBUTION EXPERIMENTS

B.2.1    M ETHODOLOGY
Experiments were performed to measure the effectiveness size generalization of GCN models when applied
to the size generalization learning case described in Section 4, where the learning task is classifying the most
common node label in sub-communities of a large underlying network.
For each of the synthetic graphs, we calculate an upper bound for M set in the out-of-distribution inequalities
                                                                                                  ⊤
we have derived. Since the graphs examined are all not d-regular, we calculate a value of α as φφ⊤ Dφ
                                                                                                    Lφ
                                                                                                       , where
L is the graph Laplacian matrix and D is the diagonal degree matrix, to apply to the formula set in Theorem
4.2. Furthermore, we use a more permissive value of δ = 0.75.

                                                  20
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similar upper bounds for M were computed for the real-world cases, but the values were too small for
experimental use. In this case, we just set N = 10 and M = 50 to attempt to gain insight about the size
generalization task’s general feasibility in real-world cases.
All experiments were performed with use of the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2015), with a constant
learning rate 0.01. Models were trained for 10 epochs, with a batch size 32 randomly selected.
The models used are different parameterizations of the Graph Convolutional Network as implemented by
the library pytorch-geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019). For synthetic experiments, which used smaller
graphs with generally smaller degree, the parameterization was 3 layers with a hidden dimension of 5, and
for the real-world data case, the parameterization was 10 layers with a hidden dimension of 32.
For each underlying graph, we generate three train/validation sets (of size N random walks) and test sets (of
size M random walks) and we record the loss and accuracy as the average of the three runs.

B.2.2   S YNTHETIC GRAPH EXPERIMENTS
A large underlying synthetic graph was generated using the stochastic block model, with some adjustment to
ensure that the randomly-generated graph had a single connected component. By controlling the intra- and
inter-block connection probability values, we are able to control the homophily of the generated graph, which
we validate by measuring the value of λ2 , as well as calculating the sparsest cut via “Cheeger rounding”
(Spielman, 2015) and subsequently the conductance of the graph with respect to this partition.
In the experiments, we generated a graph with approximately 2000 nodes, with in-block connectivity prob-
ability set to 8/1000 and inter-block connectivity set to 6/105 .
Node features are generated from a mixture of multivariate Gaussian distributions with dimension 3, mean
(−0.5, −0.5, −0.5) for one block, and mean (0.5, 0.5, 0.5) for the other; the covariance matrix is a diagonal
matrix (each coordinate is independent) of variance either 2, 4, or 8.
Experiments were also performed on non-homophilic synthetic graphs. Like the homophilic synthetic graphs
they are generated with the stochastic block model with about 2000 nodes, about 1000 of each label, and with
the same mixture-of-Gaussian node features. However the parameters used for the generation of connection
are crucially different. The probabilities of connection between nodes of the same block and nodes of a
different block are set to be equal, with both being set to 8/1000. These settings ensure that a node’s label
is independent from the labels of its neighbors, so the homophily property is not exhibited.
Contrasting with the results shown for the homophilic synthetic graphs, the non-homophilic graph results
show that the out-of-distribution test accuracy is less than the training accuracy. This further illustrates the
association between homophily and size generalization.

B.2.3   R EAL - WORLD GRAPH EXPERIMENTS
Since the node features are indicators, we encoded the node feature information by using the positional
encoding mechanism introduced in the Transformer model (Vaswani et al., 2017). For each node, each of
their integer indicators was encoded via positional embedding and aggregated via sum.


                                                  21
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                                    Test         Test
                             0.75              Train    Train   Val.    Val.                              Test    Test
          Graphs             3√      N    M                                         loss         acc.
                             22  α             loss     acc.    loss    acc.                              loss    acc.
                                                                                (sampling)   (sampling)
       CSBM var=2            20.7    10   20   0.005    0.953   0.007   0.943      0.020        0.869     0.003   0.970
       CSBM var=4            18.6    10   18   0.014    0.889   0.014   0.897      0.026        0.811     0.009   0.937
       CSBM var=8            17.5    10   17   0.021    0.826   0.022   0.803      0.032        0.745     0.015   0.880
 CSBM non-homophilic var=2   5.12    10   20   0.032    0.723   0.032   0.720      0.049        0.611     0.034   0.704
 CSBM non-homophilic var=4   5.14    10   18   0.036    0.676   0.041   0.643      0.049        0.596     0.038   0.655
 CSBM non-homophilic var=8   5.12    10   17   0.042    0.630   0.045   0.570      0.049        0.575     0.043   0.600
      Twitch-ENGB              –     10   50   0.042    0.581   0.044   0.570      0.025        0.764     0.025   0.764
        Twitch-FR              –     10   50   0.013    0.877   0.012   0.887      0.002        0.984     0.002   0.984
        Twitch-ES              –     10   50   0.006    0.944   0.008   0.923      0.000        0.999     0.000   0.999
      Twitch-PTBR              –     10   50   0.010    0.902   0.011   0.893      0.001        0.989     0.001   0.989
        Twitch-DE              –     10   50   0.035    0.672   0.032   0.690      0.008        0.921     0.008   0.921
        Twitch-RU              –     10   50   0.003    0.974   0.004   0.973      0.000        1.000     0.000   1.000

                       Table 3: Experimental data for out-of-distribution experiments


                                                   22
