Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


S PURIOUS F EATURES IN C ONTINUAL L EARNING

                                       Anonymous authors
                                 Paper under double-blind review



                                             A BSTRACT
         Continual Learning (CL) is the research field addressing learning without forget-
         ting when the data distribution is not static. This paper studies spurious features’
         influence on continual learning algorithms. We show that continual learning algo-
         rithms solve tasks by selecting features that are not generalizable. Our experiments
         highlight that continual learning algorithms face two related problems: (1) spuri-
         ous features (SF) and (2) local spurious features (LSF). The first one is due to a
         covariate shift between training and testing data, while the second is due to the
         limited access to data at each training step. We study (1) through a consistent set
         of continual learning experiments varying spurious correlation amount and data
         distribution support. We show that (2) is a major cause of performance decrease
         in continual learning along with catastrophic forgetting (CF). This paper presents
         a different way of understanding performance decrease in continual learning by
         highlighting the influence of (local) spurious features in algorithms performance.


1    I NTRODUCTION
Feature selection is a standard machine learning problem. Its objective is to improve the prediction
performance, provide faster and more effective predictors, and provide a better understanding of the
underlying process that generated the data (Guyon & Elisseeff, 2003). In this paper, we are interested
in improving prediction performance in the presence of spurious features. Spurious features arise
when features correlate well with labels in training data but not in test data. Learning algorithms that
rely on spurious features will generalize badly to test data.
In continual learning (CL), the training data distribution changes through time. Hence, we could
expect that spurious features (SFs) in one time-step of the data distribution will not last. A continual
learning algorithm relying on a spurious feature to solve a task can then be resilient and learn better
features later, given more data. Algorithms can aim to detect and ignore spurious features learned in
the past (Javed et al., 2020). An example of a task with spurious features could be a classification
task between cars and bikes, but in the training data, all cars are red, and all bikes are white, but it
test data, both are in a unique blue not available in train data. A model could easily overfit the color
to solve the task while it is not discriminative in the test data. This problem is notably caused by a
covariate shift between train and test data. In CL, we would expect future tasks to bring pictures of
cars and bikes of other colors to learn better features.
On the other hand, in CL, the second type of spurious feature can be described: local spurious
features. Local features denote features that correlate well with labels within a task (a state of the
data distribution) but not in the full scenario. In opposite to the usual spurious features, this problem
is provoked by the unavailability of all data, for example, because only red cars and white bikes are
currently available in train data, but in the test data, there are also cars and bikes of colors not seen
yet or seen in the past. Overall, there is no significant covariate shift between all train data and test
data. It is, therefore, a problem specific to continual learning.
This paper investigates both the problem of spurious features (with covariate shift) and local spurious
features (without covariate shift) in CL as shown in Fig. 1. Our contributions are: (1) We propose a
methodology to highlight the problems of spurious features and local spurious features in continual
learning. (2) We create a binary CIFAR10 scenario SpuriousCIFAR2 inspired by colored MNIST
to experiment with spurious correlations. (3) We propose a modified version of Out-of-Distribution
(OOD) generalization methods for continual learning and evaluate them on SpuriousCIFAR2. (4) We
identify local spurious features as a core challenge for continual learning algorithms along with CF.


                                                   1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


       (a) Train (Spurious)     (b) Test (Spurious)   (c) Train (local spurious) (d) Test (local spurious)

Figure 1: Spurious features and local spurious features. If the task is to distinguish the squares
from the circles. In Fig. 1a and 1b, the color is a spurious feature because there is a covariate shift
between train and test data. In Fig. 1c and 1d, we observe two tasks of a domain-incremental scenario,
the colors are locally spurious in tasks 1 and 2. Even if there is no significant covariate shift between
train and test full data distribution, colors appear discriminative while looking at data within a task.


We expect this paper to improve the understanding of the continual learning problem.


2    R ELATED W ORK

In large part of the continual learning bibliography, algorithms assume that to avoid catastrophic
forgetting (CF), they should not increase the loss on past tasks (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017; Ritter
et al., 2018). It leads to the definition of interference/forgetting of (Riemer et al., 2019): ∂L(x
                                                                                                  ∂θ
                                                                                                    i ,yi )
                                                                                                            ·
∂L(xj ,yj )
    ∂θ      < 0, ∀(xi , yi ) ∈ Ti and ∀(xj , yj ) ∈ Tj with j > i, < · > is the dot product operator.
Following this definition, increasing the loss on past tasks necessarily leads to a performance decrease.
However, the algorithm might have learned spurious/local features that need to be forgotten to
improve performance. Hence, the loss needs to be temporarily increased to reach a more general
solution, and optimizing the interference equation could be counterproductive. On the same line, the
presence of spurious features could be adversarial to most continual regularization strategies. For
example, if we measure weights importance with Fisher information, high importance will be given
to weights using spurious features, and regularization will penalize their modification. Regularization
could protect features that generalize poorly to the test set.
Vanilla rehearsal or generative replay is a good solution to not forget meaningful information and to
deal with spurious features. By replaying old data, algorithms simulate an independent and identical
distribution (iid) and avoid local spurious feature problems. Replay methods have been shown in the
bibliography to be efficient and versatile even in their most straightforward form (Prabhu et al., 2020).
Notably, CL state-of-the-art on ImageNet uses replay (Douillard et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2020).
The research field that usually deals with spurious correlations is the out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization field. This field has received a lot of attention in recent years, especially since the
Invariant Risk Minimization (IRM) (Arjovsky et al., 2019) paper. OOD approaches target training
scenarios where there are several training environments within which different spurious features
correlate with labels. The goal then is to learn invariant features among all environments to build
an invariant predictor in all training environments and potentially any other (Arjovsky et al., 2019;
Ahuja et al., 2021; Sagawa et al., 2019; Pezeshki et al., 2020). This paper will adapt some of those
approaches for continual learning to evaluate how those approaches can deal with sequences of tasks.


3    P ROBLEM F ORMULATION

This section introduces the spurious features problems in a sequence of tasks. The goal is to present
the key types of features, namely: general, local, and spurious features.
General Formalism: We consider a continual scenario of classification tasks. We study a function
fθ (·), implemented as a neural network, parameterized by a vector of parameters θ ∈ Rp (where p
is is the number of parameters) representing the set of weight matrices and bias vectors of a deep
network. In continual learning, the goal is to find a solution θ∗ by minimizing a loss L on a stream of
data formalized as a sequence of tasks [T0 , T1 , ..., TT −1 ], such that ∀(xt , yt ) ∼ Tt (t ∈ [0, T − 1]),
fθ∗ (x) = y. We do not use the task index for inferences (i.e. single head setting).


                                                      2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


To describe the different types of features, let z    Table 1: Summary of characteristics of the types of
be a feature and x ∼ D a datum point in dataset       features. For a feature z of a class c, we denote if
D. We define w(.) a function which returns 1 if       it verify (1) on different data setting, a single task
z is in x and 0 if not. w(.)’s output is binary for   Tt , the whole scenario CT , the test set Dte .
simplicity. Then, for all data with a label y in
the dataset D, we can compute the correlation         Name                                Tt   CT    Dte
c(D, z, y) = correlation(w(z, x) = 1, Y =             Good Feature (z+ )                  ✓    ✓     ✓
y), which estimates how a feature correlates          Spurious Feature (zspur )           ✓    ✓     ×
with the data of a given class. We can then           Local Feature (zloc )               ✓    ?     ?
                                                      Local Spurious Feature (zspur:t )   ✓    ×     ×
define discriminative features as:
z is discriminative for class y in D if:
                               ∀y ′ ∈ Y, y ̸= y ′ c(D, z, y) ≫ c(D, z, y ′ )                            (1)
Y is the set of classes in D. In other words, z is discriminative for y if it correlates significantly more
to y’s data than to the data of any other class. Then a good feature z+ for a class y respects (1) for
training data Dtr and test data Dte .
Spurious Features (SF) and Local Spurious Features (LSF):
A spurious feature zspur for a class y respects (1) for training data Dtr but not for test data Dte .
A spurious feature is well correlated with labels in training data but not with testing data. Hence,
learning from zspur may offer a low training error but high test error. The presence of zspur is due to
a covariate shift between train and test distribution which changes the feature distribution.
In continual learning, the covariate shift between train and test zspur may also lead to poor general-
ization. Further, the features can be locally spurious, e.g., they correlate well with labels within a task
but not within the whole scenario. We name them local spurious features (LSF). We illustrate the
difference between spurious features and local spurious features in Figure 1.
At task t, A local spurious feature zspur;t respects (1) for a class yt in task Tt , but not for the whole
scenario CT . z is a LSF for a class y in Tt ∼ CT , with t ∈ J0, T − 1K:
                               if ∀ y ′ ∈ Yt , y ̸= y ′ c(Tt , z, y) ≫ c(Tt , z, y ′ )
                                                                                                       (2)
                           and ∃ y ′′ ∈ Y, y ̸= y ′′ c(CT , z, y) ̸≫ c(CT , z, y ′′ )
Yt is the classes set in task Tt and Y is the classes set in the full scenario CT composed of T tasks.
A LSF zspur;t correlates well with a label on the current task but not on the whole scenario. zspur;t
can be extended from a single task Tt to all task seen so far T0:t without loss of generality.
Global vs Local Solution: We assume that machine learning models solve tasks by learning to
detect (or select) features that correlate well with labels. Then, while learning on a task t, we can
distinguish a local solution θt∗ , satisfying for the current task Tt , from a global solution θ0:T
                                                                                                ∗
                                                                                                    that is
satisfying for whole scenario CT (past, current, and future tasks).
Similarly, we can differentiate local and global features, contributing to local and global solutions. The
global features are the good features z+ that are useful for the solution of the scenario. Unfortunately,
at time t, we can not know if a feature is part of z+ without access to the future. Therefore, algorithms
should learn with their current data but update their knowledge afterwards, given new data. For
example, in classification, the discriminative features for a given class depend on all the classes.
Therefore, when new classes arrive, discriminative features can become outdated in class-incremental
scenarios.

4     I NFLUENCE OF S PURIOUS F EATURES (SF S ) ON C ONTINUAL L EARNING
This experimental section studies how continual learning algorithms can deal with spurious features.
We design a scenario with spurious features that change at each task. We create a set of scenarios with
gradual correlations between spurious features and labels. We evaluate various baselines to assess
continual learning capabilities (Sec. 4.3.2) in such scenarios. We also experiments with potential
solutions to deal with spurious correlation.

4.1   S ETTING


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We propose a benchmark “SpuriousCIFAR2” inspired by col-
ored MNIST (Arjovsky et al., 2019) with CIFAR10 but without
label noise. We convert the ten-way classification dataset into a           t           zspu
binary dataset. The new classes are “transportation means ver-
sus not transportation means”, i.e., cars, trucks, ships, airplanes,
and horses versus the other classes: birds, cats, dogs, deers,                                        X
frogs. The goal is to have a simple setting more challenging
than colored MNIST with features that are built upon all three             Y            z+
color channels.
The spurious feature is a square of color. We sample two
colors randomly (one per class) and add a 2 × 2 pixels square          Figure 2: Data generation model
randomly positioned in the images (Ap. E). We can vary the             of SpuriousCIFAR2 scenario. The
percentage of images with the spurious feature to reduce or            good features z+ are generated
grow the correlation between the spurious feature and the labels.      from the labels and zspu are gen-
A correlation of 1 means that all images have a colored square.        erated from the task label.
The scenario is then a sequence of SpuriousCIFAR2 datasets
with different colors of spurious features. The test set of each scenario is the binarized version
of CIFAR10 test set without any spurious features. We created the sequence of tasks using the
Continuum library (Douillard & Lesort, 2021). We illustrate two environments and the test set in
Sec. E, and the data generation process in Fig. 2.
Setting Goal: This setting is made to highlight how spurious features can disrupt CL algorithms
and discuss the problems that spurious correlation can bring to existing approaches. Moreover, it
evaluates the capacity of algorithms to modify their past knowledge to improve test accuracy.

4.2     A PPROACHES

First, we experiment with a classical vanilla replay (rehearsal) method and simple finetuning. Finetun-
ing baseline consists of training with Adam optimizer without any CL mechanism. For rehearsal, the
replay buffer is constructed by randomly selecting N samples per class. The buffer is then sampled
to keep class distribution uniform over all classes seen so far. Balancing samples distribution over
classes is made to avoid the challenge of training on imbalanced datasets (cf Sec. I in the appendix
for details).
For the existing OOD approaches, we compare continual versions of IRM (Arjovsky et al., 2019) and
the state-of-the-art OOD classification methods IB-ERM, IB-IRM (Ahuja et al., 2021), GroupDRO
(Sagawa et al., 2019) and Spectral Decoupling (Pezeshki et al., 2020). OOD approaches are algorithms
designed to be trained on multiple environments in a multi-task fashion. IRM (Arjovsky et al., 2019)
(invariant risk minimization) is an approach that uses multiple environments to learn invariant features
and improves empiric risk minimization (ERM) generalization. IB-ERM augments this approach
with a regularization terms based on an information bottleneck constraint. GroupDRO (group
Distributionally Robust Optimization) learns models that minimize the worst-case training loss over
the set of environments. (Sagawa et al., 2019) proposes to couple group DRO models with a strong
regularization term such as L2 regularization or early stopping to improve generalization. Spectral
Decoupling (Pezeshki et al., 2020) proposes a regularization term that maximizes the number of
features an algorithm learns to avoid relying only on spurious features. The continual version of
OOD approaches simulates multiple environments by replaying data of past tasks. The adaptation
of all those methods is then to add a replay buffer to the algorithms to train continually the baseline
through the sequence of tasks. The replay buffer simulates the growing number of environments
for the OOD approaches. In such context, replay (rehearsal) is equivalent to the ERM (empiric risk
minimization) baseline in OOD literature. We choose empirically a replay buffer storing 100 samples
per class for both OOD approaches and vanilla replay (cf appendix F for HPs selection).

4.3     E XPERIMENTS

4.3.1    P ROBLEM H IGHLIGHTS
Overfitting the spurious features: To assess that algorithms overfit on the spurious features, we
train the model on a single task with spurious features. We compare the test accuracy on data without


                                                     4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


spurious features (final test set) with the test accuracy on data with spurious features (evaluation set).
If the test accuracy is good with spurious features and bad without, the algorithm overfits the spurious
features. Fig. 3, show exactly this phenomenon, test accuracy on task 0 is near-perfect accuracy,
while on the final test set, the accuracy is near-random prediction. This figure shows that the artificial
spurious features cause the expected learning behaviors: the model overfits and generalizes poorly.
Instability: In Fig. 4, we assess the test accuracy A at each epoch over
the whole sequence of 10 tasks. This figure indicates two interesting                  Final           Eval T_0
pieces of information. First, even in the 100% spurious correlation, i.e.      1.0
all images have a square of colors, baseline models can learn at some          0.8


                                                                                                   Test Accuracy
point a good solution. Secondly, even when they learn a good solution,         0.6
they are very unstable and can easily forget a good solution. To lighten the   0.4
influence of instability on the evaluation metrics, in the later experiments   0.2
of this section, we report the average test accuracy after each task, which    0.0
                      T −1                                                                 finetuning
we note Ω = T1 i=0 Ai instead of reporting the final test accuracy
                  P
                                                                                          name_algo
AT −1 .                                                                      Figure 3: Overfitting the
Comparing CL Baselines with OOD Baselines: We now assess how spurious features on a sin-
baselines adapted from the OOD field behave in the 100% spurious gle task setting.
correlation setting. In our experiments, IB-ERM, SpectralDecoupling                  replay           finetuning
and GroupDRo show some interesting improvement over rehearsal and
finetuning baselines ( Fig. 5). On the other hand, IRM and IB-IRM              0.8


                                                                                                   Test Accuracy
performed poorly.                                                              0.7

Those experiments show us that we can have some improvement over                                               0.6
replay and finetuning baselines when there is 100% correlation between                                         0.5
spurious features and labels. Note that there is much variance in results                                            0   100      200
                                                                                                                          epoch
because of the instability mentioned earlier. Moreover, the improvements
stay far from a satisfying accuracy. Indeed, the average performance                                  Figure 4: Generalization
of the baselines on SpuriousCIFAR2 is below 70% of average accuracy.                                  and forgetting: test ac-
Meanwhile, we trained a model on the CIFAR2 dataset without spurious                                  curacy in a sequence
features and reached 96.73% of accuracy. The next experiments will                                    of tasks (25 epochs per
analyze performance while gradually growing the spurious correlations.                                task).


4.3.2    I NFLUENCE OF S PURIOUS C ORRELATION

In this section, we aim to answer the question “how does the level
of spurious correlation influence learning algorithms?”. From a
stream of tasks, we can expect that the 100% spurious correlation is                         0.8
                                                                             Test Accuracy


quite rare. Hence, we will investigate the setting of lower spurious                         0.7
correlation in this set of experiments. We study the 25%, 50% and                            0.6
75% spurious correlation cases along the 100% correlation.
                                                                                             0.5
Fig. 6 show that lowering the spurious correlation makes rehearsal           0.4
and finetuning (baseline) the best approaches. Those results indicate
                                                                                                          erm
                                                                                                           irm
                                                                                                           irm

                                                                                                     ba y
                                                                                                   Sp ne

                                                                                                     ou .
                                                                                                            RO
                                                                                                   Gr .Dec
                                                                                                            la


that the OOD baselines are most interesting in the very high spurious
                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                       rep


                                                                                                        pD
                                                                                                        sel
                                                                                                       ib_
                                                                                              ib_


                                                                                                        t
                                                                                                     ec


correlation setting but are not very interesting when the spurious                      name_algo
correlation is lower or equal to 75%. It might seem counter-intuitive
                                                                           Figure 5: Accuracy with local
that finetuning is over the best baseline in a continual learning setting.
                                                                           100% correlation between fea-
Still, only the spurious correlation change in our scenario, so the
                                                                           tures and labels
global features needed to solve all tasks are in each task. It is then
reasonable that with a lower spurious correlation finetuning works well.
The scenario could be made harder by only keeping a subset of the dataset in each task, i.e., lowering
the support of the data distribution (cf in appendix B). However, in the experiments, we can note
that lowering the support makes the task harder because there are fewer data per task and removes
the full observability of data. It means that good/global features are no longer always observable
and that some good features can be available in some tasks but not others. Nevertheless, our results
on the support showed that it has a low influence on the results. This is probably because replay
makes everything observable at the last tasks and overcomes partial support challenges. It is similar


                                                       5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                               ib_erm                     irm                 baseline                         GroupDRO
                               ib_irm                     rehearsal           SpectralDecoupling

                                             0.9

                                             0.8


                         Average Test Accuracy
                                             0.7

                                             0.6

                                             0.5

                                             0.4

                                                   0.25               0.5                         0.75   1.0
                                                                       spurious_corr

Figure 6: Averaged accuracy Ω on 10 tasks over various amount of spurious correlation between
spurious features and labels.


to creating several environments with separate splits of the full distribution as in DomainBed datasets
(Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020).

4.3.3   P OTENTIAL S OLUTIONS TO L OWER I MPACT OF S PURIOUS F EATURES
A solution to prevent models from relying too
much on spurious features is (1) to force them         0.9


                                                                                                                  test accuracy task 10
                                                                                test accuracy task 10


to learn/use more features or (2) to try to ignore     0.8                            0.8
the spurious features. We experiment with (1)          0.7
by using a regularization strategy to maximize                                        0.6
                                                       0.6
the number of features selected. This regular-                                        0.4
                                                       0.5
ization is different from regularization methods             CIFAR100             N/A       Yes         No
                                                                      pretraining               dropout
designed to not forget. We experiment with (2)             (a) Pre-training               (b) Dropout
by using a model pre-trained on a trusted task.
The idea of the pre-trained model is that it will Figure 7: Canceling noisy spurious features with
ignore noisy features, such as SFs.                pre-trained models.
Using a pre-trained model: We can use a pre-trained model on a trusted data source to ignore
spurious features. For example, the spurious feature in our setting is noise, so if we use a pre-trained
model on a known dataset such as CIFAR100, the model filter out noisy features and can significantly
improve results. This approach, experimented in Fig. 7a, shows clearly that using a pre-trained model
can erase the problem of noisy spurious correlation. This solution is convenient, but it assumes we
have a compatible trusted set of data (or a trusted model) and that the spurious features are noisy.
More details on noisy features in appendix C.
Maximizing the amount of features selected: If we can not use the previous solution, another
potential solution is to learn to select as many features as possible that could help solve the problem.
A famous solution to maximize the features learned is dropout. Dropout randomly replaces some
activations value with a zero for inference to force the model to learn more robust features. It has
notably been widely experimented in continual learning (Goodfellow et al., 2013; Mirzadeh et al.,
2020). We experimented 0.25, 0.5, and 0.75 amount of dropout just before the last linear layer.
However, in our experiments, it did not show any improvement (cf. Fig. 7b).
Nevertheless, on a similar idea as dropout, the spectral decoupling approach is designed to address
the gradient starvation problem. The gradient starvation problem arises when the loss is minimized
by capturing only a subset of features relevant to the task, despite the presence of other predictive
features that fail to be discovered (Pezeshki et al., 2020). Spectral decoupling is designed to discover
supplementary features even with minimal train error. As dropout, it enables the possibility to
learn additional features that could help to improve the test error. The experiment in section 4.3.1
illustrated in Fig. 5 indeed shows that in the 100% spurious correlation experiment, this strategy
greatly improves simple rehearsal proving the potential of the idea.


                                                                            6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Conclusion We proposed some trivial solutions to illustrate how supplementary knowledge or
assumptions on the spurious features might help prevent or fix bad learning behavior. However, it
would probably not work as easily in a setting with more complex spurious features.
Experiments in sections 4.3.2 and 4.3.3 investigate how algorithms learning continually can deal
with spurious features. We created a benchmark with spurious features and empirically investigated
algorithms’ performance when varying the correlation of spurious features with labels. In the next
section, we will investigate local spurious features, which are a type of spurious feature specific to
CL. We will investigate if those features may cause a performance decrease in CL algorithms. We
shown that models can overfits spurious features easily, in the next section, we investigate if local
spurious features (LSF) can exist in exisiting original datasets, and if they can be easily be overfit and
influence models performance.


5     I NFLUCENCE OF L OCAL S PURIOUS F EATURES (LSF) IN C ONTINUAL
      L EARNING

In the previous section, we study how spurious features impact continual learning algorithms. In this
section, we show that local spurious features (LSFs) may also lead to a performance decrease, even
in scenarios composed of usual data.

5.1   L OCAL S PURIOUS F EATURES S ETTING

Our goal is to investigate if some LSFs exist in continual learning scenarios without being manually
added. To demonstrate their existence, we will show that they influence the results. Their influence is
incarnated by a model that learns independent tasks correctly, but that can not generalize to tasks
together.
Data: We experiment with classical datasets without modification to create class-incremental sce-
narios as in most continual learning literature. We use CIFAR10, OxfordPet, OxfordFlowers and
CUB200 datasets with pretrained models: a resnet model on CIFAR100 for CIFAR10 and for the
other datasets we use VGG, Resnet, Alexnet and googlenet pretrained on Imagenet from torchvision
library. We create the scenarios by splitting each dataset into 5 tasks with disjoint sets of classes.
Model: We use frozen pretrained models: a resnet model on CIFAR100 for CIFAR10 and for the
other datasets we use VGG, Resnet, Alexnet and googlenet pretrained on Imagenet from torchvision
library. We assume that the pre-trained models provide a feature space sufficient for the continual
downstream scenarios. They are used frozen with a linear classifier on top. We also assume that
algorithms select features that correlate well with labels to solve the current task. The goal is then to
show that classifiers rely on local spurious features while learning continually. If it is the case,
this will lead to a good performance on the tasks but not in the full scenario. The training is realized
with a simple finetuning without any replay or regularization.
Approach: We train a linear classifier per task (multi-head). Hence, while training, inference
considers one head at a time for classification. The softmax function is applied only to the classes
of a single head. We note the test performance in multi-head Ate−local sof tmax . It estimates the
capabilities of the features selected to solve tasks independently. After each task, we freeze the
weights of past heads to avoid forgetting. After training, we concatenate all the heads into a single
linear classifier and evaluate this classifier on the whole scenario (the test performance with a single
head is noted Ate−global sof tmax ). This second evaluation estimates the generalization capabilities of
the features selected.
Hence, if classifiers select local spurious features, Ate−local sof tmax should be significantly bigger
than Ate−global sof tmax .

5.2   D ISENTANGLING FACTORS OF INFLUENCE

Apart from the problem of feature selection, a gap between Ate−local sof tmax and Ate−global sof tmax
could be explained by (1) the difference in difficulty of both evaluation (multi-head and single head),
(2) an unbalance of bias and norms from different heads that could lead to bad performance in single


                                                    7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


head (Lesort et al., 2021) (more details about this problem in appendix G). However, if neither (1) or
(2) are sufficient to explain the performance gap, then we can conclude that LSFs exists.
(1) Difficulty gap: the comparison between single head and multi-head is biased because the first
is one 10-way classification (harder) while the latter is the addition of five binary classifications
(simpler). To estimate the difference of difficulty between both, we added a non-parametric method,
MeanLayer as in (Lesort et al., 2021) which is an nearest mean classifier (NMC). There is no feature
selection in MeanLayer. The classifier only uses the mean of the features of each class. There is no
feature selection then no problem with local features selection. The difference in performance with
MeanLayer in multi-head and the single head is then a good proxy to estimate the difference in the
difficulty of both evaluations.
(2) Unbalance of bias and norms: we compare the linear layer performance with the weightnorm
layer from (Lesort et al., 2021). This layer does not use norm and bias for inference and is then
insensitive to such imbalance (details in appendix G).
We note that forgetting is by design impossible here since the features extractor and the other heads
are frozen. Hence, forgetting can not explain drops in performance.


5.3                  L OCAL S PURIOUS F EATURES E XPERIMENTS


           Linear            WeightNorm          MeanLayer           Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer               Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer           Linear          WeightNorm          MeanLayer
                                                                                                                                                                                            1.0
               0.8                                                       0.6                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                            0.8
   Test Accuracy


                                                             Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                          Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                   Test Accuracy
               0.6                                                                                                                    0.6                                                   0.6
                                                                         0.4
               0.4                                                                                                                    0.4                                                   0.4
               0.2                                                       0.2                                                          0.2                                                   0.2
               0.0                                                       0.0                                                          0.0                                                   0.0
                      Multi-Head   Single-Head                                 Multi-Head   Single-Head                                     Multi-Head   Single-Head                                Multi-Head   Single-Head
                              variable                                                 variable                                                     variable                                                variable

Figure 8: Comparison of final test accuracy AT −1 in multi-head and the same classifier without task
label information (In this order: CIFAR10, CUB200, OxfordFlower102, OxfordPet). The results
are averaged among several pretrained models. The performance gap in the linear layer indicates
how local features selected are generalizable. We use the weightnorm to estimate if bias or norm
imbalance phenomena (Lesort et al., 2021) play a role in the performance gap . The MeanLayer
baseline indicates the difference of difficulty of both evaluations. The results of this figure indicate
that classifiers rely on local spurious features to solve tasks.


We report results in Figure 8. We remind that only the inference method changes between single head
and multi-heads results. The parameters of the classifiers are the same (cf Sec. 5.1). The details of
the results are in appendix H. We see that there is a considerable accuracy gap between multi-head
(MH) Ate−local sof tmax and single head (SH) Ate−global sof tmax performance in the linear layer.
Moreover, the gap for MeanLayer is significantly smaller than the gap for the linear layer. Hence, the
difference in difficulty is not sufficient to explain the accuracy gap of the linear layer. And finally, the
results are similar for linear layer and weightnorm which show that the norm/bias unbalance is not a
problem that could explain the performance gap. Therefore, as described in Sec 5.1, we can conclude
that the classifier selected local spurious features, which leads to a poor generalization and a low
single-head performance.
These phenomena prove that the drop in performance in class-incremental can be due to a bad feature
selection and not necessarily to forgetting. An explanation for this is that in CL, the unavailability of
data from future tasks makes it impossible to know the features that generalize to the whole scenario.
Therefore the model solves the tasks based on currently available data and can only verify later
if the feature selected are correct. This is a fundamental observation for future continual learning
approaches as it means that the features learned and selected should not necessarily be preserved for
later tasks. While the continual learning bibliography focused mostly on forgetting or transfer, the
LSF problem is also a great challenge to deal with to create efficient CL.
Another interesting insight that this experiment gives is that contrary to experiments in section 4.3.3
which show that using a pre-trained model can help for spurious features, it does not offer a solution
to local spurious features. A good feature extractor is then not sufficient for a good feature selection.


                                                                                                                      8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5.4   E FFECT OF N UMBER OF C LASSES PER TASKS

We have seen in the previous experiments that local spurious features are due to wrong selection of
features. Nevertheless, if we increase the complexity of a task, for example, by increasing the number
of classes per task, then the model is forced to learn more about the data and select more features,
building a more complete representation of the data. In this experiments, we investigate the influence
of local spurious features with various number of classes per tasks. The hypothesis is that increasing
the number of classes should reduce the influence of local spurious features. We create scenario of
5 tasks with various number of classes per tasks from tiny-Imagenet and CUB200 and train only a
classifier on top of a pretrained model in a similar way as in previous experiments (Sec. 5.1).
Fig. 9 reports the difference ∆Head =
Ate−local sof tmax − Ate−global sof tmax for a                       OutLayer     0.5
                                                                                                 OutLayer


                                                     Delta Test Accuracy


                                                                                 Delta Test Accuracy
various number of classes per task. For each         0.5
                                                                        Linear    0.4               Linear
                                                     0.4                MeanLayer                   MeanLayer
scenario, one task represents 20% or the total                                    0.3
                                                     0.3
number of classes. Hence, the difference of diffi-   0.2                          0.2
culty between solving tasks separately (MH) and      0.1                          0.1
together (SH) is assumed to be marginal. The         0.0                          0.0
                                                         2    5 10 20 40              2   5 10 20 40
results with MeanLayer in Fig. 9 confirm this               Classes per Tasks           Classes per Tasks
hypothesis; the gap stays quite stable with num-
ber of classes per task. On the other hand, Fig. 9 Figure 9: Delta accuracy between MH and SH ac-
shows that increasing the number of classes per curacy. The effect of LSF reduces with the number
task reduces ∆Head , which means that the in- of classes per tasks. CUB200 (left), TinyImagenet
fluence of local spurious features is reduced. In (right), 5 tasks per scenario.
practice, the algorithms should be more careful about local spurious features when the number of
classes in a task is low.
Conclusion: In this section, we have shown that local spurious features (LSF) exist. We proved it by
highlighting their influence on a classifier on top of frozen pretrained models. We consider that it is
sufficient to assume that the same problem would also exist when training the models end-to-end.
We also showed that the influence of LSF depends on the number of classes inside a task. The more
classes there are inside a task, the fewer influence LSFs have.

6     C ONCLUSION
Continual learning algorithms are built to learn, accumulate and memorize knowledge through time to
reuse them later. Memorizing bad features can have catastrophic repercussions on future performance.
Then, to learn general features, algorithms need to deal with spurious and local spurious features.
This paper first investigates the impact of spurious features on continual learning. Algorithms easily
overfit spurious features for one or several tasks, leading to poor generalization. Our goal was to
investigate if continual learning algorithms can benefit from the variation of the spurious features
through time to ignore them. Our results show that a classical continual learning approach such as
rehearsal can deal with spurious features until a certain level of correlation with labels. Secondly,
we investigated if local spurious features exist in usual CL scenarios and can compromise continual
learning. Those features are supposed to correlate spuriously with labels within a task only. Our
results show that they are indeed present, and they can influence performance in CL significantly.
In the continual learning literature, performance decrease is generally attributed to catastrophic
forgetting. Our results show that the problem of local spurious features also plays a major role. More
research is needed to understand better the impact of local spurious features along with catastrophic
forgetting. Understanding this phenomenon is critical to better address forgetting and feature selection
and enable efficient continual learning.
We recommend using replay as a practical solution to reduce SPs and LSPs influence. Indeed, the
replay process can simulate an identically and independent distribution of tasks seen so far. It makes it
possible to fix potential mistakes in past feature selections. Nevertheless, even if this solution already
exists, it significantly increases the computational cost when the number of tasks grows. Therefore, a
better understanding of forgetting and spurious feature in CL could help to optimize it.



                                                     9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Kartik Ahuja, Ethan Caballero, Dinghuai Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and Irina Rish.
  Invariance principle meets information bottleneck for out-of-distribution generalization. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2106.06607, 2021.

Martin Arjovsky, Léon Bottou, Ishaan Gulrajani, and David Lopez-Paz. Invariant risk minimization.
 arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.02893, 2019.

Lukas Biewald. Experiment tracking with weights and biases, 2020. URL https://www.wandb.
  com/. Software available from wandb.com.

Arthur Douillard and Timothée Lesort. Continuum: Simple management of complex continual
  learning scenarios. 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06253.

Arthur Douillard, Matthieu Cord, Charles Ollion, Thomas Robert, and Eduardo Valle. Podnet: Pooled
  outputs distillation for small-tasks incremental learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE European
  Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020. URL https://www.ecva.net/papers/
  eccv_2020/papers_ECCV/papers/123650086.pdf.

I. J. Goodfellow, M. Mirza, D. Xiao, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio. An empirical investigation
   of catastrophic forgetting in gradient-based neural networks. ArXiv e-prints, dec 2013. URL
   https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6211.

Ishaan Gulrajani and David Lopez-Paz. In search of lost domain generalization. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2007.01434, 2020.

Isabelle Guyon and André Elisseeff. An introduction to variable and feature selection. J. Mach.
   Learn. Res., 3(null):1157–1182, mar 2003. ISSN 1532-4435.

Khurram Javed, Martha White, and Yoshua Bengio. Learning causal models online. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2006.07461, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07461.

James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proc. of the national academy of sciences, 2017. URL
  https://www.pnas.org/content/pnas/114/13/3521.full.pdf.

Timothée Lesort, Thomas George, and Irina Rish. Continual learning in deep networks: an analysis
  of the last layer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01834, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
  2106.01834.

Seyed Iman Mirzadeh, Mehrdad Farajtabar, and Hassan Ghasemzadeh. Dropout as an implicit gating
  mechanism for continual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pp. 232–233, 2020.

Mohammad Pezeshki, Sékou-Oumar Kaba, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, Doina Precup, and
 Guillaume Lajoie. Gradient starvation: A learning proclivity in neural networks. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2011.09468, 2020.

Ameya Prabhu, Philip HS Torr, and Puneet K Dokania. Gdumb: A simple approach that questions
 our progress in continual learning. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 524–540.
 Springer, 2020.

Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, , and Gerald
 Tesauro. Learning to learn without forgetting by maximizing transfer and minimizing interference.
 In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019. URL https://openreview.
 net/forum?id=B1gTShAct7.

Hippolyt Ritter, Aleksandar Botev, and David Barber. Online structured laplace approximations for
  overcoming catastrophic forgetting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
  3738–3748, 2018.


                                               10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


              ib_erm                    irm             baseline                         GroupDRO
              ib_irm                    rehearsal       SpectralDecoupling
                            0.9

                            0.8
        Average Test Accuracy


                            0.7

                            0.6

                            0.5

                            0.4
                                  0.2        0.4      0.6       0.8           1.0
                                                    support
Figure 10: Averaged accuracy Ω on 10 tasks over various amount of support, the spurious correlation
is set to 0.75.


Shiori Sagawa, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori B Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Distributionally robust
  neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
Bowen Zhao, Xi Xiao, Guojun Gan, Bin Zhang, and Shu-Tao Xia. Maintaining discrimination and
  fairness in class incremental learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
  Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 13208–13217, 2020.
Hattie Zhou, Ankit Vani, Hugo Larochelle, and Aaron Courville. Fortuitous forgetting in connectionist
  networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022. URL https://
  openreview.net/forum?id=ei3SY1_zYsE.


A    C OMPUTE
The experiments were run on internal cluster on Quadro RTX 8000 GPUs. The total time of compute
for an approximate period of 100 days of GPU use with hyper-parameters selections and experiments.

B    L OWERING THE S UPPORT OF THE DISTRIBUTION AT EACH TASK
B.0.1          L OWERING THE S UPPORT A MOUNT
In experiments Sec. 4.3.2, the same data support was used for all tasks. This means that the shared
support of original data is 100%. However, we expect continual algorithms to learn with less support.
The support of a task is the percentage of the full original distribution within the task. We investigate
in those experiments the influence that the support amount has on learning algorithms. We set the
spurious correlation to 75% in those experiments.
As it is designed in the SpuriousCIFAR2 scenario, each class (0 and 1) has 5 distributional modes
corresponding to the 5 original classes. In the previous experiments, all the data for all those modes
are available in all tasks only the spurious features changed from one task to another.


                                                      11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In those experiments, we reduce the support by subsampling the original data. We select the data
of a subset of the CIFAR10 classes for each task. For example, we select only cars for class 0 and
only deers for class 1, instead of airplanes, cars, trucks, ships, and horses for class 0 and birds, cats,
dogs, deers, and frogs for class 1. Hence, if we use the support of 0.2 (i.e. 20%), we will only
select the data of 5 ∗ 0.2 = 1.0 original classes for class 0 and one other for class 1. For simplicity’s
sake, we will use only support compatible with the number of classes to have a round subset, i.e.,
[0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0]. At each task, the support is randomly sampled, hence the same original data
can be in several tasks, but the spurious features will still be different for all tasks.
The support experiments results, illustrated in Fig. 10, show that in all support settings, the finetuning
baseline and rehearsal are the best performing methods. On the other hand, contrary to what would
be expected, the amount of support seems to not play an important role in the final performance, at
least in the range of supports possible in our scenario. This is probably because doing replay converts
a partially observable setting into a fully observable setting by simulating an iid distribution.


C    S PURIOUS C ORRELATIONS : D IFFERENT CASES

We have defined the different types of features in Sec. 3. We can now identify different cases among
the spurious correlation between features and labels. Those different cases can either apply to SF or
LSF.
Data Observability: (1) Fully observable data (Javed et al., 2020) The global features are always
present and always observable. In this case, we can assume that features in data that do not last
are spurious, and we can learn to ignore them. (2) Partially observable data The global features’
presence is not invariant. In this case, features that do not last can either be spurious or good.
Noisiness of Spurious Features: (1) SFs are irrelevant for other classes they can be ignored
completely without affecting the learning process. We will refer to them as noisy SFs. (2) SFs
are good features for other classes, e.g., for classification, the color can be a spurious feature for
some classes and valuable for others. We can not ignore those features since it could lead to poor
performance in other classes.
In our experiment, we propose settings with fully observable and partially observable data. Our
spurious features are noise in our domain incremental experiments and true features in our class-
incremental experiments. Nevertheless, we do not exploit information about spurious feature types to
design approaches.


D    D ISCUSSION

Spurious Features vs Local Spurious Features: Spurious features and local spurious features lead
to the same problem for learning algorithms: overfitting features that are not discriminative. The
difference is that spurious features result from a covariate shift between training and test data. In
contrast, local spurious features are due to the unavailability of all data while learning. Local spurious
features are then, more specifically, a continual learning challenge, and we showed that they could
have a significant impact in classical continual learning scenarios.
Solutions to spurious features: The problems of spurious features and local spurious features
lead to phenomena where forgetting is helpful to improve final performance (Zhou et al., 2022) also
denoted as graceful forgetting. Indeed, forgetting by reinitializing some weights allows escaping
spurious local minima and relearning a better solution taking new data and knowledge into account.
On a more general note, spurious features and local spurious features make ineffective approaches
that are too rigid and unable to modify and fix previously learned features/knowledge. The replay
methods have been known to be a good solution for many continual learning problems. Our findings
do not challenge this approach. However, it could be of some use to make replay approaches more
effective and reduce the need for replay.
Benchmark: The scenario SpuriousCIFAR2 proposed in this paper has been designed to highlight
the problem that spurious correlation might create in continual learning. This scenario plainly fulfills
its task of disturbing CL algorithms, particularly in the 100% correlation setting. However, it can
not be used as a benchmark to evaluate the robustness of algorithms. The spurious features are very


                                                   12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


simple, and a simple ad hoc processing of data could solve this scenario, i.e., encoding data with a
pre-trained model as in Fig. 7a. A proper benchmark to assess robustness to spurious correlation
would propose spurious features easy to learn by the model but harder to detect or ignore than
simple squares of color. DomainBed datasets (Gulrajani & Lopez-Paz, 2020) are an interesting
set of benchmarks for spurious correlation investigation. However, the amount of features is not
controllable, making it harder to evaluate the limits of algorithms.

E       S AMPLES S UPPORT E XPERIMENTS


          (a) Train / Valid data task 0        (b) Train / Valid data task 1    (c) Final Test data

Figure 11: Samples for support experiences, here with 20% support, i.e. the data of only two of the
original classes in each task.


F       H YPER -PARAMETERS SELECTION

For a fair comparison between algorithms originally designed for continual learning, such as replay,
and OOD algorithms, we conduct the hyper-parameter search more intensively for OOD approaches.
For each OOD approach, we search for the best hyper-parameters in the range proposed in the
DomainBed GitHub repository 1 . We also searched for the best learning rate with the bayesian
method of wandb (Biewald, 2020). We used approximately 100 runs for each OOD baseline to
select hyper-parameters. The scenario for hyper-parameters selection was an OOD setting with 5
environments of SpuriousCIFAR2 with 75% correlation but all simultaneously available (with no
continual stream of tasks).
The hyper-parameters for rehearsal and finetuning (baseline), have been selected on a finetuning
training in a single task setting with 75% of correlation. The number of samples per class for replay
has been selected on a 5 task SpuriousCifar2 scenario with 75% of correlation. The optimizer used
was Adam with a learning rate of 0.06 (others HPs are default ones in pytorch library).

G       B IAS N ORM IMBALANCE

As described in (Lesort et al., 2021): A linear layer is parameterized by a weight matrix A and bias
vector b, respectively of size N × h and N , where h is the size of the latent vector (the activations of
the penultimate layer) and N is the number of classes. For z a latent vector, the output layer computes
the operation o = Az + b. We can formulate this operation for a single class i with ⟨z, Ai ⟩ + bi = oi ,
where ⟨·⟩ is the euclidean scalar product, Ai is the ith row of the weight matrix viewed as a vector
and bi is the corresponding scalar bias.
It can be rewritten:
                                          ∥z∥∥Ai ∥ · cos(∠(z, Ai )) + bi = oi                         (3)
Where ∠(·, ·) is the angle between two vectors and ∥·∥ denotes here the euclidean norm of a vector.
    1
        https://github.com/facebookresearch/DomainBed


                                                           13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, at inference time, yi = argmaxi (oi ) rely on the norm of ∥Ai ∥ and on the bias bi . Within a
single task, i.e. within a single head in a multi-head setting, ∥Ai ∥ and bi are balanced to predict class
correctly. However, we can not ensure that ∥Ai ∥ and bi will are not biased from one head to another.
To avoid unbalance for bias and norm for inference, (Lesort et al., 2021) proposed the weigthnorm
layer where: ∥z∥ · cos(∠(zt , Ai )) = oi and show that this layer in efficient in learning in incremental
and lifelong settings.

H                   D ETAILS M ULTI -H EAD EXPERIMENTS
            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer           Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer
                0.8                                                      0.8                                                       0.8                                                       0.8
    Test Accuracy


                                                             Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                       Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                 Test Accuracy
                0.6                                                      0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6
                0.4                                                      0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4
                0.2                                                      0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2
                0.0                                                      0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
                      Multi-Head   Single-Head                                 Multi-Head   Single-Head                                  Multi-Head   Single-Head                                  Multi-Head   Single-Head
                              variable                                                 variable                                                  variable                                                  variable

 (a) alexnet                                                                     (b) vgg                              (c) googlenet                                             (d) resnet
 OxfordFlower102                                                             OxfordFlower102                          OxfordFlower102                                           OxfordFlower102
            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer           Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer
                                                                      1.0                                                       1.0                                                       1.0
                0.8                                                   0.8                                                       0.8                                                       0.8
    Test Accuracy


                                                             Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                       Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                 Test Accuracy
                0.6                                                   0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6
                0.4                                                   0.4                                                       0.4                                                       0.4
                0.2                                                   0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2
                0.0                                                   0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
                      Multi-Head   Single-Head                                 Multi-Head   Single-Head                                  Multi-Head   Single-Head                                  Multi-Head   Single-Head
                              variable                                                 variable                                                  variable                                                  variable

 (e) alexnet                                                                      (f) vgg                                                (g) googlenet                                               (h) resnet
 OxfordFlower102                                                                 OxfordPet                                                 OxfordPet                                                 OxfordPet
            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer           Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer            Linear           WeightNorm          MeanLayer
                0.6
                                                                         0.6                                                       0.6                                                       0.6
    Test Accuracy


                                                             Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                       Test Accuracy


                                                                                                                                                                                 Test Accuracy
                0.4                                                                                                                0.4
                                                                         0.4                                                                                                                 0.4
                0.2                                                      0.2                                                       0.2                                                       0.2
                0.0                                                      0.0                                                       0.0                                                       0.0
                      Multi-Head   Single-Head                                 Multi-Head   Single-Head                                  Multi-Head   Single-Head                                  Multi-Head   Single-Head
                              variable                                                 variable                                                  variable                                                  variable

                        (i) alexnet                                                (j) vgg                                               (k) googlenet                                                (l) resnet
                         CUB200                                                   CUB200                                                   CUB200                                                     CUB200

Figure 12: Local spurious features experiments: after training in a multi-head way, we compare
accuracy between multi-head (soft-max applied on a subset of classes’ outputs) and single head
(softmax applied on all classes’ outputs). The performance differences assess how the model selected
local spurious features to solve tasks. Two baselines are added, (1) meanlayer, which assesses
the difference in the difficulty of the two evaluations, and (2) weightnorm, which assesses if the
performance difference is due to an imbalance in norm or bias. The results in this figure show that
models indeed rely on local spurious features to solve tasks.


I             S AMPLING A LGORITHM
Algorithm 1 describes the sampler used to train the model with replay. The input dataset D is a
concatenation of the buffer with the current data. The goal is to make the probability of sampling on
each class, the same whatever the number of sample for each class in D.


                                                                                                                  14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 Balanced Sampling of Data Mixture.
 1: procedure GET SAMPLER(D)
 2:    y ← D.y                                                                          ▷ Get data class labels
 3:    nb per class = bincount(y)                               ▷ count the number of occurence of each class
 4:    weights per class = nb per1 class
 5:    sample weights = weights per class[y]               ▷ give a sample probability weight to each data point
 6:    sampler = Sampler(D, sample weights, replacement=True) ▷ create sampler to sample accordingly to the
    sample weights
 7:    return sampler
 8: end procedure


                                                      15
