Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


I MPROVED S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY FOR R EWARD -
FREE R EINFORCEMENT L EARNING UNDER L OW- RANK
MDP S
 Yuan ChengвҲ—                                                       Ruiquan HuangвҲ—
 University of Science and Technology of China                     The Pennsylvania State University
 cy16@mail.ustc.edu.cn                                             rzh5514@psu.edu

 Jing Yang                                                 Yingbin Liang
 The Pennsylvania State University                         The Ohio State University
 yangjing@psu.edu                                          liang.889@osu.edu



                                              A BSTRACT

             In reward-free reinforcement learning (RL), an agent explores the environment
             first without any reward information, in order to achieve certain learning goals
             afterwards for any given reward. In this paper we focus on reward-free RL under
             low-rank MDP models, in which both the representation and linear weight vectors
             are unknown. Although various algorithms have been proposed for reward-free
             low-rank MDPs, the corresponding sample complexity is still far from being sat-
             isfactory. In this work, we first provide the first known sample complexity lower
             bound that holds for any algorithm under low-rank MDPs. This lower bound
             implies it is strictly harder to find a near-optimal policy under low-rank MDPs
             than under linear MDPs. We then propose a novel model-based algorithm, coined
             RAFFLE, and show it can both find an Пө-optimal policy and achieve an Пө-accurate
             system identification via reward-free exploration, with a sample complexity sig-
             nificantly improving the previous results. Such a sample complexity matches our
             lower bound in the dependence on Пө, as well as on K in the large d regime, where
             d and K respectively denote the representation dimension and action space cardi-
             nality. Finally, we provide a planning algorithm (without further interaction with
             true environment) for RAFFLE to learn a near-accurate representation, which is
             the first known representation learning guarantee under the same setting.


1       I NTRODUCTION

Reward-free reinforcement learning, recently formalized by Jin et al. (2020b), arises as a powerful
framework to accommodate diverse demands in sequential learning applications. Under the reward-
free RL framework, an agent first explores the environment without reward information during the
exploration phase, with the objective to achieve certain learning goals later on for any given re-
ward function during the planning phase. Such a learning goal can be to find an Пө-optimal policy,
to achieve an Пө-accurate system identification, etc. The reward-free RL paradigm may find broad
application in many real-world engineering problems. For instance, reward-free exploration can
be efficient when various reward functions are taken into consideration over a single environment,
such as safe RL (Miryoosefi & Jin, 2021; Huang et al., 2022), multi-objective RL (Wu et al., 2021),
multi-task RL (Agarwal et al., 2022; Cheng et al., 2022), etc. Studies of reward-free RL on the theo-
retical side have been largely focused on characterizing the sample complexity to achieve a learning
goal under various MDP models. Specifically, reward-free tabular RL has been studied in Jin et al.
(2020a); MeМҒnard et al. (2021); Kaufmann et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2020). For reward-free RL with
function approximation, Wang et al. (2020) studied linear MDPs introduced by Jin et al. (2020b),
where both the transition and the reward are linear functions of a given feature extractor, Zhang et al.
    вҲ—
        Equal contribution


                                                     1
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


(2021b) studied linear mixture MDPs introduced by Ayoub et al. (2020), and Zanette et al. (2020b)
considered a classes of MDPs with low inherent Bellman error introduced by Zanette et al. (2020a).
In this paper, we focus on reward-free RL under low-rank MDPs, where the transition kernel admits
a decomposition into two embedding functions that map to low dimensional spaces. Compared with
linear MDPs, the feature functions (i.e., the representation) under low-rank MDPs are unknown,
hence the design further requires representation learning and becomes more challenging. Reward-
free RL under low-rank MDPs was first studied by Agarwal et al. (2020), and the authors introduced
a provably efficient algorithm FLAMBE, which achieves the learning goal of system identification
                                   22   9 7
with a sample complexity of OМғ( H ПөK  10
                                         d
                                            ). Here d, H and K respectively denote the representation
dimension, episode horizon, and action space cardinality. Later on, Modi et al. (2021) proposed
a model-free algorithm MOFFLE for reward-free RL under low-nonnegative-rank MDPs (where
feature functions are non-negative), for which the sample complexity for finding an Пө-optimal policy
              H 5 K 5 d3                                          PH
scales as OМғ( Пө2 О· LV ) (which is rescaled under the condition of h=1 rh вүӨ 1 for fair comparison).
Here, dLV denotes the non-negative rank of the transition kernel, which may be exponentially larger
than d as shown in Agarwal et al. (2020),
                                       вҲҡ      and О· denotes the positive reachability probability to all
states, where 1/О· can be as large as dLV as shown in Uehara et al. (2022b). Recently, a reward-
free algorithm called RFOLIVE has been proposed under non-linear MDPs with low Bellman Eluder
dimension (Chen et al., 2022b), which can be specialized to low-rank MDPs. However, RFOLIVE is
computationally more costly and considers a special reward function class, making their complexity
result not directly comparable to other studies on reward-free low-rank MDPs.
This paper investigates reward-free RL under low-rank MDPs to address the following important
open questions:
вҖў For low-rank MDPs, none of previous studies establishes a lower bound on the sample com-
  plexity showing a necessary sample complexity requirement for near-optimal policy finding.
вҖў The sample complexity of previous algorithms in Agarwal et al. (2020); Modi et al. (2021) on
  reward-free low-rank MDP is polynomial in the involved parameters, but still much higher than
  desirable. It is vital to improve the algorithm to further reduce the sample complexity.
вҖў Previous studies on low-rank MDPs did not provide estimation accuracy guarantee on the
  learned representation (only on the transition kernels). However, such a representation learning
  guarantee can be very beneficial to reuse the learned representation in other RL environment.

1.1   M AIN C ONTRIBUTIONS
We summarize our main contributions in this work below.
вҖў Lower bound: We provide the first-known lower bound в„ҰМғ( HdK      Пө2 ) on the sample complexity
  that holds for any algorithm under the same low-rank MDP setting. Our proof lies in a novel
  construction of hard MDP instances that capture the necessity of the cardinality of the action
  space on the sample complexity. Interestingly, comparing this lower bound for low-rank MDPs
  with the upper bound for linear MDPs in Wang et al. (2020) further implies that it is strictly
  more challenging to find near-optimal policy under low-rank MDPs than linear MDPs.
вҖў Algorithm: We propose a new model-based reward-free RL algorithm under low-rank MDPs.
  The central idea of RAFFLE lies in the construction of a novel exploration-driven reward, whose
  corresponding value function serves as an upper bound on the model estimation error. Hence,
  such a pseudo-reward encourages the exploration to collect samples over those state-action
  space where the model estimation error is large so that later stage of the algorithm can further
  reduce such an error based on those samples. Such reward construction is new for low-rank
  MDPs, and serve as the key reason for our improved sample complexity.
вҖў Sample complexity: We show that our algorithm can both find an Пө-optimal policy and achieve
  an Пө-accurate system identification via reward-free exploration, with a sample complexity of
        3 2      2
  OМғ( H d K(d Пө2
                   +K)
                       ), which matches our lower bound in terms of the dependence on Пө as well as
                                                                                 22   9 7
  on K in the large d regime. Our result significantly improves that of OМғ( H ПөK    10
                                                                                       d
                                                                                          ) in Agar-
  wal et al. (2020) to achieve the same goal. Our result also improves the sample complexity of
      H 5 K 5 d3
  OМғ( Пө2 О· LV ) in Modi et al. (2021) in three aspects: order on K is reduced; d can be exponen-
  tially smaller than dLV as shown in Agarwal et al. (2020); and no introduction of О·, where 1/О·


                                                   2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                      вҲҡ
    can be as large as dLV . Further, our result
                                                 on reward-free
                                                                    RL naturally achieves the goal of
                                                   H 5 d4 K 2
    reward-known RL, which improves that of OМғ         Пө2       in Uehara et al. (2022b) by Оҳ(H 2 ).
вҖў Near-accurate representation learning: We design a planning algorithm that exploits the
  exploration phase of RAFFLE to further learn a provably near-accurate representation of the
  transition kernel without requiring further interaction with the environment. To the best of our
  knowledge, this is the first theoretical guarantee on representation learning for low-rank MDPs.

2     P RELIMINARIES AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Notation. For any H вҲҲ N, we denote [H] := {1, . . . ,вҲҡH}. For any vector x and symmetric matrix
A, we denote вҲҘxвҲҘ2 as the в„“2 norm of x and вҲҘxвҲҘA := xвҠӨ Ax. For any matrix A, we denote вҲҘAвҲҘF
as its Frobenius norm and let Пғi (A) be its i-th largest singular value. For two probability measures
P, Q вҲҲ в„Ұ, we use вҲҘP вҲ’ QвҲҘT V to denote their total variation distance.
2.1    E PISODIC MDP S

We consider an episodic Markov decision process (MDP) M = (S, A, H, P, r), where S can be
an arbitrarily large state space; A is a finite action space with cardinality K; H is the number of
steps in each episode; P : S Г— A Г— S вҶ’ [0, 1] is the time-dependent transition kernel, where
Ph (sh+1 |sh , ah ) denotes the transition probability from the state-action pair (sh , ah ) at step h to
state sh+1 in the next step; rh : S Г— A вҶ’ [0, 1] denotes the deterministic reward function at step
                                                                  PH
h; We further normalize the summation of reward function as h rh вүӨ 1. A policy ПҖ is a set of
mappings {ПҖh : S вҶ’ вҲҶ(A)}hвҲҲ[H] , where вҲҶ(A) is the set of all probability distributions over the
action space A. Further, a вҲј U(A) indicates the uniform selection of an action a from A.
In each episode of the MDP, we assume that a fixed initial state s1 is drawn. Then, at each step
h вҲҲ [H]. the agent observes state sh вҲҲ S, takes an action ah вҲҲ A under a policy ПҖh , and receives a
reward rh (sh , ah ) (in the reward-known setting), and then the system transits to the next state sh+1
with probability Ph (sh+1 |sh , ah ). The episode ends after H steps.
As standard in the literature, we use sh вҲј (P, ПҖ) to denote a state sampled by executing the policy ПҖ
under the transition kernel P for h вҲ’ 1 steps. If the previous state-action pair (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) is given,
we use sh вҲј P to denote that sh follows the distribution Ph (В·|shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ). We use the notation
E(sh ,ah )вҲј(P,ПҖ) [В·] to denote the expectation over states sh вҲј (P, ПҖ) and actions ah вҲј ПҖ.
For a given policy ПҖ and an MDP M = (S, A, H, P, hr), we denote the valueifunction starting
                            ПҖ
                                                              PH                                ПҖ
from state sh at step h as Vh,P,r (sh ) := E(shвҖІ ,ahвҖІ )вҲј(P,ПҖ)  hвҖІ =h rh (sh , ah )|sh . We use VP,r to
                                                                       вҖІ   вҖІ    вҖІ

          ПҖ
denote V1,P,r (s1 ) for simplicity. Similarly, we denote the action-value function starting from state
                                                                                  h                        i
action pair (sh , ah ) at step h as QПҖh,P,r (sh , ah ) := rh (sh , ah ) + Esh+1 вҲјP Vh+1,P,r
                                                                                    ПҖ
                                                                                            (sh+1 )|sh , ah .

We use P вӢҶ to denote the transition kernel of the true environment and for simplicity, denote
E(sh ,ah )вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖ) [В·] as EвӢҶПҖ [В·]. Given a reward function r, there always exists an optimal policy ПҖ вӢҶ
that yields the optimal value VPвӢҶвӢҶ ,r = supПҖ VPПҖвӢҶ ,r .

2.2    L OW- RANK MDP S
This paper focuses on the low-rank MDPs (Agarwal et al., 2020) defined as follows.
Definition 1. (Low-rank MDPs). A transition probability PhвӢҶ : S Г— A вҶ’ вҲҶ(A) admits a low-rank
decomposition with dimension d вҲҲ N if there exists two embedding functions П•вӢҶh : S Г— A вҶ’ Rd
and ВөвӢҶh : S вҶ’ Rd such that PhвӢҶ (sвҖІ |s, a) = вҹЁП•вӢҶh (s, a), ВөвӢҶh (sвҖІ )вҹ© , вҲҖs, sвҖІ вҲҲ S, a вҲҲ A.
                                  вӢҶ
For normalization, we assume
         R вӢҶ                 вҲҡ вҲҘП•h (s, a)вҲҘ2 вүӨ 1 for all (s, a), and for any function g : S вҶ’
[0, 1], вҲҘ Вөh (s)g(s)dsвҲҘ2 вүӨ d. An MDP M is a low-rank MDP with dimension d if for each
h вҲҲ [H], Ph admits a low-rank decomposition with dimension d. We use П•вӢҶ = {П•вӢҶh }hвҲҲ[H] and
ВөвӢҶ = {ВөвӢҶh }hвҲҲ[H] to denote the embeddings for P вӢҶ .

We remark that when П•h is revealed to the agent, low-rank MDPs specialize to linear MDPs (Wang
et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2020b). Essentially, low-rank MDPs do not assume that the features {П•h }h


                                                     3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


are known a priori. The lack of knowledge on features in fact invokes a nonlinear structure, which
makes the model strictly harder than linear MDPs or tabular models. Since it is impossible to learn
a model in polynomial time if there is no assumption on features П•h and Вөh , we adopt the following
conventional assumption from the recent studies on low-rank MDPs.
Assumption 1. (Realizability). A learning agent can access to a model class {(ОҰ, ОЁ)} that contains
the true model, i.e., the embeddings П•вӢҶ вҲҲ ОҰ, ВөвӢҶ вҲҲ ОЁ.

While we assume the cardinality of the function classes to be finite for simplicity, extensions to infi-
nite classes with bounded statistical complexity (such as bounded covering number) are not difficult
(Sun et al., 2019; Agarwal et al., 2020).

2.3   R EWARD - FREE RL AND L EARNING O BJECTIVES
Reward-free RL typically has two phases: exploration and planning. In the exploration phase, an
agent explores the state space via interaction with the true environment and can collect samples over
multiple episodes, but without access to the reward information. In the planning phase, the agent is
no longer allowed to interact with the environment, and for any given reward function, is required
to achieve certain learning goals (elaborated below) based on the outcome of the exploration phase.
The planning phase may require the agent to achieve different learning goals. In this paper, we focus
on three of such goals. The most popular goal in reward-free RL is to find a near-optimal policy that
achieves the best value function under the true environment with Пө-accuracy, as defined below.
Definition 2. (Пө-optimal policy). Fix Пө > 0. For any given reward function r, a learned policy ПҖ is
                             вӢҶ
Пө-optimal if it satisfies VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вүӨ Пө.

For model-based learning, Agarwal et al. (2020) proposed system identification as another useful
learning goal, defined as follows.
Definition 3 (Пө-accurate system identification). Fix Пө > 0. Given a model class (ОҰ, ОЁ), a learned
model (П•МӮ, ВөМӮ) is said to achieve Пө-accurate
                                   h D       system identification
                                                         E         if it uniformly
                                                                                 i approximates the true
model P вӢҶ , i.e., вҲҖПҖ, h вҲҲ [H], EвӢҶПҖ    П•МӮh (sh , ah ), ВөМӮh (В·) вҲ’ PhвӢҶ (В·|sh , ah )        вүӨ Пө.
                                                                                   TV
Besides those two common learning goals, we also propose an additional goal on near-accurate rep-
resentation learning. Towards that, we introduce the following divergence-based metric to quantify
distance between two representations, which has been used in supervised learning (Du et al., 2021b).
Definition 4. (Divergence between two representations). Given a distribution q over S Г— A and
                          вҖІ
two
    representations   П•, П• вҲҲ ОҰ, define the covariance between     П• and П•вҖІ w.r.t q as ОЈ(s,a)вҲјq (П•, П•вҖІ ) =
           вҖІ       вҠӨ                                            вҖІ
E П•(s, a)П• (s, a) . Then, the divergence between П• and П• with respect to q is defined as
                                                                              вҖ 
        Dq (П•, П•вҖІ ) = ОЈ(s,a)вҲјq (П•вҖІ , П•вҖІ ) вҲ’ ОЈ(s,a)вҲјq (П•вҖІ , П•) ОЈ(s,a)вҲјq (П•, П•) ОЈ(s,a)вҲјq (П•, П•вҖІ ).

It can be verified that Dq (П•, П•вҖІ ) вӘ° 0 (i.e., positive semidefinite) and Dq (П•, П•) = 0 for any П•, П•вҖІ вҲҲ ОҰ.

3     L OWER B OUND ON S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY

In this section, we provide a lower bound on the sample complexity that all reward-free RL algo-
rithms must satisfy under low-rank MDPs. The detailed proof can be found in Appendix C.
Theorem 1 (Lower bound). For any algorithm that can output an Пө-optimal policy (as Definition 2),
if H > max(24Пө, 4), S вүҘ 6, K вүҘ 3 and Оҙ < 1/16, then there exists a low-rank       MDP model M
such that the number of trajectories sampled by the algorithm is at least в„Ұ HdK
                                                                             Пө2  .

To the best of our knowledge, Theorem 1 establishes the first lower bound for learning low-rank
MDPs in the reward-free setting. More importantly, Theorem 1 shows that it is strictly more costly
in terms of sample complexity to find near-optimal policies under low-rank MDPs (which have
unknown representations) than linear MDPs (which have known representations) by at least a factor
of в„Ұ(K). This can be seen as the lower bound
                                         3 4in
                                               Theorem 1 for low-rank MDPs has an additional
                                         d H
term K compared to the upper bound OМғ     Пө2    provided in Wang et al. (2020) for linear MDPs.


                                                     4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


This can be explained intuitively as follows. In linear models, all the representations П• : SГ—A вҶ’ Rd
are known. Then, it requires at most O(d) actions with linearly independent features to realize all
transitions вҹЁП•, Вөвҹ©. However, learning low-rank MDPs requires the agent to further select O(K)
actions to access the unknown features, leading to a dependence on K.
Our proof of the new lower bound mainly features the following two novel ingredients in the con-
struction of hard MDP instances. a) We divide the actions into two types. The first type of actions is
mainly used to form a large state space through a tree structure. The second type of actions is mainly
used to distinguish different MDPs. Such a construction allows us to separately treat the state space
and the action space, so that both state space and action space can be arbitrarily large. b) We explic-
itly define the feature vectors for all state-action pairs, and more importantly, the dimension is less
than or equal to the number of states. These two ingredients together guarantee that the number of
actions K can be arbitrarily large and independent with other parameters d and S, which indicates
that the dependence on the number of actions K is unavoidable.

4    T HE RAFFLE A LGORITHM

In this section, we propose RAFFLE (see Algorithm 1) for reward-free RL under low-rank MDPs.
Summary of design novelty: The central idea of RAFFLE lies in the construction of a novel
exploration-driven reward, which is desirable because its corresponding value function serves as
an upper bound on the model estimation error during the exploration phase. Hence, such a pseudo-
reward encourages the exploration to collect samples over those state-action space where the model
estimation error is large so that later stage of the algorithm can further reduce such an error based on
those samples. Such reward construction are new for low-rank MDPs, and serve as the key enabler
for our improved sample complexity. They also necessitate various new ingredients in other steps of
algorithms, as elaborated below.
Exploration and MLE model estimation. In each iteration n during the exploration phase, for
each h вҲҲ [H], the agent executes the exploration policy ПҖnвҲ’1 (defined in the previous iteration)
up to step h вҲ’ 1, after which it takes two uniformly selected actions, and stops after step h + 1.
Different from FLAMBE (Agarwal et al., 2020) that collects a large number of samples for each
episode, our algorithm uses each exploration policy to collect only one sample trajectory at each
episode, indexed by (n, h). Hence, the sample complexity of RAFFLE is much smaller than that
of FLAMBE. In fact, such an efficient sampling together with our new termination idea introduced
later benefit sample complexity.
                                                                     (n)           (n)
Then, the agent estimates the low-rank components П•МӮh and ВөМӮh via the MLE oracle with given
model class (ОҰ, ОЁ) and a dataset Dhn as follows
              MLE(Dhn ) := arg maxП•вҲҲОҰ,ВөвҲҲОЁ (s,a,sвҖІ )вҲҲDn log вҹЁП•h (s, a), Вөh (sвҖІ )вҹ© .
                                                P
                                                                           h

                                                                                                 (n)
Design of exploration reward. The agent updates the empirical covariance matrix UМӮh as
              (n)        Pn      (n) (П„,h+1) (П„,h+1)      (n) (П„,h+1) (П„,h+1) вҠӨ
            UМӮh = О»n I + П„ =1 П•МӮh (sh       , ah      )(П•МӮh (sh       , ah     )) ,                        (1)
         (П„,h+1)     (П„,h+1)     (П„,h+1)
where {sh          , ah        , sh+1      } is collected at iteration П„ , episode (h + 1), and step h.
                                (n)          (n)
Next, the agent uses both П•МӮh and UМӮh              to construct an exploration-driven reward function as
                                 (n)                           (n)
                                bМӮh (s, a) = min{ОұМӮn вҲҘП•МӮh (s, a)вҲҘ(UМӮ (n) )вҲ’1 , 1},                         (2)
                                                                               h

                                                                                                  (n)
where ОұМӮn is a pre-determined parameter. We note that although individual bМӮh (s, a) for
each step may not represent point-wise uncertainty as indicated in Uehara et al. (2022b), we
find its total cumulative version VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) can serve as a trajectory-wise uncertainty mea-
sureh to
      D select exploration Epolicy. To see this,    i it can be shown          that for any ПҖ and h,
  вӢҶ       (n)             (n)      вӢҶ                      вҖІ ПҖn
                                                                            p cn         вҖІ
EПҖ      П•МӮh (sh , ah ), ВөМӮh (В·) вҲ’ Ph (В·|sh , ah )     вүӨ c VМӮPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) +   n , where c is a constant
                                                         TV
and cn = O(log n). As iteration number n grows, the second term diminishes to zero, which indi-
cates that VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                n
                    ,bМӮ(n)
                           (under the reward of bМӮ(n) ) serves as a good upper bound on the estimation error


                                                           5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


for the true transition kernel. Hence, exploration guided by maximizing VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) will collect more
trajectories over which the learned transition kernels are not estimated well. This will help to reduce
the model estimation error in the future.

Algorithm 1 RAFFLE (RewArd-Free Feature LEarning)
 1: Input: ОұМӮn , О¶n , Пө > 0, Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), regularizer О»n , model classes {(Вө, П•) : Вө вҲҲ ОЁ, П• вҲҲ ОҰ}.
 2: Initialize ПҖ0 (В·|s) to be uniform; set Dh0 = вҲ….
 3: Phase I: Exploration Phase
 4: for n = 1, . . . do
 5:    for h = 1, . . . , H do
 6:       Use ПҖnвҲ’1 : roll into shвҲ’1 , uniformly choose ahвҲ’1 , ah , enter into sh , sh+1 .
 7:       Collect data s1(n,h) , a1(n,h) , . . . , sh(n,h) , a(n,h)
                                                              h
                                                                       (n,h)
                                                                    , sh+1 .
                            (n,h) (n,h) (n,h)                                      (n,h) (n,h) (n,h)
 8:       Add the triple (sh , ah , sh+1 ) to the dataset Dhn = DhnвҲ’1 вҲӘ {(sh , ah , sh+1 )}.
                     (n)   (n)
 9:       Learn (П•МӮh , ВөМӮh ) = MLE(Dhn ).
                                                   (n)                  (n)         (n)
10:       Update transition dynamics PМӮ (n) as PМӮh (sвҖІ |s, a) = вҹЁП•МӮh (s, a), ВөМӮh (sвҖІ )вҹ©.
11:     end for
                                                (n)
12:     Update empirical covariance matrix UМӮh as in Equation (1).
                                                         (n)
13:     Define exploration-driven reward function bМӮh as in Equation (2).
14:     Define an estimated value function VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) based on PМӮ (n) and bМӮ(n) as in Equation (3).
15:     Find exploration policy ПҖn = arg maxПҖ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) .
                               вҲҡ
16:     if 2VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                 n
                     ,bМӮ(n)
                            + 2 KО¶n вүӨ Пө then
17:      Terminate Phase I: Exploration Phase and set PМӮ Пө = PМӮ (n) , bМӮПө = bМӮ(n) , ПҖПө = ПҖn , nПө = n.
18:   end if
19: end for
20: Phase II: Planning Phase
21: Option 1 (learn near-optimal policy): Receive reward function r = {rh }H         h=1 , and compute
      policy ПҖМ„ = arg maxПҖ VPМӮПҖПө ,r .
22: Option 2 (system identification): let PМӮ = PМӮ Пө .
23: Option 3 (learn near-accurate representation): call Algorithm 2 of RepLearn and obtain П•Мғ.
24: Output: policy ПҖМ„, learned transition dynamics PМӮ Пө , learned representation П•Мғ.



Design of exploration policy. The agent defines a truncated value function iteratively using the
estimated transition kernel and the exploration-driven reward as follows:
                                                n                                                     o
                                                         (n)            (n) ПҖ
           QМӮПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sh , ah ) = min 1, bМӮh (sh , ah ) + PМӮh VМӮh+1, PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sh , ah )  ,
                                         h                           i
           VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sh ) = E QМӮПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sh , ah ) .                                   (3)
                                  ПҖ

The truncation technique here is important for the improvement of the sample complexity on the
dependence of H. The agent finally finds an optimal policy maximizing VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) , and uses this
policy as the exploration policy for the next iteration.
Novel termination criterion. RAFFLE does not require a pre-determined maximum number of
iterations as its input. Instead, it will terminate and output the current estimated model if the
optimal value function VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) plus a minor term is below a threshold. Such a termination criterion
essentially guarantees that the value functions under the estimated and true models are close to
each other under any reward and policy, hence the exploration can be terminated in finite steps.
Such a termination criterion enables our algorithm to identify an accurate model and later find a
near-optimal policy with fewer sample collections than FLAMBE in Agarwal et al. (2020) as we
discuss in the exploration phase. Additionally, our termination criterion provides strong performance
guarantees on the output policy and estimator from the last iteration. On the contrary, Uehara et al.
(2022b) can only provide guarantees on a random mixture of the policies obtained over all iterations.


                                                      6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Planning phase. Given any reward function r, the agent finds a near-optimal policy by planning
with the learned transition dynamics PМӮ Пө and the given reward r. Note that such planning with a
known low-rank MDP is computationally efficient by assumption.

5     U PPER B OUNDS ON S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY
In this section, we first show that the policy returned by RAFFLE is an Пө-optimal policy with respect
to any given reward r in the planning phase. The detailed proof can be found in Appendix A.
Theorem 2 (Пө-optimal policy). Assume M is a low-rank MDP with dimension d, and Assumption
1 holds. Given any Пө, Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), and any reward function r, let ПҖМ„ and PМӮ Пө be the output ofвҲҡRAFFLE
and ПҖ вӢҶ := arg maxПҖ VPПҖвӢҶ ,r be the optimal policy under the true model P вӢҶ . Set ОұМӮn = OМғ( K + d2 )
                                                                      вӢҶ
and О»n = OМғ(d). Then, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPПҖМ„вӢҶ ,r вүӨ Пө, and the total
                                                                               3 2     2
number of trajectories collected by RAFFLE is upper bounded by OМғ( H d K(d
                                                                        Пө2
                                                                           +K)
                                                                               ).

We note that the upper bound in Theorem 2 matches the lower bound in Theorem 1 in terms of the
dependence on Пө as well as on K in the large d regime.
Compared with MOFFLE (Modi et al., 2021), which also       5finds  an Пө-optimal policy in reward-free
                                                          H K 5 d3LV
RL, our result improves their sample complexity of OМғ         Пө2 О·     in three aspects. First, the or-
der on K is reduced. Second, the dimension dLV of the underlying function class in MOFFLE
can be exponentially larger than d as shown in Agarwal et al. (2020). Finally, MOFFLE requires
reachability assumption, leading to a factor 1/О· in the sample complexity, which can be as large as
вҲҡ
  dLV . Further, Theorem 2 naturally achieves
                                         5 4 2the
                                                  goal of reward-known RL with the same sample
                                         H d K
complexity, which improves that of OМғ       Пө2     in Uehara et al. (2022b) by a factor of O(H 2 ).

Proceeding to the learning objective of system identification, the learned transition kernel output by
Algorithm 1 achieves the goal of Пө-accurate system identification with the same sample complexity
as follows. The detailed proof can be found in Appendix B.
Theorem 3 (Пө-accurate system identification). Under the same condition of Theorem 2 and let PМӮ Пө =
{П•МӮПөh , ВөМӮПөh } be the output of RAFFLE. Then, with probability
                                                   h D                    вҲ’ Оҙ, PМӮ Пө achieves Пө-accurate
                                                               at least 1 E                     i
system identification, i.e. for any ПҖ and h: EвӢҶПҖ        П•МӮПөh (sh , ah ), ВөМӮПөh (В·) вҲ’ PhвӢҶ (В·|sh , ah )   вүӨ Пө,
                                                                                      TV
                                                                            3 2    2
and the number of trajectories collected by RAFFLE is upper bounded by OМғ( H d K(d
                                                                                Пө2
                                                                                     +K)
                                                                                         ).
                                                                        22   9 7
Theorem 3 significantly improves the sample complexity of OМғ( H ПөK 10
                                                                      d
                                                                         ) in Agarwal et al. (2020)
on the dependence of all involved parameters for achieving Пө-accurate system identification.

6     N EAR -ACCURATE R EPRESENTATION L EARNING
In low-rank MDPs, it is of great interest to learn the representation П• accurately, because other
similar RL environments can very likely share the same representation (Rusu et al., 2016; Zhu
et al., 2020; Dayan, 1993) and hence such learned representation can be directly reused in those
environments. Thus, the third objective of RAFFLE in the planning phase is to provide an accurate
estimation of П•. We note that although RAFFLE provides an estimation of П• during its execution,
such an estimation does not come with an accuracy guarantee. Besides, Theorem 3 on system
identification does not provide the guarantee on the representation П•МӮ, but only on the entire transition
kernel PМӮ . Further, none of previous studies of reward-free RL under low-rank MDPs (Agarwal et al.,
2020; Modi et al., 2021; Uehara et al., 2022b) established the guarantee on П•МӮ.

6.1   T HE R EP L EARN A LGORITHM

In this section, we present the following algorithm of RepLearn, which exploits the learned transition
kernel from RAFFLE and learns a near-accurate representation without additional interaction with
the environment. The formal version of RepLearn, Algorithm 2, is delayed in Appendix D. We
explain the main idea of Algorithm 2 as follows. First, for each h вҲҲ [H], t вҲҲ [T ], where T is the


                                                   7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


number of rewards, Nf pairs of state-action (sh , ah ) are generated based on distribution qh . Note
that the agent does not interact with the true environment during such data generation. Then, for any
h, if we set the reward r at step h to be zero, QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) can have a linear structure in terms
of the true representation П•вӢҶh (sh , ah ). Namely, there exists a wh decided by r, P вӢҶ and ПҖ such that
QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) = вҹЁП•вӢҶh (sh , ah ), wh вҹ©. Then, with the estimated transition kernel PМӮ that RAFFLE
                                                         t
provides and the well-designed rewards rh,t , QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (sh , ah ) can be computed efficiently and
serve as a target to learn the representation via the following regression problem:
                                                             t
           arg minП•h вҲҲОҰ,wht вҲҲRd tвҲҲ[T ] (sh ,ah )вҲҲDt (QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (sh , ah ) вҲ’ вҹЁП•h (sh , ah ), wht вҹ©)2 .
                                   P        P
                                                                                                         (4)
                                                    h


The main difference between our algorithm and that in Lu et al. (2021) for representation learning is
that, our data generation is based on PМӮ from RAFFLE, which carries a natural estimation error but
requires no interaction with the environment, whereas their algorithm assumes a generative model
to collect data from the ground-truth transition kernel.

6.2   G UARANTEE ON ACCURACY

In order to guarantee the learned representation by Algorithm 2 is sufficiently close to the ground
truth, we need to employ the following two somewhat necessary assumptions.
First, for the distributions of the state-action pairs {qh }H
                                                            h=1 in Algorithm 2, it is desirable to have
PМӮ (В·|s, a) approximates true P (В·|s, a) well over those distributions, so that QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah ) can ap-
                                 вӢҶ

proximate the ground truth well. Intuitively, if some state-action pairs can hardly be visited under
any policy, the output PМӮ (В·|s, a) of Algorithm 1 cannot approximate true P вӢҶ (В·|s, a) well over these
state-action pairs. Hence, we assume reachability type assumptions for MDPs as following so that
all state-action pairs is likely to be visited by certain policy. Such reachability type assumption is
common in relevant literature (Modi et al., 2021; Agarwal et al., 2020).
As discussed in Section 6, intuitively, if some state action pairs can be hardly visited by any policy,
the output of Algorithm 1 PМӮ (В·|s, a) can not approximate true P вӢҶ (В·|s, a) well over these state action
pairs, so a standard reachability type assumption is necessary so that all states can be visited.
Assumption 2 (Reachability). For the true transition kernel P вӢҶ , there exists a policy ПҖ 0 such that
             0                       0
minsвҲҲS PПҖh (s) вүҘ О·min , where PПҖh (В·) : S вҶ’ R is the density function over S using policy ПҖ 0 to
roll into state s at timestep h.

We further assume the input distributions {qh }H
                                               h=1 are bounded with constant CB . Then, together
                                                                      0
with Assumption 2, for any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г—A, we have qh (s, a) вүӨ Cmin PПҖh (s, a), where Cmin = О·Cmin
                                                                                               B
                                                                                                  .
Next, we assume that the rewards chosen for generating target Q-functions are sufficiently diverse
so that the target QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) spans over the entire representation space to guarantee accurate
representation learning in Equation (4). Such an assumption is commonly adopted in multi-task
representation learning literature (Du et al., 2021b; Yang et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2021). To formally
state the assumption, for any h вҲҲ [H], let {rh,t }tвҲҲ[T ] be a set of T rewards (where T вүҘ d) satisfying
                                                                  вӢҶ
rhh,t = 0. As a result, for each t, given ПҖ t , there exists wht вҲҲ Rd such that QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (sh , ah ) =
                 вӢҶ                   вӢҶ          вӢҶ
вҹЁП•вӢҶh (sh , ah ), wht вҹ©. Let WhвӢҶ = [wh1 , . . . , whT ] вҲҲ RdГ—T .
Assumption 3 (Diverse rewards). The smallest singular value Пғd (WhвӢҶ ) of WhвӢҶ defined above satis-
fies Пғd2 (WhвӢҶ ) вүҘ в„Ұ( Td ), i.e., there exists a constant CD > 0 such that Пғd2 (WhвӢҶ ) вүҘ CDd T .

We next characterize the accuracy of the output representation of Algorithm 2 in terms of the di-
vergence Definition 4 between the learned and the ground truth representations in the following
theorem and defer the proof to Appendix D.
Theorem 4 (Guarantee for representation learning). Under Assumption 1 and Assumption 3, for
any Пө, Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), any h вҲҲ [H], and sufficiently large Nf , let PМӮ be the output transition kernel of
RAFFLE that satisfies Theorem 3. With probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the output П•Мғ of RAFFLE satisfies
                                              2                    q 2
                                                                     log Оҙ
                          Dqh (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )1/2   = O( ПөdC
                                                       CD
                                                         min
                                                             +  d
                                                               CD    T Nf ).                      (5)
                                               F


                                                     8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


We explain the bound in Equation (5) as follows. The first term arises from the system identification
error Пө by using the output of RAFFLE, and can be made as small as possible by choosing appropriate
Пө. The second term is related to the randomness caused by sampling state-action pairs from input
distribution {qh }hвҲҲ[H] , and vanishes as Nf becomes large. Note that Nf is the number of simulated
samples in Algorithm 2, which does not require interaction with the true environment. Hence, it can
be made sufficiently large to guarantee a small error.
Theorem 4 shows RAFFLE can learn a near-accurate representation, based on which learned repre-
sentations can be further used in other RL environments sharing common representations, similarly
in spirit to how representation learning has been exploited in supervised learning (Du et al., 2021b).

7    R ELATED W ORK
Reward-free RL. While various studies (Oudeyer et al., 2007; Bellemare et al., 2016; Burda et al.,
2018; Colas et al., 2018; Nair et al., 2018; Eysenbach et al., 2018; Co-Reyes et al., 2018; Hazan
et al., 2019; Du et al., 2019; Pong et al., 2019; Misra et al., 2020) proposed exploration algorithms
for good coverage on the state space without using explicit reward signals, theoretically speaking,
the paradigm of reward-free RL was first formalized by Jin et al. (2020a), where they provided
both upper and lower bounds on the sample complexity. For tabular case, several follow-up stud-
ies (Kaufmann et al., 2021; MeМҒnard et al., 2021) further improved the sample complexity, and Zhang
et al. (2020) established the minimax optimality guarantee. Reward-free RL was also studied with
function approximation. Wang et al. (2020) studied linear MDPs, and Zhang et al. (2021b) studied
linear mixture MDPs. Further, Zanette et al. (2020b) considered a class of MDPs with low inherent
Bellman error introduced by Zanette et al. (2020a). Chen et al. (2022b) proposed a reward-free al-
gorithm called RFOLIVE under non-linear MDPs with low Bellman Eluder dimension. In addition,
Miryoosefi & Jin (2021) proposed a reward-free approach to solving constrained RL problems with
any given reward-free RL oracle under both the tabular and linear MDPs.
Reward-free RL under low-rank MDPs. As discussed in Section 1, reward-free RL under low-
rank MDPs have been studied recently (Agarwal et al., 2020; Modi et al., 2021), and our result
significant improves the sample complexity therein. When finite latent state space is assumed, low-
rank MDPs specialize to block MDPs, under which algorithms termed as PCID (Du et al., 2019) and
                                                                    d4 H 2 K 4                 d8 H 4 K 4
HOMER (Misra et al., 2020) achieved sample complexities of OМғ( min(О·    4 Оі 2 ,Пө2 ) ) and OМғ( min(О· 3 ,Пө2 ) ),
                                                                           n
respectively. Our result on the general low-rank MDPs can be utilized to further improve those
results for block MDPs.
Reward-known RL under low-rank MDPs. For reward-known RL, Uehara et al. (2022b) pro-
posed a computationally efficient algorithm REP-UCB under low-rank MDPs. Our design of the
reward-free algorithm for low-rank MDPs is inspired by their algorithm with several new ingre-
dients as discussed in Section 4, and improves their sample complexity on the dependence of H.
Meanwhile, algorithms have been proposed for MDP models with low Bellman rank (Jiang et al.,
2017), low witness rank (Sun et al., 2019), bilinear classes (Du et al., 2021a) and low Bellman eluder
dimension (Jin et al., 2021), which can specialize to low-rank MDPs. However, those algorithms are
computationally more costly as remarked in Uehara et al. (2022b), although their sample complex-
ity may have sharper dependence on d, K or H. Specializing to block MDPs, Zhang et al. (2022)
proposed an algorithm called BRIEE, which empirically achieves the state-of-art sample complexity
for block MDP models. Besides, Zhang et al. (2021a) proposed an algorithm coined ReLEX for a
slightly different low-rank model, and obtained a problem dependent regret upper bound.

8    C ONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we investigate the reward-free reinforcement learning, in which the underlying model
admits a low-rank structure. Without further assumptions, we propose an algorithm called RAFFLE
which significantly improves the state-of-the-art sample complexity for accurate model estimation
and near-optimal policy identification. We further design an algorithm to exploit the model learned
by RAFFLE for accurate representation learning without further interaction with the environment.
Although Пө-accurate system identification can easily induce HПө-optimal policy, the relationship be-
tween these two learning goals under general reward-free exploration setting remain under-explored,
and is an interesting topic for future investigation.


                                                      9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Alekh Agarwal, Sham Kakade, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and Wen Sun. Flambe: Structural complex-
  ity and representation learning of low rank mdps. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 33, 2020.
Alekh Agarwal, Yuda Song, Wen Sun, Kaiwen Wang, Mengdi Wang, and Xuezhou Zhang. Provable
  benefits of representational transfer in reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.14571,
  2022.
Alex Ayoub, Zeyu Jia, Csaba Szepesvari, Mengdi Wang, and Lin Yang. Model-based reinforcement
  learning with value-targeted regression. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
  463вҖ“474. PMLR, 2020.
Marc Bellemare, Sriram Srinivasan, Georg Ostrovski, Tom Schaul, David Saxton, and Remi Munos.
 Unifying count-based exploration and intrinsic motivation. Advances in neural information pro-
 cessing systems, 29:1471вҖ“1479, 2016.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.12894, 2018.
Fan Chen, Yu Bai, and Song Mei. Partially observable rl with b-stability: Unified structural condition
  and sharp sample-efficient algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14990, 2022a.
Jinglin Chen, Aditya Modi, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. On the statisti-
   cal efficiency of reward-free exploration in non-linear RL. CoRR, abs/2206.10770, 2022b.
Yuan Cheng, Songtao Feng, Jing Yang, Hong Zhang, and Yingbin Liang. Provable benefit of multi-
  task representation learning in reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/2206.05900, 2022.
John Co-Reyes, YuXuan Liu, Abhishek Gupta, Benjamin Eysenbach, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey
  Levine. Self-consistent trajectory autoencoder: Hierarchical reinforcement learning with trajec-
  tory embeddings. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1009вҖ“1018. PMLR,
  2018.
CeМҒdric Colas, Pierre Fournier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. CURIOUS: intrinsically
   motivated multi-task, multi-goal reinforcement learning. CoRR, abs/1810.06284, 2018.
Christoph Dann, Tor Lattimore, and Emma Brunskill. Unifying pac and regret: Uniform pac bounds
  for episodic reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.07710, 2017.
Peter Dayan. Improving generalization for temporal difference learning: The successor representa-
  tion. Neural Comput., 5(4):613вҖ“624, 1993.
Omar Darwiche Domingues, Pierre MeМҒnard, Emilie Kaufmann, and Michal Valko. Episodic rein-
 forcement learning in finite mdps: Minimax lower bounds revisited, 2020.
Simon Du, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, Alekh Agarwal, Miroslav Dudik, and John Langford.
  Provably efficient rl with rich observations via latent state decoding. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1665вҖ“1674, 2019.
Simon S Du, Sham M Kakade, Jason D Lee, Shachar Lovett, Gaurav Mahajan, Wen Sun, and
  Ruosong Wang. Bilinear classes: A structural framework for provable generalization in rl. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2103.10897, 2021a.
Simon Shaolei Du, Wei Hu, Sham M. Kakade, Jason D. Lee, and Qi Lei. Few-shot learning via
  learning the representation, provably. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representa-
  tions, ICLR 2021. OpenReview.net, 2021b.
Benjamin Eysenbach, Abhishek Gupta, Julian Ibarz, and Sergey Levine. Diversity is all you need:
  Learning skills without a reward function. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.06070, 2018.
Elad Hazan, Sham Kakade, Karan Singh, and Abby Van Soest. Provably efficient maximum entropy
  exploration. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2681вҖ“2691. PMLR, 2019.


                                                 10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Ruiquan Huang, Jing Yang, and Yingbin Liang. Safe exploration incurs nearly no additional sample
  complexity for reward-free rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.14057, 2022.

Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, John Langford, and Robert E Schapire. Con-
  textual decision processes with low bellman rank are pac-learnable. In International Conference
  on Machine Learning, pp. 1704вҖ“1713. PMLR, 2017.

Chi Jin, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Max Simchowitz, and Tiancheng Yu. Reward-free exploration
  for reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 4870вҖ“4879, 2020a.

Chi Jin, Zhuoran Yang, Zhaoran Wang, and Michael I Jordan. Provably efficient reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 2137вҖ“2143.
  PMLR, 2020b.

Chi Jin, Qinghua Liu, and Sobhan Miryoosefi. Bellman eluder dimension: New rich classes of rl
  problems, and sample-efficient algorithms, 2021.

Emilie Kaufmann, Pierre MeМҒnard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Adaptive reward-free exploration. In Algorithmic Learning Theory, pp. 865вҖ“
  891. PMLR, 2021.

Qinghua Liu, Praneeth Netrapalli, Csaba Szepesvari, and Chi Jin. Optimistic mleвҖ“a generic
  model-based algorithm for partially observable sequential decision making. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2209.14997, 2022.

Rui Lu, Gao Huang, and Simon S Du. On the power of multitask representation learning in linear
  mdp. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.08053, 2021.

Pierre MeМҒnard, Omar Darwiche Domingues, Anders Jonsson, Emilie Kaufmann, Edouard Leurent,
  and Michal Valko. Fast active learning for pure exploration in reinforcement learning. In Inter-
  national Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 7599вҖ“7608. PMLR, 2021.

Sobhan Miryoosefi and Chi Jin. A simple reward-free approach to constrained reinforcement learn-
  ing, 2021.

Dipendra Misra, Mikael Henaff, Akshay Krishnamurthy, and John Langford. Kinematic state ab-
  straction and provably efficient rich-observation reinforcement learning. In International confer-
  ence on machine learning, pp. 6961вҖ“6971, 2020.

Aditya Modi, Jinglin Chen, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Nan Jiang, and Alekh Agarwal. Model-free
  representation learning and exploration in low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07035,
  2021.

Ashvin Nair, Vitchyr Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Shikhar Bahl, Steven Lin, and Sergey Levine. Visual
  reinforcement learning with imagined goals. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.04742, 2018.

Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Frdric Kaplan, and Verena V Hafner. Intrinsic motivation systems for au-
  tonomous mental development. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation, 11(2):265вҖ“286,
  2007.

Vitchyr H Pong, Murtaza Dalal, Steven Lin, Ashvin Nair, Shikhar Bahl, and Sergey Levine. Skew-
  fit: State-covering self-supervised reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03698,
  2019.

Tongzheng Ren, Tianjun Zhang, Lisa Lee, Joseph E Gonzalez, Dale Schuurmans, and Bo Dai. Spec-
  tral decomposition representation for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09515,
  2022.

Andrei A. Rusu, Neil C. Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick,
  Koray Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. CoRR,
  abs/1606.04671, 2016.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Wen Sun, Nan Jiang, Akshay Krishnamurthy, Alekh Agarwal, and John Langford. Model-based
 rl in contextual decision processes: Pac bounds and exponential improvements over model-free
 approaches. In Conference on learning theory, pp. 2898вҖ“2933. PMLR, 2019.
Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline rl
 in low-rank mdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04652, 2021.
Masatoshi Uehara, Ayush Sekhari, Jason D Lee, Nathan Kallus, and Wen Sun. Provably
 efficient reinforcement learning in partially observable dynamical systems. arXiv preprint
 arXiv:2206.12020, 2022a.
Masatoshi Uehara, Xuezhou Zhang, and Wen Sun. Representation learning for online and offline
 RL in low-rank mdps. In The Tenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR.
 OpenReview.net, 2022b.
Lingxiao Wang, Qi Cai, Zhuoran Yang, and Zhaoran Wang. Embed to control partially observed
  systems: Representation learning with provable sample efficiency. CoRR, abs/2205.13476, 2022.
Ruosong Wang, Simon S Du, Lin F Yang, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. On reward-free reinforcement
  learning with linear function approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.11274, 2020.
Jingfeng Wu, Vladimir Braverman, and Lin Yang. Accommodating picky customers: Regret bound
   and exploration complexity for multi-objective reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural In-
   formation Processing Systems, 34:13112вҖ“13124, 2021.
Jiaqi Yang, Wei Hu, Jason D. Lee, and Simon Shaolei Du. Impact of representation learning in
   linear bandits. In 9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2021. Open-
   Review.net, 2021.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Learning near op-
  timal policies with low inherent bellman error. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
  pp. 10978вҖ“10989. PMLR, 2020a.
Andrea Zanette, Alessandro Lazaric, Mykel J Kochenderfer, and Emma Brunskill. Provably efficient
  reward-agnostic navigation with linear value iteration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.07737, 2020b.
Andrea Zanette, Ching-An Cheng, and Alekh Agarwal. Cautiously optimistic policy optimization
  and exploration with linear function approximation. In Conference on Learning Theory, pp. 4473вҖ“
  4525. PMLR, 2021.
Wenhao Zhan, Masatoshi Uehara, Wen Sun, and Jason D Lee. Pac reinforcement learning for
 predictive state representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05738, 2022.
Weitong Zhang, Jiafan He, Dongruo Zhou, Amy Zhang, and Quanquan Gu. Provably efficient
 representation learning in low-rank markov decision processes. CoRR, abs/2106.11935, 2021a.
Weitong Zhang, Dongruo Zhou, and Quanquan Gu. Reward-free model-based reinforcement learn-
 ing with linear function approximation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34,
 2021b.
Xuezhou Zhang, Yuda Song, Masatoshi Uehara, Mengdi Wang, Wen Sun, and Alekh Agarwal.
  Efficient reinforcement learning in block mdps: A model-free representation learning approach.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00063, 2022.
Zihan Zhang, Simon S Du, and Xiangyang Ji. Nearly minimax optimal reward-free reinforcement
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.05901, 2020.
Zhuangdi Zhu, Kaixiang Lin, and Jiayu Zhou. Transfer learning in deep reinforcement learning: A
  survey. CoRR, abs/2009.07888, 2020.


                                               12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 2
We first provide a proof outline to highlight our key ideas in the analysis of Theorem 2, and
then provide the detailed proof. To simplify the notation, we denote the total variation distance
    (n)                               (n)
  PМӮh (sh , ah ) вҲ’ PhвӢҶ (sh , ah ) by fh (sh , ah ).
                                  TV


Proof Outline for Theorem 2. Step 1 provides an upper bound on the difference of value functions
under estimated model PМӮ (n) and the true model P вӢҶ for any given policy ПҖ and reward r, as given in
the following proposition (see proposition 4 in appendix A.2).
Proposition 1 (Informal). There exist constants cn = O(log n) and cвҖІ = O(1) such that for any
policy ПҖ and reward r, with high probability, we have
                                                                       r
                                ПҖ         ПҖ             ПҖn               cn
                              VP вӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮ (n) ,r вүӨ VМӮPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) +      .
                                                                         n

This proposition is inspired by Uehara et al. (2022b), while it generalizes to non-stationary setting
and arbitrary reward scenario from infinite stationary MDP and fixed reward. The main proof idea
is to first notice that for any reward, we have

                                        VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮПҖ(n) ,r вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,f (n) .                                   (6)

                                                                вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                                         p cn                         p cn
Then, we show that VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,f (n) вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) +      n
                                                                       n
                                                                           ,bМӮ(n)
                                                                                  +     n     due to the optimality of
the exploration policy ПҖn .
Step 2 shows sublinearity of the summation of VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                                   n
                                                       ,bМӮ(n)
                                                              , which is an upper bound of value function
difference under the true model with the estimated model (see proposition 5 in appendix A.3).
Proposition 2 (Informal). Under the same setting of Proposition 1, with high probability, the sum-
mation of value functions VPМӮПҖ(n)
                              n
                                  ,bМӮ(n)
                                         under exploration policies {ПҖn }nвҲҲ[N ] with exploration-driven
reward functions bМӮ(n) is sublinear, as given by
                             X                            p
                                  VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                       n
                                           ,bМӮ (n)
                                                   вүӨ OМғ  Hd K(K + d 2 )N .

                               nвҲҲ[N ]


Step 3 combines Step 2 and Step 1. We are able to conclude that RAFFLE will terminate with
polynomial sample complexity such that, the value function difference of P вӢҶ and the returned envi-
ronment PМӮ Пө is at most Пө.

Proposition 3. With high probability, RAFFLE terminates after at most OМғ H 2 d2 K(d2 + K)/Пө2
iterations, and the output model PМӮ Пө satisfies
                                                                      r
                             ПҖ         ПҖ             ПҖnПө                cnПө
                           VP вӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮ (Пө) ,r вүӨ VМӮPМӮ (Пө) ,bМӮ(nПө ) +       вүӨ Пө/2,
                                                                        nПө

where nПө is the iteration number where RAFFLE terminates, i.e. PМӮ Пө = PМӮ (nПө ) .

Finally, with some algebraic operations, Proposition 3 concludes the proof of Theorem 2.

A.1    S UPPORTING L EMMAS

We first present the high probability event.
Lemma 1. We define О n to be a uniform mixture of previous n вҲ’ 1 exploration policies:
                                         О n = U(ПҖ0 , ПҖ1 , ..., ПҖnвҲ’1 ).
                                                                                        (n)
Denote the total variation of PМӮ (n) and P вӢҶ , and the expected matrix of UМӮh                 as follows.


                                                         13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                        (n)                                          (n)
                      fh (sh , ah ) = PhвӢҶ (В·|sh , ah ) вҲ’ PМӮh (В·|sh , ah )    ,                                                  (7)
                                                                          TV
                        (n)
                                            П•(sh , ah )(П•(sh , ah ))вҠӨ + О»n I,

                      Uh,П• = n       EвӢҶ                                                                                         (8)
                                 sh вҲј(P ,О n )
                                  ah вҲјU (A)

                         (n)
                                                             П•(sh , ah )(П•(sh , ah ))вҠӨ + О»n I.

                      Wh,П• = n             E                                                                                    (9)
                                 (sh ,ah )вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О n )

where О»n = ОІ3 d log(2nH|ОҰ|/Оҙ)) and ОІ3 = O(1) is a constant coefficient. Suppose Algorithm 1
runs N iterations and let events E0 and E1 be defined as follows.

                                                                                h               i
                                                                                  (n)         2
     E0 =       вҲҖn вҲҲ [N ], h вҲҲ [H], sh вҲҲ S, ah вҲҲ A,                 E            fh (sh , ah ) вүӨ О¶n ,
                                                               sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О n )
                                                                   ah вҲјU

     E1 =       вҲҖn вҲҲ [N ], h вҲҲ [H], sh вҲҲ S, ah вҲҲ A,

            1 (n)                        (n)                        (n)
              П•МӮ  (s, a) (n)         вүӨ П•МӮhвҲ’1 (s, a) (n)       вүӨ 3 П•МӮhвҲ’1 (s, a) (n)                                          .
            5 hвҲ’1       (U
                          hвҲ’1,П•МӮ
                                 )вҲ’1               (UМӮhвҲ’1 )вҲ’1                 (U
                                                                                hвҲ’1,П•МӮ
                                                                                       )вҲ’1

where О¶n = log (2|ОҰ||ОЁ|nH/Оҙ) /n. We further denote О¶ = N О¶N = log (2|ОҰ||ОЁ|N H/Оҙ) for sim-
plicity. Denote E = E0 вҲ© E1 as the intersection of the two events. Then, P[E] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.

Proof. By Corollary 2 in Appendix F, we have P[E0 ] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2. Further, by Lemma 39 in Zanette
et al. (2021) for the version of fixed П• and Lemma 11 in Uehara et al. (2022b), we have P[E1 ] вүҘ
1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2. Therefore, P[E] вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.

Based on Lemma 1, we can bound the exlporation-driven reward in RAFFLE as follows.
Corollary 1. Given that the event E occurs, the following inequality holds for any n вҲҲ [N ], h вҲҲ
[H], sh вҲҲ S, ah вҲҲ A:
          (                                  )
             ОұМӮn (n)                              (n)                   (n)
      min        П•МӮh (sh , ah ) (n)       , 1 вүӨ bМӮh (sh , ah ) вүӨ 3ОұМӮn П•МӮh (sh , ah ) (n)       ,
              5                (U
                                 h,П•МӮ
                                      )вҲ’1                                           (U
                                                                                      h,П•МӮ
                                                                                           )вҲ’1
              p
where ОұМӮn = 5 2ОІ3 nО¶n (K + d2 ).

                (n)                      (n)
Proof. Recall bМӮh (sh , ah ) = min ОұМӮn П•МӮh (s, a)                    (n) вҲ’1
                                                                            , 1   . Applying Lemma 1, we can im-
                                                                  (UМӮh )
mediately obtain the result.

The following lemma extends the Lemmas 12 and 13 under infinite discount MDPs in Uehara et al.
(2022b) to episodic MDPs. We provide the proof for completeness.
Lemma 2. Let PhвҲ’1 = вҹЁП•hвҲ’1 , ВөhвҲ’1 вҹ© be a generic MDP model, and О  be an arbitrary and possibly
mixture policy. Define an expected Gram matrix as follows
                                                    h                                                           i
                                                                                                            вҠӨ
            MhвҲ’1,П• = О»n I + n             E вӢҶ           П•hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) (П•hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ))                   .
                                     shвҲ’1 вҲј(P ,О )
                                       ahвҲ’1 вҲјО 


                                                                 вӢҶ
Further, let fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) be the total variation between PhвҲ’1 and PhвҲ’1 at time step h вҲ’ 1.
Suppose g вҲҲ S Г— A вҶ’ R is bounded by B вҲҲ (0, вҲһ), i.e., вҲҘgвҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B. Then, вҲҖh вүҘ 2, вҲҖ policy ПҖh ,
       E [g(sh , ah )|shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ]
    sh вҲјPhвҲ’1
     ah вҲјПҖh

                вүӨ вҲҘП•hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )вҲҘ(MhвҲ’1,П• )вҲ’1 Г—
                 s
                   nK      E вӢҶ [g 2 (sh , ah )] + О»n dB 2 + nB 2                     E           [fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )2 ].
                        sh вҲј(P ,О )                                              shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )
                           ah вҲјU                                                  ahвҲ’1 вҲјО 


                                                             14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. We first derive the following bound:

               E       [g(sh , ah )|shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ]
           sh вҲјPhвҲ’1
            ah вҲјПҖh
               Z     X
           =               g(sh , ah )ПҖ(ah |sh )вҹЁП•hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ), ВөhвҲ’1 (sh )вҹ©dsh
                sh ah
                                                                 Z X
           вүӨ вҲҘП•hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )вҲҘ(MhвҲ’1,П• )вҲ’1                             g(sh , ah )ПҖ(ah |sh )ВөhвҲ’1 (sh )dsh               ,
                                                                     ah                                         MhвҲ’1,П•


where the inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. We further expand the second term
in the RHS of the above inequality as follows.

  Z X                                                         2

               g(sh , ah )ПҖ(ah |sh )ВөhвҲ’1 (sh )dsh
      ah                                                      MhвҲ’1,П•
                                пЈ®                                                                           !2 пЈ№
     (i)
                                         Z    X
     вүӨn               E         пЈ°                   g(sh , ah )ПҖh (ah |sh )Вө(sh )вҠӨ П•(shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )dsh          пЈ» + О»n dB 2
               shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )
                                          sh ah
                 ahвҲ’1 вҲјО 
                                пЈ®пЈ«                                           пЈ¶ пЈ№
                                                                              2
     =n                                              g(sh , ah ) shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 пЈё пЈ» + О»n dB 2
                                пЈҜпЈӯ                                              пЈә
                      E         пЈ°            E
               shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )            sh вҲјPhвҲ’1
                 ahвҲ’1 вҲјО                   ah вҲјПҖh

                                     пЈ®                                         пЈ№
     (ii)
                                                                             2
     вүӨ 2n                 E          пЈ°       E       g(sh , ah ) shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 пЈ» + О»n dB 2
                   shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )        sh вҲјP вӢҶ
                                              hвҲ’1
                     ahвҲ’1 вҲјО               ah вҲјПҖh

                                                                      2
           + 2nB 2              E            [fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )]
                          shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )
                            ahвҲ’1 вҲјО 
                                     пЈ®                                         пЈ№
     (iii)

      вүӨ 2n                 E         пЈ°        E       g(sh , ah )2 shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 пЈ» + О»n dB 2
                   shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )        sh вҲјP вӢҶ
                                              hвҲ’1
                     ahвҲ’1 вҲјО               ah вҲјПҖh


           + 2nB 2                            fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )2

                                E
                          shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )
                            ahвҲ’1 вҲјО 

     (iv)
                                      g(sh , ah )2 + О»n dB 2 + 2nB 2                              fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )2 ,

     вүӨ 2nK                  E                                                        E
                      sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )                                              shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О )
                         ah вҲјU                                                    ahвҲ’1 вҲјО 


where (i) follows from the assumption that вҲҘgвҲҘвҲһ вүӨ B, (ii) is due to that fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) is the
                         вӢҶ
total variation between PhвҲ’1 and PhвҲ’1 at time step h вҲ’ 1 and the fact that (a + b)2 вүӨ 2a2 + 2b2 ,
(iii) follows from JensenвҖҷs inequality, and (iv) is due to importance sampling. This finishes the
proof.



                                                                                                                                (n)
Based on Lemma 2, we summarize three useful inequalities which bridges the total variation fh
                                    (n)
and the exploration-driven reward bМӮh .
Lemma 3. Define

                                     (n)
                                                                   П•(sh , ah )(П•(sh , ah ))вҠӨ + О»n I,

                                 Wh,П• = n               EвӢҶ                                                                     (10)
                                                  sh вҲј(P ,О n )
                                                     ah вҲјО n


                                                                      15
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


where О»n = ОІ3 d log(2nH|ОҰ|/Оҙ). Given that the event E occurs, the following inequalities hold.
For any n, when h вүҘ 2,

                      (n)                           (n)
              E     f h   (s ,
                            h ha ) shвҲ’1 hвҲ’1 вүӨ Оұn П•МӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
                                       , a                              (n)
                                                                                 ,        (11)
                          (n)                                                 вҲ’1                                       (U            )
                   sh вҲјPМӮ                                                                                                   hвҲ’1,П•МӮ
                         hвҲ’1
                     ah вҲјПҖ

                                   (n)
                      E           fh (sh , ah ) shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 вүӨ Оұn П•вҲ—hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) (U (n)                                             )вҲ’1
                                                                                                                                               ,              (12)
                   sh вҲјP вҲ—                                                                                                  hвҲ’1,П•вӢҶ
                        hвҲ’1
                     ahвҲјПҖ

                                    (n)
                      E           bМӮh (sh , ah ) shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 вүӨ Оіn П•вҲ—hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) (W (n)                                            )вҲ’1
                                                                                                                                               ,              (13)
                   sh вҲјP вҲ—                                                                                                  hвҲ’1,П•вӢҶ
                         hвҲ’1
                     ah вҲјПҖ


where
                                       p                                             p
                                Оұn =       2ОІ3 nО¶n (K + d2 ),                 Оіn =       45ОІ3 nО¶n Kd(K + d2 ).
Specially, when h = 1,
                                                                                                                              r
                            h
                                 (n)
                                                i    p                                           h               i                   dK
                     E          f1 (s1 , a1 )       вүӨ KО¶n ,                              E           bМӮ(s1 , a1 ) вүӨ 15Оұn                .                     (14)
                    a1 вҲјПҖ                                                            a1 вҲјПҖ                                            n

Proof. We start by developing Equation (11) as follows. Given that the event E occurs, for h вүҘ 2
we have

           (n)
   E     f h   (s ,
                 h ha ) s   , a
                         hвҲ’1 hвҲ’1
       (n)
sh вҲјPМӮ
      hвҲ’1
  ah вҲјПҖ

             (i)
                       (n)
             вүӨ П•МӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )                  (n)
                                                                   Г—
                                                    (U      )вҲ’1
                                                     hвҲ’1,П•МӮ
             v                                                                                                         h                                      i
                                                          (n)                                                               (n)
             u
             unK
             u                        EвӢҶ             [fh (sh , ah )2 ] + О»n d + n                           EвӢҶ             fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )2
             t               shвҲ’1 вҲј(P ,О n )                                                           shвҲ’1 вҲј(P ,О n )
                              ahвҲ’1 ,ah вҲјU                                                                ahвҲ’1 вҲјU
                         sh вҲјP вӢҶ h (В·|shвҲ’1 ,ahвҲ’1 )


             (ii)
                         (n)
             вүӨ        П•МӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )               (n)
                                                                      Г—
                                                    (U          )вҲ’1
                                                         hвҲ’1,П•МӮ
             v                                                                                                                                     h                          i
                                                          (n)                                                                                           (n)
             u
             unK
             u                        EвӢҶ             [fh (sh , ah )2 ] + О»n d + nK                                     EвӢҶ                              fhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )2
             t               shвҲ’1 вҲј(P ,О n )                                                                   shвҲ’2 вҲј(P ,О n )
                              ahвҲ’1 ,ah вҲјU                                                                     ahвҲ’2 ,ahвҲ’1 вҲјU
                         sh вҲјP вӢҶ h (В·|shвҲ’1 ,ahвҲ’1 )                                                      shвҲ’1 вҲјP вӢҶ hвҲ’1 (В·|shвҲ’2 ,ahвҲ’2 )


             (iii)
                         (n)
                                                                      p
              вүӨ       П•МӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )              (n)
                                                                              2nО¶n K + ОІ3 nО¶n d2
                                                     (U        )вҲ’1
                                                        hвҲ’1,П•МӮ

                             (n)
             вүӨ Оұn П•МӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )                     (n)
                                                                          ,
                                                         (U       )вҲ’1
                                                           hвҲ’1,П•МӮ

                                                                                   (n)
where (i) follows from Lemma 2 and the fact that fh (sh , ah ) вүӨ 1, (ii) follows from importance
sampling at time step h вҲ’ 2, and (iii) follows from Lemma 1.
Equation (12) follows from the arguments similar to the above.
To obtain Equation (13), we first apply Lemma 2 and obtain

                      (n)
             EвӢҶ     bМӮh   (s ,
                            h ha ) s   , a
                                    hвҲ’1 hвҲ’1
               sh вҲјP
                     hвҲ’1
                ah вҲјПҖn
                                                                          s
                                                                                                           (n)
               вүӨ П•вӢҶhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) (W (n)                       )вҲ’1
                                                                               nK            E          [{bМӮh (sh , ah )}2 ] + О»n d,
                                                          hвҲ’1,П•вӢҶ                    sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О n )
                                                                                        ah вҲјU


                                                                              16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                            (n)
where we use the fact that bМӮh (sh , ah )                                            вүӨ     1.         We further bound the term
                       (n)
n E sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О n ) [(bМӮh (sh , ah ))2 ] as follows:
        ah вҲјU
                                                2
                              (n)
  n        E                bМӮh (sh , ah )
      sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О n )
          ah вҲјU
                        "                                              #
                                                        2
                                         (n)
вүӨn           E              ОұМӮn2       П•МӮh (sh , ah )       (n) вҲ’1
       sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О n )                                   (UМӮ      )
           ah вҲјU                                            h,П•МӮ
                        "                                                  #
(i)                                                         2
                                          (n)
вүӨn           E              9ОұМӮn2       П•МӮh (sh , ah )           (n) вҲ’1
       sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,О n )                                       (U        )
           ah вҲјU                                                 h,П•МӮ
         пЈұ                пЈ®                             пЈ«                                                    пЈ¶вҲ’1 пЈ№пЈј
         пЈҙ
         пЈІ                                                              h                              i          пЈҙ
                                                                                                                  пЈҪ
     2                    пЈҜ (n)            (n)         вҠӨпЈӯ                                (n)         вҠӨ
= 9ОұМӮn tr n               пЈ°П•МӮh (sh , ah )П•МӮh (sh , ah )  n               П•МӮh (sh , ah )П•МӮh (sh , ah ) + О»n I
                                                                                                                 пЈә
                 EвӢҶ                                              EвӢҶ                                          пЈё   пЈ»
         пЈі sh вҲј(P
         пЈҙ
               ah вҲјU
                    ,О n )                                  sh вҲј(P ,О n )
                                                               ah вҲјU
                                                                                                                  пЈҙ
                                                                                                                  пЈҫ

вүӨ 9ОұМӮn2 tr(I) = 9ОұМӮn2 d,
where (i) follows from Lemma 1, and we use tr(A) to denote the trace of any matrix A.
Hence,

                     (n)
                                                                                                                     p
          EвҲ—       bМӮh (sh , ah ) shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 вүӨ П•вҲ—hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) (W (n)                                   )вҲ’1
                                                                                                                      9K ОұМӮn2 d + О»n d
      sh вҲјP                                                                                            hвҲ’1,П•вӢҶ
            hвҲ’1
        ah вҲјПҖ


                                                                  вүӨ Оіn П•вҲ—hвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) W (n)                   )вҲ’1
                                                                                                                          ,
                                                                                                         hвҲ’1,П•вӢҶ


where the last inequality follows from that ОұМӮn = 5Оұn and the definition of Оіn In addition, for h = 1,
we have

                                         h             i (i) r h            i p
                                           (n)                   (n)
                                   E      f1 (s1 , a1 ) вүӨ K E f1 (s1 , a1 )2 вүӨ KО¶n ,
                             a1 вҲјПҖn                                            a1 вҲјU

and
                                                                       s
                                           h            i (ii)
                                            bМӮ(s1 , a1 ) вүӨ ОұМӮn                                 2
                                                                           K E вҲҘП•МӮ1 (s1 , a1 )вҲҘ (n) вҲ’1
                                   E                                                           (UМӮ )
                              a1 вҲјПҖn                                            a1 вҲјU                        1,П•МӮ
                                                                       s
                                                            вүӨ 3ОұМӮn                             2
                                                                           K E вҲҘП•МӮ1 (s1 , a1 )вҲҘ (n) вҲ’1
                                                                                   a1 вҲјU       (U  )
                                                                                                             1,П•МӮ
                                                                   r                              r
                                                                       25KОұn2 d                       dK
                                                            вүӨ3                           = 15Оұn          ,
                                                                               n                       n



A.2     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 1

Equipped with Lemma 3, the following proposition provides an upper bound on the difference of
value functions under the estimated model PМӮ (n) and the true model P вӢҶ for any given policy ПҖ and
reward r.
Proposition 4 (Restatement of Proposition 1). For all n вҲҲ [N ], policy ПҖ and reward r, given that
the event E occurs, we have
                                                                      p
                              VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮПҖ(n) ,r вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) + KО¶n .


Proof. Step 1. We first show that VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮПҖ(n) ,r вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,f (n) .


                                                                               17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Recall the definition of estimated value functions VМӮh,PМӮ (n) ,r (sh ) and QМӮh,PМӮ (n) ,r (sh , ah ):
                                                n                                              o
                                                                    (n) ПҖ
               QМӮПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,r (sh , ah ) = min 1, rh (sh , ah ) + PМӮh VМӮh+1,         (s
                                                                            PМӮ (n) ,r h h
                                                                                         , a )   ,
                                         h                       i
               VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,r (sh ) = E QМӮПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,r (sh , ah ) .
                                         ПҖ

We develop the proof by induction.             For the base case h =                              H + 1, we have
  ПҖ                       ПҖ                          ПҖ
VH+1,PМӮ (n) ,r (sH+1 ) вҲ’ VH+1,P вӢҶ ,r (sH+1 ) = 0 = VМӮH+1,              (s
                                                          PМӮ (n) ,f (n) H+1
                                                                            ).

             ПҖ                      ПҖ                       ПҖ
Assume that Vh+1,         (s
                 PМӮ (n) ,r h+1
                               ) вҲ’ Vh+1,P вӢҶ ,r (sh+1 ) вүӨ VМӮ                 (s
                                                           h+1,PМӮ (n) ,f (n) h+1
                                                                                 ) holds for any sh+1 .

Then, from Bellman equation, we have,

        QПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖh,P вӢҶ ,r (sh , ah )

                            (n)
                     = PМӮh Vh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ PhвӢҶ Vh+1,P
                                                           ПҖ
                                                                 вӢҶ ,r (sh , ah )



                            (n)
                              ПҖ                  ПҖ                              (n)     вӢҶ      ПҖ
                     = PМӮh   Vh+1, PМӮ (n) ,r
                                             вҲ’ V       вӢҶ
                                                h+1,P ,r   (sh  , ah  ) +    PМӮ h   вҲ’ P h Vh,P вӢҶ ,r (sh , ah )

                     (i)

                                (n)                (n)   ПҖ                   ПҖ
                     вүӨ min 1, fh (sh , ah ) + PМӮh Vh+1,      PМӮ (n) ,r
                                                                        вҲ’ V h+1,P ,rвӢҶ  (s  ,
                                                                                          h ha   )
                     (ii)

                                 (n)                (n) ПҖ
                      вүӨ min 1, fh (sh , ah ) + PМӮh VМӮh+1,                 (s , a )
                                                             PМӮ (n) ,f (n) h h

                     = QМӮПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,f (n) (sh , ah ),                                                               (15)

where (i) follows from the (action) value function is at most 1, and (ii) follows from the induction
hypothesis.
Then, by the definition of VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,r (sh ), we have

                          Vh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,r (sh ) вҲ’ Vh,P
                                                 ПҖ
                                                     вӢҶ ,r (sh )


                                            h                       i
                                       = E QПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ E QПҖh,P вӢҶ ,r (sh , ah )

                                          ПҖ                            ПҖ

                                       вүӨ E QПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖh,P вӢҶ ,r (sh , ah )
                                             ПҖ
                                       (i)h                             i
                                       вүӨ E QМӮПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,f (n) (sh , ah )
                                             ПҖ

                                       = VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,f (n) (sh ),

where (i) follows from Equation (15).
Therefore, by induction, we have

                                                 VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮПҖ(n) ,r вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,f (n) .

                                                                          вҲҡ
Step 2. Then, we show that VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,f (n) вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) +                KО¶n .
By Equation (11) and the fact that the total variation distance is upper bounded by 1, with probability
at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2, we have
                                         "                                              !#
              (n)                                                        (n)
    E        fh (sh , ah ) shвҲ’1 вүӨ                E       min Оұn П•МӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )         (n)
                                                                                                          ,1   , вҲҖh вүҘ 2.
 PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ                                ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖ                                           (U      )вҲ’1
                                                                                             hвҲ’1,П•МӮ

                                                                                                                    (16)


                                                                  18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Similarly, when h = 1,
                                                                    s
                                        h                   i                                                      2
                                             (n)                                           (n)
                                                                                                                              p
                               E            f1 (s1 , a1 )       вүӨ       K E               f1 (s1 , a1 )                  вүӨ        KО¶n .                (17)
                              a1 вҲјПҖ                                          aвҲјU

Based on Corollary 1, Equation (16) and Оұn = 5ОұМӮn , we have
                        "                                   !#
    (n)                               (n)                                                                                              (n)
E bМӮh (sh , ah ) sh вүҘ E min Оұn П•МӮh (sh , ah ) (n) вҲ’1 , 1       вүҘ                                                            E         fh+1 (sh+1 , ah+1 ) sh .
ПҖ                                       ПҖ                                                (U         )                    PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ
                                                                                             h,П•МӮ

                                                                                                                                                       (18)

For the base case h = H, we have


                          ПҖ                                                       (n)
                E       VМӮH,             (s
                            PМӮ (n) ,f (n) H
                                            ) sHвҲ’1 =                     E       fH (sH , aH ) sHвҲ’1
         PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ                                                  PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ
                                                                    h                            i
                                                                      (n)
                                                                вүӨ E bHвҲ’1 (sHвҲ’1 , aHвҲ’1 )|sHвҲ’1
                                                                  ПҖ

                                                                             ПҖ
                                                                вүӨ min 1, E QМӮHвҲ’1,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sHвҲ’1 , aHвҲ’1 ) sHвҲ’1
                                                                                     ПҖ
                                                                    ПҖ
                                                                = VМӮHвҲ’1,             (s
                                                                        PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) HвҲ’1
                                                                                          ).


                         ПҖ
Assume that EPМӮ (n) ,ПҖ VМӮh+1,PМӮ (n) ,f (n)
                                           (sh+1 ) sh   вүӨ VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sh ) holds for step h + 1. Then, by
JensenвҖҷs inequality, we obtain

           ПҖ
    E VМӮh,PМӮ (n) ,f (n) (sh ) shвҲ’1
    PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ
                          (                                                                             )
                                                (n)              (n) ПҖ
                вүӨ min 1,            E          fh (sh , ah ) + PМӮh VМӮh+1,PМӮ (n) ,f (n) (sh , ah ) shвҲ’1
                                PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ
                          (                                                              "                                                     #)
                (i)       h                    i
                             (n)                                                                             ПҖ
                вүӨ min 1, E bМӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) +                               E                E         VМӮh+1,PМӮ (n) ,f (n) (sh+1 ) sh shвҲ’1
                                ПҖ                                            PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ     PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ
                           (                                                                                              )
                (ii)                    h                            i
                                             (n)
                вүӨ min 1, E                  bhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )          +       E         VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sh ) shвҲ’1
                                    ПҖ                                         PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ
                          h                                   i
                = min 1, E QМӮПҖhвҲ’1,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
                                ПҖ
                    ПҖ
                = VМӮhвҲ’1,             (s
                        PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) hвҲ’1
                                          ),

where (i) follows from Equation (18), and (ii) is due to the induction hypothesis.
By induction, we conclude that
                                                       h             i
                                                         (s)
                               VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,f (n) = E      f1 (s1 , a1 ) +                      E
                                                                                                            ПҖ
                                                                                                         VМӮ2,PМӮ (n) ,f (n) (s2 ) s1
                                                 ПҖ                                   PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ
                                                     p
                                                 вүӨ       KО¶n + VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) .

Combining Step 1 and Step 2, we conclude that
                                                                                  p
                                                 VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮПҖ(n) ,r вүӨ                  KО¶n + VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) .


                                                                                19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A.3     P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 2

The following lemma is key to ensure that RAFFLE terminates in finite episodes.
Proposition 5 (Restatement of Proposition 2). Given that the event E occurs, О¶ =
log (2|ОҰ||ОЁ|N H/Оҙ) the summation of the truncated value functions VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                                                       n
                                                                           ,bМӮ(n)
                                                                                  under exploration
policies {ПҖn }nвҲҲ[N ] is sublinear, i.e., the following bound holds:
                              X                           p                            p
                                     VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                          n
                                              ,bМӮ(n)
                                                     +        KО¶n вүӨ 32О¶Hd               ОІ3 K(d2 + K)N .
                           nвҲҲ[N ]


Proof. Note that VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) вүӨ 1 holds for any policy ПҖ and h вҲҲ [H]. We first have

                                   h                                                                       i
                                        (n) ПҖn
VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
     n
         ,bМӮ (n)
                 вҲ’ V ПҖn
                      вӢҶ
                    P ,bМӮ (n)
                              вүӨ E    PМӮ 1   VМӮ 2,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ (n)
                                                                (s1 , a1 ) вҲ’ P вӢҶ ПҖn
                                                                               1 V   вӢҶ
                                                                                  2,P ,bМӮ (n)
                                                                                              (s  1 , a1 )
                                ПҖn
                                   h                                                                                                 i
                                          (n)
                              = E PМӮ1 вҲ’ P1вӢҶ VМӮ2,ПҖPМӮn (n) ,bМӮ(n) (s1 , a1 ) + P1вӢҶ VМӮ2,ПҖPМӮn (n) ,bМӮ(n) вҲ’ V2,P  ПҖn
                                                                                                                вӢҶ ,bМӮ(n)
                                                                                                                           (s1 , a1 )
                                ПҖn
                                   h                                                                   i
                                       (n)
                              вүӨ E f1 (s1 , a1 ) + P1вӢҶ VМӮ2,ПҖPМӮn (n) ,bМӮ(n) вҲ’ V2,P        ПҖn
                                                                                            вӢҶ ,bМӮ(n)
                                ПҖn
                            вүӨ ...
                                                            "H                           #
                                                             X
                            вүӨ E(sh ,ah )вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖn )                   f   (n)
                                                                                (sh , ah ) = VPПҖвӢҶn,f (n) ,
                                                              h=1



which implies VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                   n
                       ,bМӮ(n)
                              вүӨ VPПҖвӢҶn,bМӮ(n) + VPПҖвӢҶn,f (n) .

Applying the Equation (13) and Equation (14), we obtain the following bound on the value function
VPПҖвӢҶn,bМӮ(n) :

                          H
                          X                      h                    i
          VPПҖвӢҶn,bМӮ(n) =               EвӢҶ             bМӮn (sh , ah )
                                sh вҲј(P ,ПҖn )
                          h=1      ah вҲјПҖn

                          H                                                                                                    r
                          X                                                                                                        dK
                     вүӨ                  E              Оіn П•вӢҶhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) (W (n)                 )   вҲ’1       + 15Оұn
                              shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖn )                                                 hвҲ’1,П•вӢҶ                               n
                          h=2   ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖn

                          H                                                         r
                          X
                                                     вӢҶ                                dK
                     вүӨ               E          Оіn вҲҘП•h (sh , ah )вҲҘ(W (n) )вҲ’1 + 15Оұn      .
                                sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖn )                      h,П•вӢҶ               n
                          h=1       ah вҲјПҖn


Similarly, we obtain

                              H                        h             i
                                                         (n)
                              X
             VPПҖвӢҶn,f (n) =                 EвӢҶ           fh (sh , ah )
                                     sh вҲј(P ,ПҖn )
                              h=1       ah вҲјПҖn

                              H
                              X
                                                                                                                           p
                          вүӨ                  E            Оұn П•вӢҶhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) (U (n)                 )вҲ’1
                                                                                                                       +       KО¶n
                                  shвҲ’1 вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖn )                                                hвҲ’1,П•вӢҶ
                              h=2   ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖn

                              H
                              X
                                                                                       p
                          вүӨ                EвӢҶ           Оұn вҲҘП•вӢҶh (sh , ah )вҲҘ(U (n) )вҲ’1 + KО¶n .
                                     sh вҲј(P ,ПҖn )                                     h,П•вӢҶ
                              h=1       ah вҲјПҖn


                                                                          20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Then, taking the summation of VPПҖвӢҶn,bМӮ(n) +f (n) over n вҲҲ [N ], we have
 X                              p
         VPПҖвӢҶn,f (n) +bМӮ(n) +       KО¶n
nвҲҲ[N ]
                             r                     H
                X                dK    X p       X X
         вүӨ            15Оұn          +2     KО¶n +          EвӢҶ        Оіn вҲҘП•вӢҶh (sh , ah )вҲҘ(W (n) )вҲ’1
                                  n                  sh вҲј(P ,ПҖn )                        h,П•вӢҶ
             nвҲҲ[N ]                            nвҲҲ[N ]                nвҲҲ[N ] h=1        ah вҲјПҖn


                 X     H
                       X
             +                      E           Оұn вҲҘП•вӢҶh (sh , ah )вҲҘ(U (n) )вҲ’1
                              sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖn )                               h,П•вӢҶ
                 nвҲҲ[N ] h=1      ah вҲјПҖn
                           v
         (i)   вҲҡ         H u
                         X
                           u X                                                        вӢҶ            2
         вүӨ 17ОұN dKN + ОіN   tN                                          E            вҲҘП•h (sh , ah )вҲҘ(W (n) )вҲ’1
                                                                  sh вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖn )                     h,П•вӢҶ
                                          h=1            nвҲҲ[N ]      ah вҲјПҖn

                    v
                  H u
                  X     X
                                                                                2
             + ОұN   tKN                                         вҲҘП•вӢҶh (sh , ah )вҲҘ(U (n) )вҲ’1
                    u
                                                    EвӢҶ
                                                sh вҲј(P ,ПҖn )                           h,П•вӢҶ
                      h=1            nвҲҲ[N ]        ah вҲјU


         (ii) p p                    p                 p
          вүӨ 17 О¶ 2ОІ3 dK(K + d2 )N + H 45ОІ3 О¶dK(K + d2 ) dN О¶
              p             p
           + H ОІ3 О¶(K + d2 ) dKN О¶
                p
         вүӨ 32О¶Hd ОІ3 K(d2 + K)N ,
where (i) follows from Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and importance sampling, and (ii) follows from
Lemma 10. Hence, the statement of Proposition 5 is verified.

A.4      P ROOF OF P ROPOSITION 3

Based on Proposition 5, we argue that with enough number of iterations, RAFFLE can find PМӮ Пө
satisfying the condition in line 15 of Algorithm 1.
Proposition 6 (Restatement of Proposition 3). Fix any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), Пө > 0. Suppose the algorithm
               14   2 2    2     2          3 2
                                             d K(d2 +K)/(ОҙПө2 ))
runs for N = 2 ОІ3 H d K(d +K) log (2|ОҰ||ОЁ|H
                                    Пө2                          iterations, with probability at least
                                                                         ПҖnПө                 p
1 вҲ’ Оҙ, RAFFLE can find an nПө вүӨ N in the exploration phase such that 2VМӮPМӮ (n Пө ) ,bМӮ(nПө )
                                                                                          + 2 KО¶nПө вүӨ Пө.
In other words, Algorithm 1 can output PМӮ Пө = PМӮ (nПө ) satisfying the condition in line 15. In addition

                                                    VPПҖвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPМӮПҖ(nПө ) ,r вүӨ Пө/2.


Proof. We show that the algorithm terminates by contradiction. If it does not stop, applying Propo-
sition 5, we have
                                       X                       p
                             ПөN/2 <          VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                                  n
                                                      ,bМӮ(n)
                                                             +   KО¶n
                                                        nвҲҲ[N ]
                                                          p
                                                   вүӨ 32О¶Hd ОІ3 K(d2 + K)N .

Therefore,
                                                        212 ОІ3 H 2 d2 K(d2 + K)О¶ 2
                                                N<
                                                                      Пө2
Recall О¶ = N О¶N = log (2|ОҰ||ОЁ|N H/Оҙ). Using the fact that n вүӨ c log2 (Оұn n) вҮ’ n вүӨ
4c log2 (Оұn c), вҲҖc вүҘ e2 , n вүҘ 1, Оұn вҲҲ R+ , it can be concluded that

                            214 ОІ3 H 2 d2 K(d2 + K) log2 (2|ОҰ||ОЁ|H 3 d2 K(d2 + K)/(ОҙПө2 ))
                    N<                                                                    ,
                                                           Пө2
which is a contradiction.


                                                                     21
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                  2 2          2           2           3 2   2         2
Therefore, there exists an nПө = O( H d K(d +K) log (|ОҰ||ОЁ|HПө2
                                                                d K(d +K)/(ОҙПө ))
                                                                                 ) such that PМӮ Пө =
   (nПө )
PМӮ       satisfies
                                    ПҖnПө               p
                                2VМӮPМӮ (n )   (n
                                        Пө ,bМӮ Пө )
                                                  + 2   KО¶nПө вүӨ Пө.

Combining Proposition 4, we finish the proof.


Proof of Theorem 2. Recall that PМӮ Пө is the output of RAFFLE in the nПө -iteration. Then, by Proposi-
tion 6

                                          VPвӢҶвӢҶ ,r вҲ’ VPПҖМ„вӢҶ ,r
                                                                вӢҶ
                                                   вүӨ VPМӮПҖПө ,r вҲ’ VPПҖМ„вӢҶ ,r + Пө/2
                                                   (i)
                                                   вүӨ VPМӮПҖМ„Пө ,r вҲ’ VPПҖМ„вӢҶ ,r + Пө/2
                                                   вүӨ Пө/2 + Пө/2
                                                   = Пө,

where (i) follows from the definition of ПҖМ„. The number of trajectories nПө H is at at most

                           H 3 d2 K(d2 + K) log2 (|ОҰ||ОЁ|H 3 d2 K(d2 + K)/(ОҙПө2 ))

                   O
                                                     Пө2


B      P ROOF OF T HEOREM 3

In this section, we adopt the same notations as in Appendix A. The following lemma provides an
upper bound for the estimation error of any learned model from the true model.
Lemma 4. Fix Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), for any h вҲҲ [H], n вҲҲ N+ , any policy ПҖ, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2,
                                h              i
                                   (n)
                                                   p
                          EвӢҶ      fh (sh , ah ) вүӨ 2 KО¶n + 2VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                                                  n
                                                                     ,bМӮ(n)
                                                                            .
                             sh вҲј(P ,ПҖ)
                                sh вҲјПҖ


                       (n)                  (n)
Proof. Recall that fh (s, a) = PМӮh (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвӢҶ (В·|s, a)      . Fix any policy ПҖ, for any h вүҘ 2,
                                                           TV
we have
          h                              i     h                                       i
                                                    (n)
    E       QМӮПҖh,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (sh , ah ) = E    PМӮh VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
sh вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)                               shвҲ’1 вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)
    ah вҲјПҖ                                        ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖ
                                                                      h   n                                                                 oi
                                                                                (n)                    (n)
                                          вүӨ             E              min 1, bМӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 ) + PМӮhвҲ’1 VМӮh,ПҖPМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
                                              shвҲ’1 вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)
                                                 ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖ
                                                                      h                                   i
                                          =             E              QМӮПҖhвҲ’1,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
                                              shвҲ’1 вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)
                                                 ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖ


                                          вүӨ ...
                                                        h                                i
                                          вүӨ E               QМӮПҖ1,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (s1 , a1 )
                                              a1 вҲјПҖ

                                          = VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) .                                                           (19)


                                                                    22
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Hence, for h вүҘ 2, we have
                       h              i (i)                                          h                     i
                          (n)                                                           (n)
                E        fh (sh , ah ) вүӨ                               E              bМӮhвҲ’1 (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
              sh вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)                                   shвҲ’1 вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)
                  ah вҲјПҖ                                            ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖ

                                                         (ii)                        h                                      i
                                                          вүӨ             E                QМӮПҖhвҲ’1,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
                                                                 shвҲ’1 вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)
                                                                    ahвҲ’1 вҲјПҖ

                                                         (iii)
                                                          вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) ,                                                                (20)

where (i) follows from Equation (18), (ii) follows from the definition of QМӮПҖhвҲ’1,PМӮ (n) ,bМӮ(n) (shвҲ’1 , ahвҲ’1 )
and (iii) follows from Equation (19).
                                                   h                i                           h                i                       h                i
           h            i                               (n)                                          (n)                                      (n)
E вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖ) fh (sh ,ah ) вүӨ                                                                          fh (sh , ah ) вҲ’
             (n)
                                       E               fh (sh , ah ) +                   EвӢҶ                                  E               fh (sh , ah )
    sh вҲјПҖ                        sh вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)                                sh вҲј(P ,ПҖ)                             sh вҲј(PМӮ (n) ,ПҖ)
                                     ah вҲјПҖ                                         ah вҲјПҖ                                   ah вҲјПҖ

                          (i)                           p                 p
                           вүӨ (VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n) +             KО¶n ) +        KО¶n + VМӮPМӮПҖ(n) ,bМӮ(n)
                          (ii)     p
                           вүӨ 2      KО¶n + 2VМӮPМӮПҖ(n)
                                                n
                                                    ,bМӮ(n)
                                                           ,

where the first term in (i) is due to Equation (20) and Equation (14), the second term in (i) is due to
Proposition 4 and (ii) follows from the definition of ПҖn .

                                                       H 2 d2 K(d2 +K) log2 (|ОҰ||ОЁ|N H 3 d2 K(K+d2 )/(ОҙПө2 ))
Proof of Theorem 3. By Proposition 6, let nПө = O                                 Пө2                          ,
with no more than nПө H trajectories, p     RAFFLE can learn a model PМӮ Пө , bonus bМӮПө and policy ПҖПө at the
nПө -th iteration satisfying 2VPМӮПҖПөПө,bМӮПө + 2 KО¶nПө вүӨ Пө. Then, following Lemma 4, we have
                           h                                             i
                                вҲҘPМӮhПө (В·|sh , ah ) вҲ’ PhвӢҶ (В·|sh , ah )вҲҘT V вүӨ 2 KО¶nПө + 2VPМӮПҖПөПө,bМӮПө вүӨ Пө.
                                                                             p
                   EвӢҶ
              sh вҲј(P ,ПҖ)
                 sh вҲјПҖ


C     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1 (L OWER B OUND ON S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY )
C.1     S TEP 1: C ONSTRUCTION OF H ARD MDP INSTANCES

Our hard MDP instances is inspired by Domingues et al. (2020) for tabular MDPs. However, the
lower bound in Domingues et al. (2020) requires S вүҘ K, where S, K denote the cardinality of
state and action space respectively. Our hard MDP instances remove the assumption that S вүҘ K
by constructing the action set with two types of actions. The first type of actions is mainly used
to form a large state space through a tree structure. The second type of actions is mainly used to
distinguish different MDPs. Such a construction allows us to separately treat the state space and
the action space, so that both state and action spaces can be arbitrarily large. We then explicitly
define the feature vectors for all state-action pairs and show our hard MDP instances have a low-
rank structure with dimension d = S. In a nutshell, we construct a family of HdK MDPs that are
hard to distinguish in KL divergence, while the corresponding optimal policies are very different as
shown in Figure 1.
First, we define a reference MDP M0 as follows. We start with the construction of the state space
S and the action space A.

        вҖў Let S = {sw , so , sg , sb } iвҲҲ[D],jвҲҲ[2iвҲ’1 ] {si,j }, where sw , so , sg and sb denote вҖҳwait-
                                           S

          ing
          S stateвҖҷ, вҖҳoutlier        stateвҖҷ, вҖҳgood stateвҖҷ, and вҖҳbad stateвҖҷ, respectively. The states in
                               i,j
            iвҲҲ[D],jвҲҲ[2 iвҲ’1 ] {s    } form a binary tree, where si,j denotes the j-th branch node of the
          layer i.


                                                                       23
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                    Figure 1: Hard MDP instances.



      вҖў Let A = {aw , a1 , a2 } A0 , where aw denotes вҖҳwaiting actionвҖҷ, a1 , a2 are two unique
                                S
        actions that form the binary tree, and |A0 | = K вҲ’ 3.

Then, the transition probabilities of M0 are specified through the following rules.

      вҖў The initial state is the waiting state sw .

      вҖў If the agent takes the waiting action aw before time step HМ„, waiting state sw stays on itself.
        Otherwise, sw transits to the root state s1,1 of the binary tree.
         Mathematically, Ph [sw |sw , aw ] = 1hвүӨHМ„ , and Ph [s1,1 |sw , a] = 1aМё=aw or h>HМ„ .

      вҖў When i < D, for states si,j in the binary tree, we have the following transition rules:

           вҖ“ If the agent takes actions a1 or a2 , si,j deterministically transits to its children
             si+1,2jвҲ’1 or si+1,2j , respectively.
             Mathematically, Ph [si+1,2jвҲ’1 |si,j , a1 ] = 1, and P[si+1,2j |si,j , a2 ] = 1.
           вҖ“ If the agent takes any action other than a1 or a2 , the agent will reach the outlier state
             so .
             Mathematically, Ph [so |si,j , a] = 1, вҲҖa Мё= a1 , a2 .

      вҖў Leaf state sD,j uniformly transits to good state sg and bad state sb no matter what action
        the agent takes.
         Mathematically, Ph [sg |sD,j , a] = Ph [sb |sD,j , a] = 21 , вҲҖa вҲҲ A.

      вҖў Good state sg , bad state sb , and outlier state so are absorbing states.

Now, we define the features as follows, which are S-dimensional vectors.


                                                      24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 sw                П•h (sw , aw ) = (1, 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 0, 0)                           Вөh (sw ) = (1hвүӨHМ„ , 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 0, 0)
                   П•h (sw , a) = (0, 1, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 0), a Мё= aw                       Вөh (s1,1 ) = (1h>HМ„ , 1, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 0, 0)
 si,j , i < D      П•h (si,j , aПү ) = (0, 0, ei+1,2j+ПүвҲ’2 , 0, 0, 0), Пү = 1, 2        Вөh (sk,в„“ ) = (0, 0, ek,в„“ , 0, 0, 0), 1 < k вүӨ D
                   П•h (si,j , a) = (0, 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 1, 0, 0), a Мё= a1 , a2             Вөh (so ) = (0, 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 1, 0, 0)
 sD,j              П•h (sD,j , a) = (0, 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 21 , 12 )                       Вөh (sg ) = (0, 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 1, 0)
 sg , sb           П•h (sg , a) = Вөh (sg ), П•h (sb , a) = Вөh (sb )                   Вөh (sb ) = (0, 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 0, 1)
 so                П•h (so , a) = Вөh (so ),
where 0SвҲ’5 вҲҲ RSвҲ’5 denotes the S вҲ’ 5 dimension vector with all zeros and ei,j вҲҲ RSвҲ’5 denotes
the one-hot vector that is zero everywhere except the (2iвҲ’1 + j вҲ’ 2)-th coordinate. Here 2 вүӨ i вүӨ
D, 1 вүӨ j вүӨ 2iвҲ’1 .
For each (hвҲ— , в„“вҲ— , aвҲ— ) вҲҲ {1 + D, . . . , HМ„ + D} Г— [2DвҲ’1 ] Г— A, we define an MDP M(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) through
M0 . Specifically, the only difference of M(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) from M0 is that the transition probability from
                     вҲ—                                                                  вҲ—
the leaf state sD,в„“ and action aвҲ— to the good state sg increases Пө0 , i.e. PhвҲ— [sg |sD,в„“ , aвҲ— ] = 21 + Пө0 ,
                   вҲ—
and PhвҲ— [sb |sD,в„“ , aвҲ— ] = 21 вҲ’ Пө0 , where Пө0 will be specified later. We note that the features of
                                                                   вҲ—
M(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) are the same as those of M0 except that П•hвҲ— (sD,в„“ , aвҲ— ) = (0, 0, 0SвҲ’5 , 0, 21 +Пө0 , 12 вҲ’Пө0 ).
We remark here that the cardinality K of A can be arbitrarily large, so that the resulting lower bound
will hold for both d вүӨ K and d вүҘ K regimes. In addition, although in our hard instances, d = S, it
is straightforward to generalize it to the regime with S > d if we set the outlier state So to be a set
of outlier states So .
Definition of reward: the reward can only be attained in two special states: the good state sg and
the outlier state so at the last stage H.
                                                               1
                      вҲҖS вҲҲ A, a вҲҲ A, rh (s, a) = 1{s=sg ,h=H} + 1{s=so ,h=H} ,
                                                               2
and rh (s, a) still belongs to [0, 1].

C.2     S TEP 2: A NALYSIS OF H ARD MDP I NSTANCES

Proof of Theorem 1. Let Пө0 = 2Пө.
For any MDP MhвҲ— ,aвҲ— , the optimal policy is to take action aw to stay at state sw until stage hвҲ— вҲ’ D,
                                                                        вҲ—                               вҲ—
and then take the corresponding action to the only state sD,в„“ at stage hвҲ— . At state sD,в„“ , the agent
takes the only optimal action aвҲ— . The optimal value function VM          вҲ—
                                                                            (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                                                                          = 12 + Пө0 , and the value
function of the output policy of Alg is given by
                                         1                                  вҲ—
                     VMПҖМӮП„
                          (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                        = + Пө0 PПҖМӮMП„ (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) [shвҲ— = sв„“ , ahвҲ— = aвҲ— ],                     (21)
                                         2
where PПҖМӮMП„ (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) is the probability distribution over the states and actions (sh , ah ) following the
Markov policy ПҖМӮП„ in the MDP M(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) . We remark that the reward of outlier state are specially
designed to be 1/2 at stage H to make Equation (21) hold for policy ПҖМӮП„ falling into the outlier state.
Hence,
                                                                                         вҲ—
                 вҲ—
                VM (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                    ПҖМӮП„
                                 вҲ’ VM  (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                                     = Пө0 (1 вҲ’ PПҖМӮMП„ (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) [shвҲ— = sв„“ , ahвҲ— = aвҲ— ])
                                                                                         вҲ—
                                                  = 2Пө(1 вҲ’ PПҖМӮMП„ (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) [shвҲ— = sв„“ , ahвҲ— = aвҲ— ]).
and
              вҲ—                                                                      вҲ—                   1
             VM (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                 ПҖМӮП„
                              вҲ’ VM  (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                                  вүӨ Пө вҮ” PПҖМӮMП„ (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) [shвҲ— = sв„“ , ahвҲ— = aвҲ— ] вүҘ       .     (22)
                                                                                                         2
The transitions of all MDPs are the same when the leaves states are reached. We define the event

                       П„                ПҖМӮП„                   в„“вҲ—       вҲ—    1
                      Оө(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) = PM(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) [sh = s , ah = a ] вүҘ
                                                          вҲ—        вҲ—            .
                                                                            2


                                                           25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                              вҲ—                       ПҖМӮП„
From Equation (22), the event is equal to the event {VM          (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                                                               вҲ’ VM      (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                                                                                       вүӨ Пө}. As a result,
                     h               i                h                                               i
                                                        вҲ—                      ПҖМӮП„
       P(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) ОөП„(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) = P(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) VM (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                                                        вҲ’ VM      (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                                                                                                вүӨ Пө вүҘ 1 вҲ’ Оҙ.

                               n=1 1{(sn
              П„
                              PП„                                     P                 П„
Recall that N(h вҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) =            ,sn )=(sв„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )} such that
                                       hвҲ— hвҲ—
                                                                        (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) N(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) вүӨ П„ . This
inequality holds because the agent is likely to fall into the outlier state so . We denote P0 and E0 to
be with respect to M0 .
Now, we invoke an intermediate result in the proof of Theorem 7 in Domingues et al. (2020) to
conclude that

              h
                 П„
                             i   1            h
                                                 П„
                                                               i     1
            E0 N(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) вүҘ        1 вҲ’ P0 {Оө(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) } log     вҲ’ log(2) .
                                16Пө2                                 Оҙ
Summing over all (hвҲ— , в„“вҲ— , aвҲ— ), we have
                   X              h                i
                                     П„
       E0 [П„ ] вүҘ             E0 N(h    вҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )

                         (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
                              пЈ®пЈ«                                                     пЈ¶           пЈ№
                          1 пЈ°пЈӯ                    X              h              i 1
                       вүҘ        HМ„LK вҲ’                   P0 ОөП„(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) пЈё log( ) вҲ’ HМ„LK log 2пЈ» .                       (23)
                         16Пө2                                                     Оҙ
                                             (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,a )
                                                       вҲ—


Notice that
                                             пЈ®                                                                    пЈ№
                         h               i
                                                               1{PПҖМӮMП„
          X                                       X
                      P0 ОөП„(hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— ) = E0 пЈ°                                      [shвҲ— =sв„“вҲ— ,ahвҲ— =aвҲ— ]вүҘ 21 }
                                                                                                                  пЈ» вүӨ 1.   (24)
                                                                     (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )
      (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )                            (hвҲ— ,в„“вҲ— ,aвҲ— )

Substituting Equation (24) into Equation (23) yields

                                     1                          1
                          E0 [П„ ] вүҘ          HМ„LK  вҲ’  1   log(    )  вҲ’ HМ„LK log 2
                                    16Пө2                        Оҙ
                                     1               1
                                  вүҘ      HМ„LK log( ),
                                    32Пө2             Оҙ
where we use the fact that Оҙ < 1/16. With the assumption of K вүҘ 3, S вүҘ 6, we have d = S. Taking
HМ„ = H 3 and with the assumption of D вүӨ H/3, we have

                                                    HdK           1
                                      E0 [П„ ] = в„Ұ           log( ) .
                                                      Пө2          Оҙ
Then following the analysis similar to that for Corollary 8 in Domingues et al. (2020), with proba-
bility at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, the number of iterarion is at least

                                                HdK         1
                                           в„Ұ           log(   )    .
                                                 Пө2         Оҙ



D     A LGORITHM 2: R EP L EARN AND P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
We first present the full algorithm in Section 6 below as Algorithm 2.

D.1     S UPPORTING L EMMAS

We first show that QПҖPМӮ ,h,r can approximate QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r well over distribution {qh }hвҲҲ[H] by following
two lemmas.
Lemma 5. Given any Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1). Let PМӮ be the output of Algorithm 1, for any policy ПҖ and rewards
r, with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, we have
                                         h                                            i
                       E(sh ,ah )вҲј(PМӮ ,ПҖ) QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вүӨПө
                                         h                                            i
                     E(sh ,ah )вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖ) QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вүӨПө.


                                                               26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 2 RepLearn: Representation Learning in Planning Phase of RAFFLE
 1: Input: Sample size Nf , state-action pair distributions {qh }H    h=1 , special designed reward func-
    tion {rh,t }hвҲҲ[H],tвҲҲ[T ] and policy {ПҖ t }tвҲҲ[T ] , and estimated transition kernel PМӮ from the output
    of Algorithm 1, model class: ОҰ.
                 0,0
 2: Initialize Dh = вҲ….
 3: for n = 1, . . . , Nf do
 4:    for h = 1, . . . , H do
 5:       for t = 1, . . . , T do
 6:          Choose (sn,t          n,t                    n,t n,t           n,t
                          h , ah ) вҲј qh and add (sh , ah ) to dataset Dh = Dh
                                                                                    nвҲ’1,t
                                                                                          вҲӘ (sn,t  n,t
                                                                                              h , ah ).
 7:       end for
 8:    end for
 9: end for
10: for h = 1, . . . , H do
11:    Learn (П•Мғh , wМғh1 , . . . , wМғhT ) as in Equation (4).
12: end for
13: Output: П•Мғ = {П•Мғh }hвҲҲ[H] .



Proof. Define fЛҶh (sh , ah ) = PМӮh (В·|sh , ah ) вҲ’ P вӢҶ (В·|sh , ah )    and fЛҶ is a collection of all fЛҶh , i.e.
n o                                                                TV
 fЛҶh      .
      hвҲҲ[H]

                                                       h                                            i
                                  E(sh ,ah )вҲј(PМӮ ,ПҖ) QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah )
                                      (i)                 h                     i
                                      вүӨ E(sh ,ah )вҲј(PМӮ ,ПҖ) QМӮПҖh,PМӮ ,fЛҶ(sh , ah )
                                      (ii)
                                      вүӨ VМӮPМӮПҖ,fЛҶ
                                      (iii)
                                       вүӨ Пө/2,                                                                             (25)

where (i) follows from Equation (15), (ii) follows from the definition of VМӮ and QМӮ, and (iii) follows
from the proof of Theorem 2.
Then for the second inequality,
                       h                                                  i
            E              QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah )
  (sh ,ah )вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖ)
                              h                                                  i
     вүӨ          E                 QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah )
       (sh ,ah )вҲј(PМӮ ,ПҖ)
                         h                                      i                   h                                       i
    + E(sh ,ah )вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖ) QПҖ                   ПҖ                                      ПҖ                   ПҖ
                           P вӢҶ ,h,r (sh ,ah )вҲ’QPМӮ ,h,r (sh ,ah ) вҲ’E(sh ,ah )вҲј(PМӮ ,ПҖ) QP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh ,ah )вҲ’QPМӮ ,h,r (sh ,ah )

     (i)
     вүӨ Пө/2 + VPМӮПҖ,fЛҶ
     (ii)
      вүӨ Пө,

where the first term in (i) is due to Equation (25) and Equation (14), the second term in (i) is due to
Step 1 in Proposition 4 and (ii) follows from the proof of Theorem 2.


Lemma 6. Given any Оҙ, Пө вҲҲ (0, 1) and the output of Algorithm 1, under Assumption 2, for
any policy ПҖ and rewards r, let the input distributions {qh }H       h=1 are bounded with constant
CB . Denote Cmin = О·Cmin         B
                                    . Then with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ, for each h вҲҲ [H],
             h                                            i
E(sh ,ah )вҲјqh QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вүӨ ПөCmin .


                                                                  27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Proof. First, together with Assumption 2, for any (s, a) вҲҲ S Г— A, we have qh (s, a) вүӨ
        0
Cmin PПҖh (s, a), then
                                h                                             i
                   E(sh ,ah )вҲјqh QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah )
                          Z
                      = qh (sh , ah ) QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah ) dsh dah
                          Z
                      (i)             0
                      =       Cmin PПҖh (sh ) QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah ) dsh dah
                                                 h                                               i
                      = Cmin           E           QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ , h,r (sh , ah )
                                  (sh ,ah )вҲј(P вӢҶ ,ПҖ 0 )


                       (ii)
                        вүӨ ПөCmin ,

where (i) follows Assumption 2 and (ii) follows Lemma 5.



The lemma above shows that for any reward r, QПҖPМӮ ,h,r (sh , ah ) can be the target of QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah )
when (sh , ah ) are chosen from given distribution qh .
We then show that for any h, when reward r is set to be zero at step h, QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r has a linear structure
w.r.t П•вӢҶh .
Lemma 7. For any h вҲҲ [H], policy ПҖ and given (sh , ah ) вҲҲ S Г— A, given any r such that r is set
to be zero at step h, i.e. rh = 0, then QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) is linear with respect to П•вӢҶ (sh , ah ), i.e. there
exist a whвӢҶ such that QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) = вҹЁП•вӢҶh (sh , ah ), whвӢҶ вҹ©.



Proof.

             QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,r (sh , ah ) = rh (sh , ah ) + Esh+1 вҲјP вӢҶ (В·|sh ,ah ) VPПҖвӢҶ ,h+1,r (sh+1 ) sh , ah

                                     Z
                                   = P вӢҶ (sh+1 |sh , ah )VPПҖвӢҶ ,h+1,r (sh+1 )dsh+1
                                                     Z
                                         вӢҶ               вӢҶ             ПҖ
                                   = П•h (sh , ah ), Вөh (sh+1 )VP вӢҶ ,h+1,r (sh+1 )dsh+1

                                  = вҹЁП•вӢҶh (sh , ah ), whвӢҶ вҹ© ,

where whвӢҶ =        ВөвӢҶh (sh+1 )VPПҖвӢҶ ,h+1,r (sh+1 )dsh+1 .
               R


D.2       P ROOF OF T HEOREM 4
                                                          t
Proof of Theorem 4. We allow П• and QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t to apply to all the samples in a dataset matrix si-
                               N ,t                                       N ,t                   t          N ,t
multaneously, i.e. П•h (Dh f ) = (П•h (s1,t
                                      h ), . . . , П•h (sh
                                                          f
                                                            ))вҠӨ вҲҲ RNf Г—d and QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f ) =
      t                       t          N ,t
(QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (s1,t           ПҖ
                h ), . . . , QPМӮ ,h,r h,t (sh
                                              f
                                                ))вҠӨ вҲҲ RNf . After we estimating П•Мғh and then taking it as
known, from the property of linear regression in Equation (4), for any reward function rh,t , any
policy ПҖ t we got

                                       N ,t                   N ,t          N ,t          N ,t
                      eht = (П•Мғh (Dh f )вҠӨ П•Мғh (Dh f ))вҖ  П•Мғh (Dh f )вҠӨ QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )
                      w
                              N ,t                                    t          N ,t
                                 eht = P
                      П•Мғh (Dh f )w                        N ,t   QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f ),
                                                П•Мғh (Dh f )



                                                                     28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                         N ,t              N ,t                   N ,t              N ,t
where P               N ,t     = П•Мғh (Dh f )(П•Мғh (Dh f )вҠӨ П•Мғh (Dh f ))вҖ  П•Мғh (Dh f )вҠӨ , represents the projection
            П•Мғh (Dh f )
                                                                          N ,t
operator to the column spaces of П•Мғh (Dh f ). Then


                                                                          2
    X                                           t                  N ,t
              PвҠҘ           Nf ,t       QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )
                   П•Мғh (Dh         )
   tвҲҲ[T ]
                                                                t                         2
                              N ,t                                             N ,t
          X
   =                           eht вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )
                    П•Мғh (Dh f )w
         tвҲҲ[T ]
   (i)                                               вӢҶ              t                         2
                              N ,t                                               N ,t
          X
   вүӨ                П•вӢҶh (Dh f )wht вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )
          tвҲҲ[T ]
            Nf                                                                     2
                               t
                                                            ПҖt
          X X
   =                        QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (sn,t
                                            h   , an,t
                                                   h   ) вҲ’ Q           (s
                                                            PМӮ ,h,r h,t h
                                                                         n,t n,t
                                                                            , ah )
         tвҲҲ[T ] n=1
                                                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                                                              T Nf log 2Оҙ
   (ii)
                                                                                                                     2
                   X                                                t                                    t
    вүӨ Nf                   E(sh ,ah )вҲјqh                      QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (sn,t
                                                                              h   , an,t
                                                                                     h   ) вҲ’ QПҖ
                                                                                                         (s
                                                                                              PМӮ ,h,r h,t h
                                                                                                           n,t n,t
                                                                                                              , ah )     +
                                                                                                                                                  2
                  tвҲҲ[T ]
                                                                                                                                        s
   (iii)            X                                    h          t                                    t
                                                                                                                                i           T Nf log 2Оҙ
    вүӨ Nf                    E(sh ,ah )вҲјqh                    QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (sn,t  n,t    ПҖ             n,t n,t
                                                                             h , ah ) вҲ’ QPМӮ ,h,r h,t (sh , ah )                     +
                                                                                                                                                2
                   tвҲҲ[T ]
                                        s
   (iv)                                          T Nf log 2Оҙ
    вүӨ ПөCmin Nf T +                                           ,                                                                                            (26)
                                                     2



                                                        eht }tвҲҲ[T ] , (ii) follows HoeffdingвҖҷs inequality,
where (i) follows from minimality of {П•Мғth }tвҲҲ[T ] and {w
                                        t                                             t
(iii) follows that QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (sn,t  n,t    ПҖ             n,t n,t
                                   h , ah ) вҲ’ QPМӮ ,h,r h,t (sh , ah ) вүӨ 1 and (iv) follows Lemma 6.

As a result:


                                                                    2
                                                N ,t           вӢҶ
 X
          PвҠҘ      N ,t       П•вӢҶh (Dh f )wht
            П•Мғh (Dh f )
tвҲҲ[T ]
                                                                                 2
          X                                          t                  N ,t
   =                PвҠҘ        Nf ,t             QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )
                      П•Мғh (Dh               )
         tвҲҲ[T ]
                  (                                                                                                                                                    )
                                                                                  2                                                                                2
          X                          t          N ,t                                                                t            N ,t                   N ,t
   вүӨ                   P вҠҘ Nf ,t QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )                                 +       P вҠҘ Nf ,t          QПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (Dh f ) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )
                        П•Мғh (Dh )                                                              П•Мғh (Dh  )
         tвҲҲ[T ]
                                                    s
   (i)    X                                              T Nf log 2Оҙ   X                     t            N ,t         t          N ,t
   вүӨ               ПөCmin Nf T +                                      +   Пғ12 (P вҠҘ Nf ,t )вҲҘQПҖP вӢҶ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )) вҲ’ QПҖPМӮ ,h,rh,t (Dh f )вҲҘ2
                                                             2                 П•Мғh (Dh )
         tвҲҲ[T ]                                                                tвҲҲ[T ]
                                            r
   (ii)                                                      2
    вүӨ 2ПөCmin Nf T +                                 2T Nf log ,
                                                             Оҙ



where (i) follows from вҲҘAvвҲҘ2 вүӨ Пғ1 (A) вҲҘvвҲҘ2 and (ii) follows from that Пғ1 (P вҠҘ                                                               N ,t   ) вүӨ 1 and
                                                                                                                                    П•Мғh (Dh f )
the process to derive Equation (26).


                                                                                          29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


           Table 1: Comparison among provably efficient RL algorithms under low-rank MDPs.

            M ETHODS                                              S ETTING                     S AMPLE C OMPLEXITY
                                                                                                    22    9 7
            FLAMBE (AGARWAL ET AL ., 2020) L OW- RANK MDP                                      OМғ( H ПөK
                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                         d
                                                                                                           )
                                                                                                  H 5 d3
                                                                                                       LV K
                                                                                                            5
            MOFFLE (M ODI ET AL ., 2021)                          L OW- NONNEGATIVE - RANK OМғ(        Пө2 О·
                                                                                                          )
            HOMER (M ISRA ET AL ., 2020)                          B LOCK MDP               OМғ(d8 H 4 K 4 ( Пө12 + О·13 ))
                                                                                                    3 2     2
            RAFFLE (O URS )                                       L OW- RANK MDP               OМғ( H d K(d
                                                                                                        Пө2
                                                                                                           +K)
                                                                                                               )
             1
                 We do not include reward-known RL under low-rank MDPs in this table and only focus
                 reward-free RL. The detailed discussion of reward-known RL under low-rank MDPs can be
                 found in Section 7.

We finally use the technique in Du et al. (2021b) to derive the super population guarantee.
                r
                             2
2ПөCmin Nf T + 2T Nf log
                             Оҙ
                                         2
                             N ,t     вӢҶ
      X
   вүҘ        P вҠҘ Nf ,t П•вӢҶh (Dh f )wht
                      П•Мғh (Dh     )
          tвҲҲ[T ]                                          F
                                               вҖ                                 2
                 Nf ,t         Nf ,t вҠӨ  Nf ,t        Nf ,t вҠӨ         N ,t     вӢҶ
    =  I вҲ’ П•Мғh (Dh ) П•Мғh (Dh ) П•Мғh (Dh ) П•Мғh (Dh )             П•вӢҶh (Dh f )wht
                                                                                F

           tвӢҶ вҠӨ вӢҶ      Nf ,t вҠӨ         Nf ,t     Nf ,t вҠӨ       Nf ,t вҖ       Nf ,t вҠӨ   N ,t вӢҶ
      X
    =   (wh ) П•h (Dh ) I вҲ’ П•Мғh (Dh )(П•Мғh (Dh ) П•Мғh (Dh )) П•Мғh (Dh ) П•вӢҶh (Dh f )wht
          tвҲҲ[T ]
                              вӢҶ                               вӢҶ
           X
    =              Nf (wht )вҠӨ D Nf ,t (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )wht
                                      Dh
          tвҲҲ[T ]
    (i)          X                вӢҶ                           вӢҶ
    вүҘ 0.9                 Nf (wht )вҠӨ Dqh (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )wht
                 tвҲҲ[T ]

                                                        вӢҶ 2
                     X
    = 0.9Nf                   Dqh (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )1/2 wht
                     tвҲҲ[T ]
                                                    2
    вүҘ 0.9Nf Dqh (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )1/2 WhвӢҶ
                                                    F
    (ii)                                        2
    вүҘ 0.9Nf Dqh (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )1/2                     Пғd2 (WhвӢҶ )
                                                F
                                    CD T    2
    вүҘ 0.9Nf Dqh (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )1/2            ,
                                F      d
where (i) follows from lemma B.1 in Du et al. (2021b) and Nf can be large enough, and (ii) follows
                2         2 2
from that вҲҘABвҲҘF вүҘ вҲҘAвҲҘF Пғmin        (B), where Пғmin (B) denote the smallest singular value of matrix
B. Then
                                                                  s
                                             2   2ПөdC min      d    2 log 2Оҙ
                        Dqh (П•вӢҶh , П•Мғh )1/2    вүӨ          +                  .
                                             F    0.9CD     0.9CD    T Nf



E     M ORE D ISCUSSION ON R ELATED W ORK
In this section, we first summarize the directly comparable work in Appendix E.

E.1        L OW- RANK MDP S IN EXTENDED RL SETTINGS

Many studies have been developed on various extended low-rank models. Wang et al. (2022); Uehara
et al. (2022a) studied partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) with latent low-rank


                                                                       30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


structure. Zhan et al. (2022) studied predictive state representations model, and applied their results
to POMDP with latent low-rank structure. Cheng et al. (2022); Agarwal et al. (2022) studied benefits
of multitask representation learning under low-rank MDPs. Huang et al. (2022) proposed a general
safe RL framework and instantiated it to low-rank MDPs. Ren et al. (2022) studied reward-known
RL under low-rank MDPs and proposed a spectral method to replace the computation oracle. We
note that even given those further developments, our results on lower bound and representation
learning are still completely new, and our algorithm design and result on sample complexity are so
far still the best-known result for standard reward-free low-rank MDPs.

E.2   D ISCUSSION ON OPTIMISTIC MLE- BASED APPROACH FOR DIFFERENT SETTINGS

There is some concurrent work also using an optimistic MLE-based approach for different settings
(POMDP) (Liu et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2022a). We elaborate the key differences between our paper
and Liu et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2022a) as follows.

       вҖў The two POMDP papers mentioned above study reward-known setting, whereas our focus
         here is on the reward-free setting.
       вҖў Although optimistic MLE-based approach is used in both settings, the design of exploration
         policy in the two settings are different. Our algorithm identifies which estimated model is
         used for exploration policy design and then calculate the exploration policy based on bonus
         terms designed for the value function. However, the POMDP papers construct a confidence
         set about the true model and solve an optimization problem within this generic model set.
         Such an oracle may not be easy to realize computationally.
       вҖў Due to the hardness of POMDP, MLE approach only guarantees that the estimated distri-
         bution of the trajectories is close to the true one. In contrast, in low-rank MDP we study
         here, we show that the estimation error for the transition probabilities is controlled at each
         time step.

F     AUXILIARY L EMMAS
         (n)                 (n)
Recall fh (s, a) = вҲҘPМӮh (В·|s, a) вҲ’ PhвӢҶ (В·|s, a)вҲҘT V represents the estimation error in the n-th itera-
tion at step h, given state s and action a, in terms of the total variation distance. By using Theorem 21
in Agarwal et al. (2020), we are able to guarantee that under all exploration policies, the estimation
error can be bounded with high probability.
Lemma 8. (MLE guarantee). Given Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), we have the following inequality holds for any
n, h вүҘ 2 with probability at least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2:
        nвҲ’1
        X                                   n                                           log (2|ОҰ||ОЁ|nH/Оҙ)
                                           fh (sh , ah )2 вүӨ nО¶n ,

                         EвӢҶ                                               where О¶n :=                     .
        П„ =0
                  shвҲ’1 вҲј(P ,ПҖП„ )                                                                 n
                 (ahвҲ’1 ,ah )вҲјU (A)
               sh вҲјP вӢҶ (В·|shвҲ’1 ,ahвҲ’1 )


In addition, for h = 1,
                                           nвҲ’1
                                           X                    n
                                                               f1 (s1 , a1 )2 вүӨ nО¶n .

                                                     E
                                                  a1 вҲјU (A)
                                           П„ =0


Divide both sides of the result of lemma Lemma 8 by n, and define О n = U(ПҖ1 , . . . , ПҖnвҲ’1 ), we
have the following corollary which will be intensively used in the analysis.
Corollary 2. Given Оҙ вҲҲ (0, 1), the following inequality holds for any n, h вүҘ 2 with probability at
least 1 вҲ’ Оҙ/2:                                     n
                                                  fh (sh , ah )2 вүӨ О¶n .

                                      EвӢҶ
                                            shвҲ’1 вҲј(P ,О n )
                                            ahвҲ’1 ,ah вҲјU (A)
                                         sh вҲјP вӢҶ (В·|shвҲ’1 ,ahвҲ’1 )


In addition, for h = 1,
                                                             n
                                                            f1 (s1 , a1 )2 вүӨ О¶n .

                                                    E
                                               a1 вҲјU (A)


                                                                   31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


The following lemma (Dann et al., 2017) will be useful to measure the difference between
two value functions under two MDPs and reward functions. We define Ph Vh+1 (sh , ah ) =
EsвҲјPh (В·|sh ,ah ) [V (s)] for shorthand.
Lemma 9. (Simulation lemma). Suppose P1 and P2 are two MDPs and r1 , r2 are the corresponding
reward functions. Given a policy ПҖ, we have,
 ПҖ                 ПҖ
Vh,P1 ,r1
          (sh ) вҲ’ Vh,P 2 ,r2
                             (sh )
                   H
                   X
                                           r1 (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) вҲ’ r2 (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) + (P1,hвҖІ вҲ’ P2,hвҖІ )VhПҖвҖІ +1,P1 ,r (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ )|sh

               =               E
                           s вҖІ вҲј(P2 ,ПҖ)
                            h
                   hвҖІ =h      a вҖІ вҲјПҖ
                               h

                   H
                   X
                                           r1 (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) вҲ’ r2 (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ ) + (P1,hвҖІ вҲ’ P2,hвҖІ )VhПҖвҖІ +1,P2 ,r (shвҖІ , ahвҖІ )|sh .

               =               E
                        s вҖІ вҲј(P1 ,ПҖ)
                   hвҖІ =h h ahвҖІ вҲјПҖ


The following lemma is a standard inequality in regret analysis for linear models in reinforcement
learning (see Lemma G.2 in Agarwal et al. (2020) and Lemma 10 in Uehara et al. (2021)).
Lemma 10. (Elliptical potential lemma). Consider a sequence of dГ—d positive semidefinite matrices
X1 , . . . , XN with tr(Xn ) вүӨ 1 for all n вҲҲ [N ]. Define M0 = О»0 I and Mn = MnвҲ’1 + Xn . Then
               N
              X
                           вҲ’1
                                                                                N
                  tr Xn MnвҲ’1    вүӨ 2 log det(MN ) вҲ’ 2 log det(M0 ) вүӨ 2d log 1 +       .
              n=1
                                                                               dО»0

                                        вҲ’1 N
If we choose any subset of the set {Xn MnвҲ’1 }n=1 , we can still get a sublinear summation as follows.


                                                              32
