Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


TASK -AGNOSTIC O NLINE M ETA -L EARNING IN N ON -
STATIONARY E NVIRONMENTS

 Anonymous authors
 Paper under double-blind review



                                            A BSTRACT
         Online meta-learning has recently emerged as a marriage between batch meta-
         learning and online learning, for achieving the capability of quick adaptation on
         new tasks in a lifelong manner. However, most existing approaches focus on the re-
         strictive setting where the distribution of the online tasks remains fixed with known
         task boundaries. In this work we relax these assumptions and propose a novel
         algorithm for task-agnostic online meta-learning in non-stationary environments.
         More specifically, we first propose two simple but effective detection mechanisms
         of task switches and distribution shift based on empirical observations, which serve
         as a key building block for more elegant online model updates in our algorithm: the
         task switch detection mechanism allows reusing of the best model available for the
         current task at hand, and the distribution shift detection mechanism differentiates
         the meta model update so as to preserve the knowledge for in-distribution tasks and
         quickly learn the new knowledge for out-of-distribution tasks. Motivated by the
         recent advance in online learning, our online meta model updates are based only on
         the current data, which eliminates the need of storing previous data as required in
         most existing methods. This crucial choice is also well supported by our theoretical
         analysis of dynamic regret in online meta-learning, where a sublinear regret can
         be achieved by updating the meta model at each round using the current data only.
         Empirical studies on three different benchmarks clearly demonstrate the significant
         advantage of our algorithm over related baseline approaches.


1   I NTRODUCTION
Two key aspects of human intelligence are the abilities to quickly learn complex tasks and continually
update their knowledge base for faster learning of future tasks. Meta-learning (Koch et al., 2015;
Ravi & Larochelle, 2016; Finn et al., 2017) and online learning (Hannan, 1957; Shalev-Shwartz
& Singer, 2007; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006) are two main research directions that try to equip
learning agents with these abilities. In particular, meta-learning aims to facilitate quick learning
of new unseen tasks by building a prior over model parameters based on the knowledge of related
tasks, whereas online learning deals with the problem where the task data is sequentially revealed
to a learning agent. To achieve the capability of fast adaptation on new tasks in a lifelong manner,
online meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017; Harrison et al., 2020; Yao et al., 2020) has attracted much
attention recently. Considering the setup where online tasks arrive one at a time, the objective of
online meta-learning is to continuously update the meta prior based on which the new task can be
learnt more quickly after the agent encounters more tasks.
In online meta-learning, the agent typically maintains two separate models, i.e., the meta-model to
capture the underlying common knowledge across tasks and the online task model for solving the
current task in hand. Most of the existing studies (Finn et al., 2017; Acar et al., 2021) in online
meta-learning follow a “resetting” strategy: quickly adapt the online task model from the meta model
using the current data, update the meta model and reset the online task model back to the updated
meta model at the beginning of the next task. This strategy generally works well when the task
boundaries are known and the task distribution remains stationary. However, in many real-world data
streams the task boundaries are not directly visible to the agent (Rajasegaran et al., 2022; Caccia
et al., 2020; Harrison et al., 2020), and the task distributions can dynamically change during the
online learning stage. Therefore, in this work we seek to solve the online meta-learning problem in
such more realistic settings.


                                                  1
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Needless to say, how to efficiently solve the online meta-learning problem without knowing the task
boundaries in the non-stationary environments is nontrivial due to the following key questions: (1)
How to update the meta model and the online task model? Clearly, the “resetting” strategy at the
moment of new data arriving is not desirable, as adapting from the previous task model is preferred
when the new data belongs to the same task with the previous data. On the other hand, the meta model
update should be distinct between in-distribution (IND) tasks, where the current knowledge should be
preserved, and out-of-distribution tasks (OOD), where the new knowledge should be learnt quickly.
(2) How to make the system lightweight for fast online learning? The nature of online meta-learning
precludes sophisticated learning algorithms, as the agent should be able to quickly adapt to different
tasks typically without access to the previous data. And dealing with the environment non-stationarity
should not significantly increase the computational cost, considering that the environment could
change fast during online learning.
The main contribution of this work is a novel online meta-learning algorithm in non-stationary
environments without knowing the task boundaries, which appropriately addresses the problems
above. More specifically, we first propose two simple but effective mechanisms to detect the task
switches using the classification loss and detect the distribution shift using the Helmholtz free energy
(Liu et al., 2020), respectively, as motivated by empirical observations. Based on these detection
mechanisms, our algorithm provides a finer treatment on the online model updates, which brings in the
following benefits: (1) (task knowledge reuse) The detection of task switches enables our algorithm
to reuse the best model available for each task, avoiding the "resetting" to the meta model at each
step as in most previous studies; (2) (judicious meta model update) The detection of distribution shift
allows our algorithm to update the meta model in a way that the new knowledge can be quickly learnt
for out-of-distribution tasks whereas the previous knowledge can be preserved for in-distribution
tasks; (3) (efficient memory usage) Motivated by the advance in online learning (Mokhtari et al., 2016;
Hazan et al., 2016) where updating the model online with the current data is sufficient to guarantee a
sublinear regret, our algorithm does not reuse/store any of the previous data and updates the meta
model at each online episode based only on the current data, which clearly differs from most existing
studies (Finn et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020; Rajasegaran et al., 2022) in online meta-learning. This
design choice is also well supported by our theoretical analysis which shows that updating the meta
model at each round with only the current data can lead to desirable sublinear dynamic regret growth.
Extensive experiments in three different benchmarks clearly show that our algorithm significantly
outperforms existing methods.
Related Work: Meta-learning. Also known as learning to learn, meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017;
Vinyals et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017) is a powerful tool for leveraging past experience from related
tasks to quickly learn good task-specific models for new unseen tasks. As a pioneering method
that drives recent success in meta-learning, model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) (Finn et al.,
2017) seeks to find good meta-initialization such that one or a few gradient descent steps from the
meta-initialization leads to a good task-specific model for a new task. Several variants of MAML have
been introduced (Finn & Levine, 2018; Finn et al., 2018; Raghu et al., 2019; Rajeswaran et al., 2019;
Nichol & Schulman, 2018; Nichol et al., 2018; Mi et al., 2019; Zhou et al., 2019). Other approaches
are essentially model based (Santoro et al., 2016; Bertinetto et al., 2018; Ravi & Larochelle, 2016;
Munkhdalai & Yu, 2017) and metric space based (Koch et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2016; Snell et al.,
2017; Sung et al., 2018).
Online Learning. In online learning (Hannan, 1957; Cesa-Bianchi & Lugosi, 2006; Hazan et al.,
2007), the cost functions are sequentially revealed to an agent which is required to select an action
before seeing each cost. One of the most studied approach is follow the leader (FTL) (Hannan, 1957),
which updates the parameters at each step using all previously seen loss functions. Regularized
versions of FTL have also been introduced to improve stability (Abernethy et al., 2009; Shalev-
Shwartz et al., 2012). Similar in spirit to our work in terms of computational resources, online
gradient descent (OGD) (Zinkevich, 2003) takes a gradient descent step at each round using only the
revealed loss. However, traditional online learning methods do not efficiently leverage past experience
and optimize for zero-shot performance without any adaptation. In this work, we study the online
meta-learning problem, in which the goal is to optimize for quick adaptation on future tasks as the
agent continually sees more tasks.
Continual Learning. Continual learning (CL; a.k.a lifelong learning) focuses on overcoming
“catastrophic forgetting” (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989; Ratcliff, 1990) when learning from a sequence
of non-stationary data distributions. Existing approaches are rehearsal-based (Lopez-Paz & Ranzato,


                                                   2
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


2017; Chaudhry et al., 2018; Riemer et al., 2018), regularization-based (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017;
Aljundi et al., 2018), and expansion-based (Rusu et al., 2016; Yoon et al., 2018; Sarwar et al.,
2019). For instance, rehearsal-based methods store a subset of previous tasks data and reuse it
for experience “replay” to avoid forgetting. However, traditional CL methods evaluate the final
model on all previously seen tasks so as to measure forgetting. In this work we are interested in
online meta-learning and evaluate models with the average online performance (e.g., accuracy) after
adaptation, which better captures the ability to quickly adapt to new online tasks (Caccia et al., 2020).
Even though we do not specifically focus on avoiding forgetting, we update the meta-model in a
way that preserves knowledge of in-distribution domain while also improving fast adaptation for
out-of-distribution domains, as demonstrated in our various experiments.
Online Meta-learning. Online meta learning was first introduced in Finn et al. (2019). Pioneering
methods (Finn et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020) follow a FTL-like design approach,
which requires storing previous tasks and leads to a linear growth of memory requirement. Follow-
the-regularized-leader (FTRL) (Shalev-Shwartz et al., 2012) approach has also been extended to
the online meta learning setting in (Balcan et al., 2019; Khodak et al., 2019), resulting in a better
memory requirement. Acar et al. (2021) proposed a memory-efficient approach based on summarizing
previous task experiences into one state vector. However, these approaches require knowledge of task
boundaries and "reset" the task model to the meta model at each online episode (Finn et al., 2017;
Denevi et al., 2019). Similar to Acar et al. (2021), our algorithm also overcomes the linear memory
scaling. But unlike their method, our algorithm does not have access to task boundaries and can
operate under dynamic environments. The method in Rajasegaran et al. (2022) tries to alleviate the
"resetting" issue by updating the online model always starting from its previous state, which however
needs to store previous models and has limited performance especially in dynamic environments
where successive tasks can be very different.
None of the methods above considered the online meta-learning problem in a dynamic environment
setting where the task distributions change substantially over time without knowing the task bound-
aries. Caccia et al. (2020) is the first work that empirically evaluated the proposed algorithm in
a dynamic environment, but did not propose a method to quickly learn the knowledge for out-of-
distribution tasks. In stark contrast, we update the meta representations in a way that preserves the
in-distribution knowledge while continually improving fast adaptation for out-of-distribution tasks.

2    BACKGROUND AND P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Background. Before introducing the online meta-learning problem in non-stationary environments,
we first briefly discuss some related concepts.
Meta-learning via MAML. Meta-learning (Finn et al., 2017; Vinyals et al., 2016; Li et al., 2017),
a.k.a., learning to learn, seeks to quickly learn a new task with limited samples by leveraging the
knowledge from similar tasks. More specifically, the objective therein is to learn a meta model based
on a set of tasks {Ti }M
                       i=1 drawn from some unknown distribution P(T ), from which task-specific
models can be quickly obtained for new tasks from the same stationary distribution P(T ). Taking
MAML as an example, the objective therein is to learn a model initialization θ such that one or a
few gradient descent steps from θ can lead to a good model for a new task T ∼ P(T ), by solving the
following optimization problem with training tasks {Ti }M i=1 :
                                                   1 XM
                                    θ := arg min          fi (Ui (θ))                                   (1)
                                               θ   M  i=1

where the task model ϕi = Ui (θ) = θ − α∇fˆi (θ), fˆi and fi correspond to the training and test losses
for task Ti , respectively.
Online learning. In the general online learning problem, loss functions are sequentially revealed to a
learning agent: at each step t, the agent first selects an action θt , and then a cost ft (θt ) is incurred.
The goal of the agent is to select a sequence of actions so as to minimize the following static regret
                                         XT                       XT
                               R(T ) =           ft (θt ) − min          ft (θ) ,                       (2)
                                           t=1              θ      t=1

i.e., the gap between the agent’s predictions {ft (θt )}Tt=1 and the performance of the best static model
in hindsight. A successful agent achieves a regret R(T ) that grows sublinearly in T . Online learning
is a well studied field and we refer the interested readers to Hazan et al. (2016) for more information.


                                                      3
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Online meta-learning. As a marriage between online learning and meta-learning, online meta-learning
(Finn et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020; Harrison et al., 2020) aims to achieve the following two features:
(i) fast adaptation to the current task (the meta-learning aspect); (ii) learn to adapt even faster as
it sees more tasks (the online learning aspect). Specifically, the agent observes a stream of tasks
S = {T1 , T2 , ..., TT } sampled from P(T ), where tasks are revealed one at a time. For each task Tt ,
the agent has access to a support set St for task-specific adaptation and a query set Qt for evaluation.
The goal here is to select a sequence of meta models {wt } for achieving sublinear growth of the
following regret
                                       XT                            XT
                        Rmeta (T ) =           ft (Ut (θt )) − min          ft (Ut (θ))                 (3)
                                         t=1                   θ      t=1

where Ut is the task adaptation function depending on the support set St , and the cost function ft is
evaluated using the adapted parameters Ut (wt ) on the query set Qt . Intuitively, the agent seeks to
learn a better meta model which leads to better task models for future tasks after seeing more tasks.
Online meta-learning in non-stationary environments. Differently from most online meta-learning
studies (Finn et al., 2019; Yao et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2020; Harrison et al., 2020; Rajasegaran et al.,
2022; Acar et al., 2021), in this work we consider the online meta-learning problem in a more realistic
scenario:
Pre-trained meta model. In many real applications, there is plenty of data available for pre-training,
and it is unrealistic to deploy an agent in complex dynamic environments without any basic knowledge
of the tasks at hand (Caccia et al., 2020). Therefore, following the same line as in Caccia et al. (2020),
we assume that there is a set of training tasks {Ti0 }M                                              0
                                                      i=1 drawn from some unknown distribution P (T ).
And as standard in meta-learning, each pre-training task Ti0 has a support dataset Si0 and a query
dataset Q0i . In this work, we employ MAML over the training tasks to learn a pre-trained meta model.
Unknown task boundaries. During the online meta-learning phase, we assume that the task boundaries
are unknown, i.e., the so-called task-agnostic setup (Caccia et al., 2020), in the sense that the agent
does not know if the new coming data at time t belongs to the previous task or a new task. To model
the uncertainty about task boundaries, we assume that at any time t the new data belongs to the
previous task with probability p ∈ (0, 1) or to a new task with probability 1 − p.
Non-stationary task distributions. During the online meta-learning phase, the agent could encounter
new tasks that are sampled from other distributions instead of the pre-training one P0 (T ). To capture
this non-stationarity in task distribution, we assume that whenever a new task arrives during online
learning, it will be sampled either from P0 (T ) with probability η ∈ (0, 1) or from a new (w.r.t. P0 (T ))
distribution with probability 1 − η. Note that we do not restrict the number of new distributions that
can be encountered during online learning and the task distributions can be revisited.

3    P ROPOSED A LGORITHM UNDER DISTRIBUTION SHIFTS
To address the online meta-learning problem mentioned above for non-stationary environments, we
next propose a simple but effective algorithm, called onLine mEta lEarning under Distribution Shifts
(LEEDS), based on the detection of task switches and distribution shift to assist fast online learning.
Following most studies (Rajasegaran et al., 2022; Caccia et al., 2020) in online meta-learning, we
maintain two separate models during the online learning stage: θ for the meta model and ϕ for the
online task model.
Detection of task switches and distribution shift: To enable fast learning of a new task in online
learning, it is clear that the detection mechanisms can not be overly sophisticated, but in the meanwhile
have to be efficient with high detection accuracy. Towards this end, we propose two different methods
for detecting the task switch and the distribution shift, respectively, which work in concert as key
components of LEEDS.
Detection of task switches. To understand the learning behaviors under task switches, we evaluate
the classification loss of the previous task model using the newly coming data, i.e., L(ϕt−1 ; St ) for
time t, where L is the loss function, ϕt−1 is the previous online model at time t − 1, and St is the
current support set. The left plot in Fig. 1 shows the empirical results on an online few-shot image
recognition problem. As depicted, the loss value keeps decreasing as the agent receives more data
from the same task but suddenly increases whenever a new task arrives. This is clearly reasonable
as the learnt online model for the previous task does not fit the new task anymore. Inspired by this


                                                      4
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


empirical observation, we use a simple mechanism based on the value of L(ϕt−1 ; St ) to detect the
task boundaries: there is a task switch whenever the loss is above some pre-defined threshold. As
demonstrated later in Section 5, such a simple mechanism is indeed quite effective as corroborated by
its high detection accuracies on various online meta-learning problems.
Detection of distribution shift. To efficiently determine if a new task is IND or OOD, i.e., sampled
from the pre-training task distribution or not, we consider an energy-based OOD detection mechanism
with a binary classifier Cτ (·; θ) defined as follows

                                                  1 if − E(x; θ) ≤ τ
                                   Cτ (x; θ) =                                                        (4)
                                                  0 if − E(x; θ) > τ
                             PK
where E(x; θ) = −δ log k=1 exp (−gk (x; θ)/δ) corresponds to the Helmholtz free energy for
input x, gk (·; θ) is the k-th component of the prediction model’s output, and δ is the temperature
parameter. The hyperparameter τ is a threshold that can be set using the pre-training tasks. As shown
in Liu et al. (2020), the negative energy is linearly aligned with the likelihood of the of input x under
model θ, making it a useful score for distinguishing IND and OOD tasks.



                                                                            Method                Memory
                                                                             Ours                  O(1)
                                                                    Rajasegaran et al. (2022)      O(T )
                                                                      Caccia et al. (2020)        O(1/p)
                                                                       Acar et al. (2021)          O(1)
                                                                       Finn et al. (2019)          O(T )



Figure 1: Left plot: Variations of the online loss for a pre-trained meta model using MAML which
is deployed for online learning. Red dot at 0 means no task switch at that time, and at 1 means the
task switched at that time. Right table: Comparison of the memory requirements among different
methods. T is number of online rounds and p ∈ (0, 1) is non-stationarity level.

Update of meta and online parameters: Based on the two detection schemes, the next question
is how to update the meta and task models accordingly for enabling fast adaption in dynamic
environments.
Without such detection mechanisms, previous online meta-learning algorithms (Finn et al., 2019;
Acar et al., 2021) typically adapt the task model from the meta model using a support set, evaluate the
adapted model on a query set, and reset the task model to the meta model when new data is received
from the online data stream process, and then repeat the process again. However, such a "resetting"
scheme can be sub-optimal in realistic scenarios. For instance, if the newly received data belongs
to the same task with the previous data, the agent should update the task model by starting from
previously adapted parameters instead of from the meta model.
In contrast, the simple but effective detection mechanisms in this work enable a more elegant treatment
to the knowledge update during online learning:
(1) If there is a task switch at time t, i.e., L(ϕt−1 ; St ) > ℓ where ℓ is the threshold, adapting from the
meta model is generally better than adapting from the task model of the previous task. Therefore, we
first obtain the online task model ϕt from the meta model using the new data:
                                 ϕt = θadapt = θt−1 − α1 ∇θt−1 L(θ; St ),
and then update the meta model no matter if there is a distribution shift, so as to incorporate the
knowledge of the new task to the meta model:
                                     θt = θt−1 − α2 ∇θ L(θadapt ; Qt ).

(2) If there is no task switch, i.e., L(ϕt−1 ; St ) ≤ ℓ, we continue to update the task model from the
previous task model using the new data, different from the “resetting" scheme in the literature:
                                   ϕt = ϕt−1 − α1 ∇ϕt−1 L(ϕt−1 ; St ).


                                                     5
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1 onLine mEta lEarning under Distribution Shifts (LEEDS)
 1: Input: Dynamic stream S, pre-training distribution P0 (T ), stepsizes α1 and α2 , thresholds ℓ and τ .
 2: Perform pre-training phase using MAML method on tasks drawn from P0 (T )
 3: while stream S is ON do
 4:   Dt ←− S // receive current data from online data stream St , Qt
 5:   St , Qt ←− Dt // split data into support and query
 6:   if L(ϕt−1 ; St ) ≤ ℓ (i.e., no switch) then
 7:       ϕt = ϕt−1 − α1 ∇ϕt−1 L(ϕt−1 ; St ) // adapt starting from previous online model
 8:       Evaluate ϕt on query set Qt
 9:       if Cτ (St ; θt−1 ) (i.e., covariate shift) then
10:          θadapt = θt−1 − α1 ∇θ L(θt−1 ; St )
11:          θt = θt−1 − α2 ∇θ L(θadapt ; Qt ) // update meta model
12:       end if
13:    else
14:       θadapt = θt−1 − α1 ∇θt−1 L(θt−1 ; St ) // adapt starting from meta model using support set
15:       Set ϕt = θadapt and Evaluate ϕt on query set Qt
16:       θt = θt−1 − α2 ∇θ L(θadapt ; Qt ) // update meta model
17:    end if
18: end while


To accelerate the knowledge learning for the new domains, we further distinguish the meta model
update for IND and OOD tasks. In particular, if the current task is an IND task, we will only update
the meta model once at the beginning of this task. That is to say, the meta model will not be further
updated within the same task. In stark contrast, if the current task is an OOD task, we continue to
update the meta model whenever new data for this task arrives as follows:
                θadapt = θt−1 − α1 ∇θ L(θt−1 ; St ), θt = θt−1 − α2 ∇θ L(θadapt ; Qt ).

Memory friendly: One important feature of the proposed algorithm LEEDS is that the meta model
update is only based on the current data, as motivated by the theoretical advance in online learning
(Mokhtari et al., 2016; Hazan et al., 2016) where updating the online model with only the current
data is sufficient to guarantee a sublinear regret. This design is also well supported by our theoretical
analysis in the following section, which indicates that updating the meta model with the current data
is also sufficient for online meta-learning to achieve a dynamic regret that grows sublinearly. As a
comparison, most of the previous studies store the previous data in the memory for the meta model
update. A comparison of the memory requirements among different approaches is summarized in the
right table in Fig. 1.

4    T HEORETICAL R ESULTS
In the online meta-learning with distribution shifts, it is clear that the static comparator in eq. (3) is
not sufficient to capture the non-stationarity, as one cannot expect to have a single meta-model for all
task distributions. Hence, we consider the following more sophisticated dynamic regret (Mokhtari
et al., 2016; Hazan et al., 2016; Zinkevich, 2003)
                                                XT                           XT
                      Rmeta (z1 , ..., zT ) =              ft (Ut (θt )) −               ft (Ut (zt )) ,     (5)
                                                     t=1                           t=1

where the meta comparator zt can change over time. If zt = arg minθ ft (Ut (θ)), then eq. (5)
becomes the worst-case dynamic regret formulation. To make the dynamic regret in eq. (5) more
suited to the realistic scenario of online meta-learning in which the task distribution changes after
some time-steps, we consider the setting where the d-th encountered distribution stays stationary for
Kd tasks before the distribution shift, leading to the following dynamic regret:
                                             Kd
                                           D X                   X D     Kd
                                           X                             X
                 Rmeta (θ1∗ , ..., θD
                                    ∗
                                      )=             fdk Udk θdk −   min    fdk Udk (θ)
                                                                                    θ
                                           d=1 k=1                           d=1         k=1
                                             Kd
                                           D X                   X   Kd
                                                                   D X
                                           X
                                     =               fdk Udk θdk −      fdk Udk (θd∗ )                       (6)
                                           d=1 k=1                           d=1 k=1


                                                             6
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 2: Online evaluations in each of the encountered domains during online learning phase for
the Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST benchmark. First row corresponds to non-stationarity level
p = 0.9. In second row p = 0.75. LEEDS is the only method that is able to preserve pre-training
knowledge while substantially increasing performance in OOD domains. Legend in first plot only.

                                                PKd k
where the meta comparator θd∗ = arg minθ k=1

                                                       fd Udk (θ) . Note that the task distributions can
be revisited, i.e., the i-th distribution could be the same as the (i + j)-th distribution but distinct to
the (i + j − 1)-th for j > 1.
To show that updating the meta model based only on the current data (which is consistent with our
algorithm) is sufficient for achieving sublinear regret, we consider the following update rule which
updates the meta model at each step based on the current task only without reusing any previous data:

                                                                                 K +1
                          θdk+1 := θdk − αdk ∇fdk Udk (θdk ) ,         1
                                                                 with θd+1 := θd d      .              (7)

And we make the following standard assumptions:
Assumption 1. Each function fdk has bounded gradient norm, i.e., ∇fdk (w) ≤ G ∀ w.
Assumption 2. Each composition function fdk ◦ Udk is convex.

We can have the following theorem which shows that updating the meta model based only on the
current task without storing any previously seen data can achieve sublinear growth of the regret
formulation in 6.
                                                                   PD
Theorem 1. Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Let PD = d=2 ∥θd∗ − θd−1     ∗
                                                                                 ∥ + 1 and αdk =
                                                                              q
     1                                                     ∗         ∗
                                                                                 PD
√PD        . Then the dynamic regret is bounded as Rmeta (θ1 , ..., θD ) ≤ O PD    d=1 Kd .
    d=1 Kd

                    q                                              q
                                                                            PD
Further, if αdk =       PDPD    , then Rmeta (θ1∗ , ..., θD
                                                          ∗
                                                            )≤O        PD    d=1 Kd         .
                         d=1 Kd



We have the following remarks on Theorem 1. (a) Theorem 1 shows that under Assumptions 1 and 2,
the dynamic regret 6 associated with the algorithm defined in eq. (7) grows sublinearly with respect to
                          PD
the total number of steps d=1 Kd . This implies that the gap between the average loss (per task) of
online models and that of optimal models in hindsight is asymptotically decreasing as more tasks are
observed. (b) The dynamic regret depends on PD (see its definition in the statement of Theorem 1),
which captures the accumulative model shift (that further reflects the domain distribution shift over
time). Clearly, smaller shift implies lower regret over time. (c) The dependency on PD also shows
that the upper bound becomes automatically tighter when the model shift across domains becomes
small (i.e., dynamic comparators are close to each other), and thus the upper bound is adaptive. (d)
Comparing the two regret bounds obtained in Theorem 1, we note that the dependency of the dynamic
regret on PD can be improved by appropriately selecting αdk when PD is known in advance.

                                                       7
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


5   E XPERIMENTS
We conduct extensive experiments to answer the following questions: (i) How our algorithm perform
when compared to existing online meta-learning methods for dynamic and static environments?
(ii) How certain characteristic of the environment such as the non-stationarity level affects the
performance of the algorithms? How our detection schemes perform when deployed to realistic
dynamic environments. Further, we conduct ablation studies to investigate the advantage of the key
domain adaptation module that permits our algorithm to process differently IND and OOD tasks.
More comprehensive experimental results are provided in Appendix B due to space limitation.
Experimental setup. We pre-train the meta model in one domain and then deploy it in a dynamic
environment where tasks can be drawn from new domains. We evaluate all the algorithms using the
average of test losses obtained throughout the entire online learning stage. To investigate the impact
of the non-stationary level on the learning performance, we further consider two different cases of the
environment non-stationarity: A moderately stationary case where the probability of not switching
to a new task is set to p = 0.9, and a low stationary case where p = 0.75. We do not consider the
cases where p is very small, as an algorithm that just assumes task switches at each round should
perform well in such cases. We compare algorithms over 10000 episodes unless otherwise stated.
Due to space limitation, we defer details about datasets and baselines in Appendix C.
For all the experiments, whenever a new task needs to be revealed, it will be drawn from either the
pre-training domain with probability 0.5, or from one of the OOD domains with probability 0.5. For
the Tiered-ImageNet dataset, because only ood2 is trully OOD with respect to the pre-training task
distribution, we increase the sampling probability of ood2 to 0.5 which is consistent to the protocol
50% − 50% for IND and OOD tasks in all our experiments. More details about the experimental setup
including the neural network architectures and the hyperparameter search are deferred to Appendix D.


Figure 3: Online evaluations for the Tiered-ImageNet (TI) and Synbols (SB) benchmarks under p =
0.9. First columns correspond to TI and second column to SB. More results including performance
in each domain and under different p can be found in Appendix B. Legend shown in first plot only.
5.1 M AIN RESULTS
Results on Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST (OMF). The online evaluations of the compared
methods are shown in fig. 2 for non-stationary levels p = 0.9 and p = 0.75. For each setting we report
separately the online accuracies on pre-training domain and on the other two OOD domains, to show
how our method keeps improving on the OOD domains while also remembering the pre-tarining tasks.
As shown in the plots, Our method LEEDS achieves superior performance compared to all other
baseline algorithms in both settings. More specifically, on the IND domain all methods pre-trained
using MAML perform similarly, but are outperformed by LEEDS and CMAML++ which can detect
task boundaries. However, on the OOD domains our algorithm significantly outperforms all other
baselines, including CMAML++. This is due to the key OOD adaptation module that allows LEEDS
to dynamically adapt the meta model based on the task distribution. Interestingly, comparing the


                                                  8
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


performance for MAML and ANIL provides some insights on the limitations of re-using pre-trained
representations in non-stationary environments. In fact, the ANIL baseline, which does not adapt
its inner representations, performs poorly compared to MAML on the OOD domains, but achieves
similar results on the pre-training domain. Also, the results highlight some limitations of the recently
introduced FOML (Rajasegaran et al., 2022) method, which achieves lower performance than other
competitive baselines. This is because FOML requires the tasks to be not mutually exclusive, which
may not hold for the standard few-shot benchmarks considered in our experiments.
Results on Tiered-ImageNet (TI) and Synbols (SB) benchmarks. We report the online accuracies
on all domains and on OOD domains for these two benchmarks in fig. 3. Due to space limitation,
results for each domain are deferred to appendix B. Because the distribution of the pre-training tasks
is similar to the OOD ones for the Tiered-ImageNet benchmark, methods such as MAML can perform
reasonably well. In fact, in the lower non-stationary case (p = 0.75, can be found in Appendix B),
MAML is able to outperform the more complex CMAML++ baseline. However, our algorithm still
achieves the best performance under both non-stationary levels and in both benchmarks. Note that
in the larger TI dataset case, the FOML algorithm, which stores all previously seen tasks, runs out
of memory after around 6500 online episodes. Again because of similarity between OOD and IND
tasks in the TI benchmark, static representations learned by ANIL are useful for all domains.
5.2 A BLATION S TUDIES
Task boundaries detection. The table in the right of fig. 4 provides the precision and recall scores of
the task switch detection schemes for our method and CMAML++. Our detection scheme outperforms
that of CMAML++ in all metrics. This is because, the detection scheme in CMAML++ is based on
comparing successive losses, which could lead to over detection of task boundaries, especially when
the task loss is too high at the first time the task is revealed to the online algorithm.
                                                                            Method       Prec.    Rec.
                                                                           LEEDS          96.6    99.27
                                                                     TI
                                                                          CMAML++        90.93    92.98
                                                                           LEEDS         91.81    99.37
                                                                    SB
                                                                          CMAML++        87.09    93.89


Figure 4: Left: LEEDS under different p. Center: LEEDS with and without domain adapta-
tion.Right: Task boundaries detection on Tiered-ImageNet (TI) and Synbols (SB).
Importance of domain adaptation module. We investigate the importance of the distribution
shift detection module that allows our algorithm LEEDS to update the meta model differently for
in-distribution and out-of-distribution tasks. Fig. 4 shows the performance of our algorithm with
and without the distribution shift detection module. The performance of the algorithm significantly
improves (∼ 4.3% improvement) with this module. This shows that such a simple mechanism can
effectively boost the online learning performance by allowing the agent to learn more from OOD
data while also remembering pre-training knowledge.
Sensitivity to frequency of task switches. Fig. 4 shows the performance of our algorithm for
different values of the probability p of task switches. The performance increases with p, which shows
that our algorithm LEEDS can successfully re-use previous task knowledge to increase performance.
6   C ONCLUSIONS
In this work, we study the online meta-learning problem in non-stationary environments without
knowing the task boundaries. To address the problems therein, we propose LEEDS for efficient
meta model and online task model updates. In particular, based two simple but effective detection
mechanisms of the task switches and the distribution shift, LEEDS can efficiently reuse the best
task model available without resetting to the meta model and distinguish the meta model updates
for in-distribution tasks and out-of-distribution tasks so as to quickly learn the new knowledge for
new distributions while preserving the old knowledge of the pre-training distribution. In particular,
the meta model update in LEEDS is based on the current data only, eliminating the need of storing
previous data. The theoretical analysis on the dynamic regret has clearly justified this design and
extensive experiments corroborate the superior performance of LEEDS over related baseline methods
on multiple benchmarks.


                                                   9
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


R EFERENCES
Jacob D Abernethy, Elad Hazan, and Alexander Rakhlin. Competing in the dark: An efficient
  algorithm for bandit linear optimization. 2009.

Durmus Alp Emre Acar, Ruizhao Zhu, and Venkatesh Saligrama. Memory efficient online meta
  learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 32–42. PMLR, 2021.

Rahaf Aljundi, Francesca Babiloni, Mohamed Elhoseiny, Marcus Rohrbach, and Tinne Tuytelaars.
  Memory aware synapses: Learning what (not) to forget. In Proceedings of the European Conference
  on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 139–154, 2018.

Maria-Florina Balcan, Mikhail Khodak, and Ameet Talwalkar. Provable guarantees for gradient-
 based meta-learning. In Kamalika Chaudhuri and Ruslan Salakhutdinov (eds.), Proceedings of
 the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine
 Learning Research, pp. 424–433. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019. URL https://proceedings.
 mlr.press/v97/balcan19a.html.

Luca Bertinetto, Joao F Henriques, Philip Torr, and Andrea Vedaldi. Meta-learning with differentiable
  closed-form solvers. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2018.

Massimo Caccia, Pau Rodríguez López, Oleksiy Ostapenko, Fabrice Normandin, Min Lin, Lucas
 Page-Caccia, Issam H. Laradji, Irina Rish, Alexandre Lacoste, David Vázquez, and Laurent Charlin.
 Online fast adaptation and knowledge accumulation (osaka): a new approach to continual learning.
 In NeurIPS, 2020.

Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi and Gábor Lugosi. Prediction, learning, and games. Cambridge university
  press, 2006.

Arslan Chaudhry, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Marcus Rohrbach, and Mohamed Elhoseiny. Efficient
  lifelong learning with a-gem. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00420, 2018.

Giulia Denevi, Dimitris Stamos, Carlo Ciliberto, and Massimiliano Pontil. Online-within-online
  meta-learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.

Chelsea Finn and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning and universality: Deep representations and gradient
  descent can approximate any learning algorithm. ArXiv, abs/1710.11622, 2018.

Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of
  deep networks. In Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1126–1135,
  2017.

Chelsea Finn, Kelvin Xu, and Sergey Levine. Probabilistic model-agnostic meta-learning. Advances
  in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.

Chelsea Finn, Aravind Rajeswaran, Sham Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Online meta-learning. In
  International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1920–1930. PMLR, 2019.

James Hannan. Approximation to bayes risk in repeated play. Contributions to the Theory of Games,
  3(2):97–139, 1957.

James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, Chelsea Finn, and Marco Pavone. Continuous meta-learning
  without tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:17571–17581, 2020.

Elad Hazan, Amit Agarwal, and Satyen Kale. Logarithmic regret algorithms for online convex
  optimization. Machine Learning, 69(2):169–192, 2007.

Elad Hazan et al. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends® in Optimiza-
  tion, 2(3-4):157–325, 2016.

Mikhail Khodak, Maria-Florina F Balcan, and Ameet S Talwalkar. Adaptive gradient-based meta-
 learning methods. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.


                                                 10
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


James Kirkpatrick, Razvan Pascanu, Neil Rabinowitz, Joel Veness, Guillaume Desjardins, Andrei A
  Rusu, Kieran Milan, John Quan, Tiago Ramalho, Agnieszka Grabska-Barwinska, et al. Overcoming
  catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 114
  (13):3521–3526, 2017.
Gregory Koch, Richard Zemel, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, et al. Siamese neural networks for one-shot
  image recognition. In ICML deep learning workshop, volume 2, pp. 0. Lille, 2015.
Zhenguo Li, Fengwei Zhou, Fei Chen, and Hang Li. Meta-sgd: Learning to learn quickly for few-shot
  learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.09835, 2017.
Weitang Liu, Xiaoyun Wang, John Owens, and Yixuan Li. Energy-based out-of-distribution detection.
 Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:21464–21475, 2020.
David Lopez-Paz and Marc’Aurelio Ranzato. Gradient episodic memory for continual learning.
 Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Michael McCloskey and Neal J Cohen. Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The
 sequential learning problem. In Psychology of learning and motivation, volume 24, pp. 109–165.
 Elsevier, 1989.
Fei Mi, Minlie Huang, Jiyong Zhang, and Boi Faltings. Meta-learning for low-resource natural
  language generation in task-oriented dialogue systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.05644, 2019.
Aryan Mokhtari, Shahin Shahrampour, Ali Jadbabaie, and Alejandro Ribeiro. Online optimization in
  dynamic environments: Improved regret rates for strongly convex problems. In 2016 IEEE 55th
  Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pp. 7195–7201. IEEE, 2016.
Tsendsuren Munkhdalai and Hong Yu. Meta networks. In International Conference on Machine
  Learning, pp. 2554–2563. PMLR, 2017.
Alex Nichol and John Schulman. Reptile: a scalable metalearning algorithm. arXiv: Learning, 2018.
Alex Nichol, Joshua Achiam, and John Schulman. On first-order meta-learning algorithms. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:1803.02999, 2018.
Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature
  reuse? towards understanding the effectiveness of MAML. International Conference on Learning
 Representations (ICLR), 2019.
Jathushan Rajasegaran, Chesea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Fully online meta-learning without task
   boundaries. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00263, 2022.
Aravind Rajeswaran, Chelsea Finn, Sham M Kakade, and Sergey Levine. Meta-learning with implicit
  gradients. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), pp. 113–124, 2019.
Roger Ratcliff. Connectionist models of recognition memory: constraints imposed by learning and
  forgetting functions. Psychological review, 97(2):285, 1990.
Sachin Ravi and Hugo Larochelle. Optimization as a model for few-shot learning. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2016.
Matthew Riemer, Ignacio Cases, Robert Ajemian, Miao Liu, Irina Rish, Yuhai Tu, and Gerald Tesauro.
 Learning to learn without forgetting by maximizing transfer and minimizing interference. arXiv
 preprint arXiv:1810.11910, 2018.
Andrei A Rusu, Neil C Rabinowitz, Guillaume Desjardins, Hubert Soyer, James Kirkpatrick, Koray
  Kavukcuoglu, Razvan Pascanu, and Raia Hadsell. Progressive neural networks. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1606.04671, 2016.
Adam Santoro, Sergey Bartunov, Matthew Botvinick, Daan Wierstra, and Timothy Lillicrap. Meta-
  learning with memory-augmented neural networks. In International conference on machine
  learning, pp. 1842–1850. PMLR, 2016.


                                               11
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Syed Shakib Sarwar, Aayush Ankit, and Kaushik Roy. Incremental learning in deep convolutional
  neural networks using partial network sharing. IEEE Access, 8:4615–4628, 2019.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Yoram Singer. Online learning: Theory, algorithms, and applications. 2007.
Shai Shalev-Shwartz et al. Online learning and online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends®
  in Machine Learning, 4(2):107–194, 2012.
Jake Snell, Kevin Swersky, and Richard Zemel. Prototypical networks for few-shot learning. In
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2017.
Flood Sung, Yongxin Yang, Li Zhang, Tao Xiang, Philip HS Torr, and Timothy M Hospedales.
  Learning to compare: Relation network for few-shot learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE
  conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 1199–1208, 2018.
Oriol Vinyals, Charles Blundell, Timothy Lillicrap, and Daan Wierstra. Matching networks for one
  shot learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016.
Huaxiu Yao, Yingbo Zhou, Mehrdad Mahdavi, Zhenhui Jessie Li, Richard Socher, and Caiming
 Xiong. Online structured meta-learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:
  6779–6790, 2020.
Jaehong Yoon, Eunho Yang, Jeongtae Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. Lifelong learning with dynamically
  expandable networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2018.
Tianhe Yu, Xinyang Geng, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Variable-shot adaptation for online
  meta-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.07769, 2020.
Chen Zeno, Itay Golan, Elad Hoffer, and Daniel Soudry. Task agnostic continual learning using
  online variational bayes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.10123, 2018.
Pan Zhou, Xiaotong Yuan, Huan Xu, Shuicheng Yan, and Jiashi Feng. Efficient meta learning via
  minibatch proximal update. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32, 2019.
Martin Zinkevich. Online convex programming and generalized infinitesimal gradient ascent. In
 Proceedings of the 20th international conference on machine learning (icml-03), pp. 928–936,
 2003.


                                               12
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Supplementary Material


We provide the details omitted in the main paper. The sections are organized as fellows:
• Appendix B: We provide more empirical results including final average accuracy of each of the
methods and for all settings.
• Appendix C: We provide further details about datasets and baseline methods.
• Appendix D: We provide further experimental specifications and discuss the heuristics used to set
the thresholds.
• Appendix F: We provide our proof of Theorem 1.



A    S ENSITIVITY TO THRESHOLDS ℓ AND τ AND TEMPERATURE δ

Figures 5 and 6 illustrate the sensitivity of our algorithm LEEDS with respect to the thresholds ℓ
and τ and the temperature parameter δ in the energy-based detection module. As depicted in fig. 5,
when the threshold ℓ is too small, the algorithm tends to over detect task switches (as indicated by
low Recall for ℓ = 0.5 in the table), which results in inferior performance of the algorithm due to
ineffective reuse of task knowledge. On the other hand when ℓ is too large, the high misdetection rate
(e.g., indicated by low Precision for ℓ = 5) results in the algorithm mostly fine-tuning the online task
model ϕt with the current task support data. As expected, this results in a failure mode (the algorithm
diverges) due to the adversariality of different tasks. We find that values of ℓ in the rage [1.5, 2.3]
yield the best performance of our algorithm.
Figure 6 (a) shows that larger values of τ , which collapse to updating the meta-model at each step (even
for pretraining task distribution), does not substantially improve the performance. This demonstrates
the advantage of the distinct meta-update scheme proposed for in- and out-of-distribution tasks, which
avoids unnecessary frequent meta-updates for the pretraining tasks and thus allows a more judicious
usage of computational budget. Lower values of τ (e.g. τ = 15) tend to detect all task distributions
as the pertaining one, and thus corresponds to eliminating the domain adaptation component of our
algorithm. We also find that simply setting the temperature δ = 1 in the energy expression yields
the best performance, and large values of δ also eliminates the effectiveness of the energy-based
detection module (fig. 6 (b)). This is in fact in accordance to the finding in Liu et al. (2020), which
also suggests setting δ = 1.


                                                                   ℓ       Precision    Recall
                                                                ℓ = 0.5      99.9        68.0
                                                                ℓ = 1.5      99.9        98.4
                                                                ℓ = 1.9      99.9        99.3
                                                                ℓ = 2.3      99.9        99.7
                                                                 ℓ=5         38.13       99.9


Figure 5: Performance of LEEDS for different values of the threshold ℓ. Left plot: Performance on
all encountered domains during online learning. Right table: Task boundaries detection for different
values of ℓ. Experiments are conducted on the Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST benchmark.



                                                   13
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


        (a) Sensitivity to energy threshold τ                  (b) Sensitivity to temperature scale

Figure 6: Performance of LEEDS for: (a) different values of the energy threshold τ and (b) different
scales of the temperature δ. For both plots we report the performance on all encountered domains
during online learning. Experiments are conducted on the Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST bench-
mark.


B     M ORE E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section, we provide more experimental results for each of the benchmarks. Figures 7 and 8 show
the online evaluations of the different methods for the Tiered-ImageNet and Synbols benchmarks
under p = 0.75. These additional results further show that our algorithm LEEDS outperforms other
baseline algorithms in the OOD domains and at the same time also retains its performance on the
pre-training tasks. The performance of the methods that do not adapt meta-parameters during online
learning phase (such as MAML and ANIL) drops drastically when OOD tasks are far away from the
pre-training ones (as shown in Table 1 for Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST). For settings in which
OOD tasks are close to the pre-training ones (such as in the Tiered-ImageNet dataset), MAML can
perform similarly to CMAML++, as depicted in Table 2.
Further, Tables 1, 2, and 3 indicate that the performance of all compared baselines decrease as
the non-stationarity level p decreases (smaller p indicates a higher task switch frequency). In fact,
this is also captured by our theoretical upper bound for the dynamic regret in Theorem 1, as the
accumulative model shift PD is likely to increase when the environment becomes less stationary.
Such intuition/result is also confirmed by the plots in Figure 9. As already shown in Figure 4 for
all encountered domains, Figure 9 depicts the same dependency on p for the pre-training domain.
The superior performance of LEEDS even for the pre-training domain particularly shows that the
re-use of task knowledge is beneficial for online meta-learning, as opposed to the usual practice of
“resetting” to meta-parameters at each step.
By comparing the two plots in Figure 10, it can be seen that the advantage of our domain adaptation
module is more significant when the OOD domains are far away from the pre-training one, as is the
case for the FashionMNIST OOD domain compared to the Omniglot pre-training domain.

C     F URTHER D ESCRIPTIONS ABOUT DATASETS AND BASELINE M ETHODS

C.1   DATASETS

We study dynamic online meta-learning on the following benchmarks:
Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST dataset. For this dataset, we consider 10-ways 5-shots classifi-
cation tasks. We pre-train the meta model on a subset of the Omniglot dataset and then deploy it in
the online learning environment where tasks are sampled from either the full Omniglot dataset, or
from one of the OOD datasets, i.e., the MNIST or FashionMNIST datasets.
Tiered-ImageNet dataset. We consider 5-ways 5-shots classification tasks for this dataset. Following
[cite paper], we split the original Tiered-ImageNet dataset into the pre-training domain and the OOD


                                                 14
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 7: Online evaluations for the Tiered-ImageNet (TI) benchmark under p = 0.75. Left:
Accuracies on all encountered domains during online learning. Right: Accuracies on all encountered
OOD domains during online learning. We compare all baselines on a 16GB GPU memory budget
and FOML runs out of memory for this benchmark due to its linear growth in memory requirement.


Figure 8: Online evaluations for the Synbols (SB) benchmark under p = 0.75. Left: Accuracies on
all encountered domains during online learning. Right: Accuracies on all encountered OOD domains
during online learning.



domains. More specifically, we pre-train on the first 200 classes of the original training set, use the
remaining classes as the first OOD domain (ood1), and set the original test classes as second OOD
domain (ood2). During online learning phase, we set the full training set to be IND domain, and ood1
and ood2 as OOD domains. We evaluate algorithms over 20000 online learning episodes.
Synbols dataset. We consider 4-ways 4-shots classification tasks in this dataset. The meta model is
pre-trained on characters from 3 different alphabets and deployed on characters from a new alphabet
(ood1). We also consider font classification tasks as additional OOD tasks (ood2).


C.2   BASELINE M ETHODS

We compare our algorithm with the following baseline methods for online meta-learning.
(1) C-MAML Caccia et al. (2020) and C-MAML++: the continual MAML approach (C-MAML)
pre-trains the meta model using MAML and employs an online learning strategy based on task
boundaries detection. Since C-MAML does not evaluate the task models on separate query sets, for a
fair comparison we adapt it to do so and call the resulting algorithm C-MAML++.


                                                  15
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   Method                 non-stationarity p = 0.9                    non-stationarity p = 0.75
                 pre-train          ood1           ood2       pre-train         ood1            ood2
   LEEDS       99.39 ±0.09 96.44 ±0.11 82.87 ±0.19          98.97 ±0.10 95.68 ±0.12 81.49 ±0.22
 CMAML++       98.78 ±0.12 92.52 ±0.19 76.16 ±0.28          97.39 ±0.11 89.07 ±0.20 73.35 ±0.35
  CMAML        89.79 ±0.54 84.06 ±0.80 69.70 ±0.63          75.51 ±0.94 70.41 ±1.22 58.58 ±1.27
   FOML        89.20 ±0.61 70.84 ±0.76 64.83 ±0.74          81.68 ±0.59 59.24 ±0.78 58.07 ±0.77
   MAML        95.07 ±0.10 62.02 ±0.14 54.67 ±0.17          95.51 ±0.11 62.31 ±0.13 54.83 ±0.13
    ANIL       96.54 ±0.12 42.14 ±0.16 40.12 ±0.13          96.88 ±0.11 42.08 ±0.11 40.00 ±0.13
  MetaOGD      84.05 ±1.66 73.73 ±1.39 60.03 ±1.60          85.67 ±1.57 75.09 ±1.43 60.51 ±1.65
    BGD        63.58 ±2.25 46.12 ±2.10 44.89 ±1.41          23.86 ±2.36 17.97 ±2.17 19.81 ±1.63
  MetaBGD      77.73 ±1.26 59.11 ±0.84 54.67 ±0.82          43.95 ±1.31 27.87 ±0.94 30.14 ±0.98



Table 1: Average accuracy over 10000 online episodes on Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST
benchmark under different non-stationarity levels. "pre-train" domain: Omniglot; "ood1" domain:
MNIST, "ood2" domain: FashionMNIST. The advantage of our algorithm LEEDS over the other
baselines is more significant in the ood domains.

              Method          non-stationarity p = 0.9      non-stationarity p = 0.75
                            all domains ood domains        all domains ood domains
              LEEDS         66.07 ±0.24 67.43 ±0.38        64.52 ±0.17 65.80 ±0.31
            CMAML++         63.83 ±0.27 63.75 ±0.55        61.28 ±0.23 61.96 ±0.41
              FOML          35.90 ±0.56 35.87 ±0.83        32.02 ±0.42 31.61 ±0.69
              MAML          62.37 ±0.46 61.00 ±0.72        62.54 ±0.37 60.88 ±0.65
               ANIL         59.78 ±0.21 57.61 ±0.38        59.57 ±0.22 57.38 ±0.36
             MetaOGD        57.01 ±0.28 57.32 ±0.66        56.80 ±0.25 56.94 ±0.42
               BGD          40.95 ±0.85 41.44 ±1.15        35.48 ±0.76 35.97 ±1.09
             MetaBGD        49.21 ±1.05 50.01 ±1.25        44.58 ±1.12 45.30 ±1.20


Table 2: Average accuracy over 20000 online episodes on Tiered-ImageNet benchmark under
different non-stationarity levels. The different domains are distinct splits of the original Tiered-
ImageNet dataset (please see experimental setup in Section 5 for details on how these splits are
obtained).

              Method          non-stationarity p = 0.9      non-stationarity p = 0.75
                            all domains ood domains        all domains ood domains
              LEEDS         85.12 ±0.91 67.48 ±0.97        82.22 ±0.32 63.68 ±0.36
            CMAML++         81.14 ±1.05 62.39 ±1.00        79.74 ±1.07 60.70 ±1.12
              FOML          46.40 ±0.61 41.73 ±0.73        37.46 ±0.27 34.13 ±0.31
              MAML          76.25 ±0.63 42.70 ±0.68        74.87 ±0.42 43.84 ±0.45
               ANIL         64.58 ±0.32 34.51 ±0.54        72.69 ±0.30 35.66 ±0.49
             MetaOGD        72.04 ±0.67 46.69 ±0.77        67.93 ±0.59 42.66 ±0.62
               BGD          25.63 ±0.07 25.61 ±0.09        27.53 ±0.08 27.17 ±0.11
             MetaBGD        53.74 ±0.41 42.25 ±0.52        40.79 ±0.23 34.63 ±0.33


Table 3: Average accuracy over 10000 online episodes on Synbols benchmark under different non-
stationarity levels. The "pre-train" domain corresponds to 3 different alphabets from Synbols dataset,
"ood1" corresponds to a new (w.r.t. the pre-training one) alphabet from Synbols dataset, and "ood2"
contains font classification tasks.


(2) FOML Rajasegaran et al. (2022): the fully online meta-learning method updates online parame-
ters using the latest online data and maintains a concurrent meta-training process to guide the online
updates regularized by the meta model.
(3) MAML Finn et al. (2017) and ANIL Raghu et al. (2019): the MAML baseline consists of an
offline pre-training phase and an online deployment phase. During offline pre-training the method


                                                 16
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Figure 9: Performance of our algorithm LEEDS under different p. Left plot: Evaluations in pre-
training domain. Right plot: Evaluations in all domains.


Figure 10: Performance of LEEDS with and without energy-based domain adaptation module. Left
plot: Evaluations in OOD domain FashionMINIST. Right plot: Evaluations in OOD domain
MNIST.


learns a common meta-initialization that will be used for all tasks, and the meta-initialization will
never be updated at the online stage. The task model is adapted from the meta-initialization using
the support set and evaluated on the query set. ANIL is similar to MAML but with partial parameter
adaption, i.e., only the last layer is adapted for each task.
(4) MetaBGD Caccia et al. (2020) and BGD Zeno et al. (2018): the baseline MetaBGD combines
MAML and the Bayesian gradient descent method during online learning.
(5) MetaOGD Zinkevich (2003): the meta online gradient descent method simply updates the
meta-model at each step using a MAML-like meta-objective evaluated on the current task data.

D     F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL D ETAILS AND H YPERAMETER S EARCH

D.1   F URTHER E XPERIMENTAL S PECIFICATIONS

In all our experiments, we consider classification tasks. The cross-entropy loss between predictions
and true labels is used to train all models. We use the same convolutional neural network (CNN)
architectures widely adopted in few-shot learning literature Finn et al. (2017; 2019); Caccia et al.
(2020), which include four convolutional blocks followed by a linear classification layer. Each
convolutional block is a stack of one 3 × 3 convolution layer followed by BatchNormalization, ReLU,
and 2 × 2 MaxPooling layers. For the Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST benchmark, we use 64
filters in each convolutional layer and downsample the gray-scale images to 28 × 28 spacial resolution


                                                 17
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


so as to have 64-dimensional feature vectors before classification. For Tiered-ImageNet and Synbols
datasets, the inputs are respectively 3 × 64 × 64 and 3 × 32 × 32 RGB images, resulting respectively
in 1024- and 256-dimensional feature vectors for 64 filters in each convolution layer.

D.2    F URTHER I MPLEMENTATION S PECIFICATIONS

We will make all our codes publicly available after the review process. The implementation of
FOML Rajasegaran et al. (2022) method is not released yet, and hence we compare with our
own implementation of their algorithm. For all other baselines, we used their publicly available
implementations. Codes for our algorithm LEEDS and all other baselines are provided in the
supplementary materials of our submission. All codes are tested with Python 3.6 and Pytorch 1.2.
For example to run our algorithm LEEDS with the best hyperparameters that we obtained for the
Omniglot-MNIST-FashionMNIST dataset under p = 0.9, one can run the following command:
p y t h o n main . py −− a l g o l e e d s −− u s e _ b e s t 1

The experiment setting (e.g., the dataset to use) can be changed in configurations.yaml file. We run
all methods on a single NVIDIA Tesla P100 GPU. All compared algorithms except FOML were able
to run on 16GB GPU memory. FOML requires at least 32GB to reach 12000 online episodes for the
Tiered-ImageNet dataset.

E     H EURISTICS FOR SETTING THE THRESHOLDS
For the energy threshold τ , we follow the strategy in Liu et al. (2020), i.e., we set the threshold τ
using the pre-training tasks. More specifically, we set τ so that 95% of the pre-training inputs are
correctly detected as pre-training data. In standard few-shot learning experimental setups, the true
labeling for each individual task is usually randomly chosen. When there is a task switch, the task
specific model learnt from the previous task generally does not fit the new task anymore, where the
learning performance could be similar to that of a random model. Thus motivated, we find that a good
heuristic to choose a starting value for the threshold ℓ is to use the loss value evaluated on a random
model. For example, for 10-ways classification tasks that value would be ℓr = − log(1/10) = 2.3.

F     P ROOF OF T HEOREM 1
Consider the following algorithm for minimizing the regret in eq. (6), which updates the meta-
parameters at each step based on current task only:
                     θdk+1 := θdk − αdk ∇fdk Udk (θdk ) , with θd+1
                                                                1
                                                                    := θdKd +1

                                                                                          (8)

For convenience, we next re-state the result in Theorem 1.
Theorem 1 (Re-stated). Suppose that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Define the path length as PD :=
PD      ∗    ∗                                    k
  d=2 ∥θd − θd−1 ∥ + 1 and set the learning rate αd =
                                                      √PD1  . Then the dynamic regret in eq. (6)
                                                                d=1 Kd
is bounded as

                                                               r              !
                                                                XD
                               Rmeta (θ1∗ , ..., θD
                                                  ∗
                                                    )≤O   PD             Kd       .                (9)
                                                                   d=1

                    q
Further, if αdk =       PDPD      , then
                         d=1 Kd
                                                          r                   !
                                                                XD
                               Rmeta (θ1∗ , ..., θD
                                                  ∗
                                                    )≤O    PD            Kd       .               (10)
                                                                   d=1



Proof of Theorem 1. In the following, we let hkd := fdk ◦ Udk and define M to be such that θdk ≤ M
for all d and k. Such an upper bound can be enforced by implementing the project gradient descent
so that the model parameter is always updated within a compact set with a radius M .


                                                     18
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023



                                                           PKd k                  PKd k
                                                                                            fd Udk (θd∗ )

First, note that for any given domain index d, the term k=1       fd Udk θdk − k=1
in the dynamic regret in eq. (6) corresponds to a static regret defined over Kd steps for loss functions
hkd := fdk ◦ Udk . Hence, applying steps similar to those in the proof of Theorem 3.1 in Hazan et al.
(2016) for static regret, we have
                        2               2                     2
            θdk+1 − θd∗ ≤ θdk − θd∗ + αdk ∇hkd (θdk )            − 2αdk ∇hkd (θdk )⊤ θdk − θd∗ .



Using Assumption 1 and rearranging the terms, we obtain
                                                                                 2                         2
                                                 θk − θd∗                            − θdk+1 − θd∗
                       2∇hkd (θdk )⊤ θdk − θd∗ ≤ d                                                             + αdk G2 .

                                                                                     αdk

Telescoping the above inequality from k = 1 to Kd and using the convexity of hkd yield


           Kd                     Kd
           X                      X                      1               2     1                2
                   hkd (θdk ) −         hkd (θd∗ ) ≤       1  θd1 − θd∗ − Kd θdKd +1 − θd∗
                                                        2αd                 2αd
           k=1                    k=1
                                                             Kd                                     Kd
                                                                                 !
                                                           1X        1       1       k     ∗ 2   G2 X
                                                        +              k
                                                                         −   k−1
                                                                                   θ d − θ d   +        αdk .                                (11)
                                                           2        α  d   αd
                                                                                                  2
                                                             k=2                                    k=1

Hence, fixing the stepsizes to αdk = √PD1                               we obtain
                                                             d=1 Kd
                                               qP
   Kd                     Kd                            D
                                                        d=1 Kd                                                                G2 Kd

   X                      X                                                           2                            2
         hkd (θdk ) −           hkd (θd∗ ) ≤                             θd1 − θd∗        − θdKd +1 − θd∗                  + qP
                                                        2                                                                       D
   k=1                    k=1                                                                                               2   d=1 Kd
                                               qP
                                                        D
                                                        d=1 Kd                                                            G2 Kd

                                                                                      2                        2
                                          =                              θd1 − θd∗           1
                                                                                          − θd+1 − θd∗                 + qP
                                                        2                                                                   D
                                                                                                                        2   d=1 Kd

where the last equality applies the transition scheme θdKd +1 = θd+1
                                                                  1
                                                                      . Now, telescoping from d = 1 to
D, we obtain
 D    Kd               Kd
                                     ! qPD            D
                                                                                               v
                                                                                                  D
X    X                 X                     d=1 K d X               2                 2
                                                                                           G2 uuX
          hkd (θdk ) −     hkd (θd∗ ) ≤                     θd1 − θd∗ − θd+11
                                                                                 − θd∗     + t        Kd .
                                             2                                               2
d=1 k=1                k=1                           d=1                                         d=1
                                                     |                 {z                }
                                                                                                      P
                                                                                                                                             (12)
Next, we upper-bound the term P . We have
               2                          2              2                                      2
   θd1 − θd∗          1
                   − θd+1 − θd∗                = θd1         − 2 θd1 , θd∗ − θd+1
                                                                              1                          1
                                                                                                    + 2 θd+1 , θd∗
                                                         2                 2
                                               = θd1            1
                                                             − θd+1                 1
                                                                               + 2 θd+1 , θd∗ − 2 θd1 , θd−1
                                                                                                         ∗              ∗
                                                                                                             + 2 θd1 , θd−1
                                                 − 2 θd1 , θd∗
Therefore, we obtain
D                                                                                                                          D
X                     2                         2                   2                 2                                    X
       θd1 − θd∗             1
                          − θd+1 − θd∗                  ≤ θ11              1
                                                                        − θD+1                 1
                                                                                          + 2 θD+1    ∗
                                                                                                   , θD +2                       θd1 , θd∗ − θd−1
                                                                                                                                              ∗

d=1                                                                                                                        d=2
                                                                                          D
                                                                                          X
                                                        ≤ M 2 + 2M 2 + 2M                       θd∗ − θd−1
                                                                                                       ∗

                                                                                          d=2
                                                                              D
                                                                                                       !
                                                                              X
                                                        ≤ 3M    2
                                                                        1+           θd∗ − θd−1
                                                                                            ∗

                                                                              d=2


                                                                         19
Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                     = 3M 2 PD ,                                           (13)
                                                             PD       ∗  ∗
where the last equality follows from the definition of PD :=   d=2 θd − θd−1 + 1. Hence,
combining eq. (12) and eq. (13), we obtain
                                                  v             v
                                                  uD            uD
                                               2              2 uX
                                            3M PD t
                                                  u X        G t
                    Rmeta (θ1∗ , ..., θD
                                       ∗
                                         )≤             Kd +          Kd
                                               2             2
                                                    d=1           d=1
                                               v uD      
                                                  uX
                                          ≤ O PD t    Kd                          (14)
                                                    d=1


which finishes the proof for the first result.
                        q
Similarly, setting αdk = PDPD K , we obtain the following upper bound for the dynamic regret in
                           d=1   d
eq. (6)
                                                      v        
                                                       u
                                                       u   D
                                                           X
                           Rmeta (θ1∗ , ..., θD
                                              ∗
                                                ) ≤ O tPD   Kd  .                        (15)
                                                          d=1


                                               20
