Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


H UMAN - LEVEL ATARI 200 X FASTER
 Steven Kapturowski, Víctor Campos*, Ray Jiang*, Nemanja Rakićević, Hado van Hasselt,
 Charles Blundell, Adrià Puigdomènech Badia
 DeepMind, *Equal contribution
 {skapturowski,camunez,rayjiang,rakicevic,hado,
 cblundell,adriap}@deepmind.com



                                             A BSTRACT
         The task of building general agents that perform well over a wide range of tasks has
         been an important goal in reinforcement learning since its inception. The problem
         has been subject of research of a large body of work, with performance frequently
         measured by observing scores over the wide range of environments contained in the
         Atari 57 benchmark. Agent57 was the first agent to surpass the human benchmark
         on all 57 games, but this came at the cost of poor data-efficiency, requiring nearly
         80 billion frames of experience to achieve. Taking Agent57 as a starting point, we
         employ a diverse set of strategies to achieve a 200-fold reduction of experience
         needed for all games to outperform the human baseline within our novel agent
         MEME. We investigate a range of instabilities and bottlenecks we encountered
         while reducing the data regime, and propose effective solutions to build a more
         robust and efficient agent. We also demonstrate competitive performance with
         high-performing methods such as Muesli and MuZero. Our contributions aim
         to achieve faster propagation of learning signals related to rare events, stabilize
         learning under differing value scales, improve the neural network architecture, and
         make updates more robust under a rapidly-changing policy.


1    I NTRODUCTION
To develop generally capable agents, the question of how to evaluate them is paramount. The Arcade
Learning Environment (ALE) (Bellemare et al., 2013) was introduced as a benchmark to evaluate
agents on an diverse set of tasks which are interesting to humans, and developed externally to the
Reinforcement Learning (RL) community. As a result, several games exhibit reward structures which
are highly adversarial to many popular algorithms. Mean and median human normalized scores
(HNS) (Mnih et al., 2015) over all games in the ALE have become standard metrics for evaluating
deep RL agents. Recent progress has allowed state-of-the-art algorithms to greatly exceed average
human-level performance on a large fraction of the games (Van Hasselt et al., 2016; Espeholt et al.,
2018; Schrittwieser et al., 2020). However, it has been argued that mean or median HNS might not be
well suited to assess generality because they tend to ignore the tails of the distribution (Badia et al.,
2019). Indeed, most state-of-the-art algorithms achieve very high scores by performing very well on
most games, but completely fail to learn on a small number of them.
Agent57 (Badia et al., 2020) was the first algorithm to obtain above human-average scores on all 57
Atari games. However, such generality came at the cost of data efficiency; requiring tens of billions
of environment interactions to achieve above average-human performance in some games, reaching a
figure of 78 billion frames before beating the human benchmark in all games. Data efficiency remains
a desirable property for agents to possess, as many real-world challenges are data-limited by time and
cost constraints (Dulac-Arnold et al., 2019). In this work, we develop an agent that is as general as
Agent57 but that requires only a fraction of the environment interactions to achieve the same result.
There exist two main trends in the literature when it comes to measuring improvements in the
learning capabilities of agents. One approach consists in measuring performance after a limited
budget of interactions with the environment. While this type of evaluation has led to important
progress (Espeholt et al., 2018; van Hasselt et al., 2019; Hessel et al., 2021), it tends to disregard
problems which are considered too hard to be solved within the allowed budget (Kaiser et al., 2019).
On the other hand, one can aim to achieve a target end-performance with as few interactions as


                                                   1
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          100B


Frames to > human score
                           10B                                                         Agent57      MEME
                            1B                                                                       390M
                          100M                                                                       200M
                           10M
                            1M


                                        Yars' Revenge
                                                  Tennis
                                           Tutankham
                                              Frostbite


                                               Freeway

                                               Venture


                                        Wizard Of Wor


                                       Kung-Fu Master
                                         Road Runner
                                               H.E.R.O.


                                                Q*BERT


                                        Fishing Derby
                                              Breakout
                                         Ms. Pac-Man


                                             Robotank
                                 Montezuma's Revenge


                                             Time Pilot


                                         Video Pinball
                                              Surround


                                                   Pong


                                             Kangaroo
                                           Ice Hockey
                                                 Pitfall!


                                                Enduro
                                             Asteroids


                                                Zaxxon


                                                 Boxing
                                           Private Eye


                                              Riverraid


                                           Stargunner


                                                Atlantis
                                        Demon Attack
                                                  Skiing


                                                 Solaris
                                               Bowling
                                               Gravitar
                                                Berzerk

                                                   Alien



                                          Beam Rider
                                             Seaquest

                                       Space Invaders
                                   Chopper Command
                                         Double Dunk

                                           Bank Heist
                                          Battle Zone
                                                 Asterix
                                                Amidar

                                               Phoenix


                                                Assault
                                           Jamesbond
                                            Centipede
                                     Name This Game


                                           Up'n Down
                                             Defender


                                                Gopher
                                        Crazy Climber
                                                   Krull
  Figure 1: Number of environment frames required by agents to outperform the human baseline on
  each game (in log-scale). Lower is better. On average, MEME achieves above human scores using
  62× fewer environment interactions than Agent57. The smallest improvement is 10× (Road Runner),
  the maximum is 734× (Skiing), and the median across the suite is 36×. We observe small variance
  across seeds (c.f. Figure 8).


  possible (Silver et al., 2017; 2018; Schmitt et al., 2020). Since our goal is to show that our new agent
  is as general as Agent57, while being more data-efficient, we focus on the latter approach.
  Our contributions can be summarized as follows. Building off Agent57, we carefully examine
  bottlenecks which slow down learning and address instabilities that arise when these bottlenecks are
  removed. We propose a novel agent that we call MEME, for MEME is an Efficient Memory-based
  Exploration agent, which introduces solutions to enable taking advantage of three approaches that
  would otherwise lead to instabilities: training the value functions of the whole family of policies
  from Agent57 in parallel, on all policies’ transitions (instead of just the behaviour policy transitions),
  bootstrapping from the online network, and using high replay ratios. These solutions include
  carefully normalising value functions with differing scales, as well as replacing the Retrace update
  target (Munos et al., 2016) with a soft variant of Watkins’ Q(λ) (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) that
  enables faster signal propagation by performing less aggressive trace-cutting, and introducing a
  trust-region for value updates. Moreover, we explore several recent advances in deep learning and
  determine which of them are beneficial for non-stationary problems like the ones considered in this
  work. Finally, we examine approaches to robustify performance by introducing a policy distillation
  mechanism that learns a policy head based on the actions obtained from the value network without
  being sensitive to value magnitudes. Our agent outperforms the human baseline across all 57 Atari
  games in 390M frames, using two orders of magnitude fewer interactions with the environment than
  Agent57 as shown in Figure 1.

   2                        R ELATED WORK
  Large scale distributed agents have exhibited compelling results in recent years. Actor-critic (Espeholt
  et al., 2018; Song et al., 2020) as well as value-based agents (Horgan et al., 2018; Kapturowski et al.,
  2018) demonstrated strong performance in a wide-range of environments, including the Atari 57
  benchmark. Moreover, approaches such as evolutionary strategies (Salimans et al., 2017) and large
  scale genetic algorithms (Such et al., 2017) presented alternative learning algorithms that achieve
  competitive results on Atari. Finally, search-augmented distributed agents (Schrittwieser et al., 2020;
  Hessel et al., 2021) also hold high performance across many different tasks, and concretely they
  hold the highest mean and median human normalized scores over the 57 Atari games. However, all
  these methods show the same failure mode: they perform poorly in hard exploration games, such as
  Pitfall!, and Montezuma’s Revenge. In contrast, Agent57 (Badia et al., 2020) surpassed the human
  benchmark on all 57 games, showing better general performance. Go-Explore (Ecoffet et al., 2021)
  similarly achieved such general performance, by relying on coarse-grained state representations via a
  downscaling function that is highly specific to Atari.
  Learning as much as possible from previous experience is key for data efficiency. Since it is often
  desirable for approximate methods to make small updates to the policy (Kakade & Langford, 2002;
  Schulman et al., 2015), approaches have been proposed for enabling multiple learning steps over
  the same batch of experience in policy gradient methods to avoid collecting new transitions for


                                                      2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


every learning step (Schulman et al., 2017). This decoupling between collecting experience and
learning occurs naturally in off-policy learning agents with experience replay (Lin, 1992; Mnih et al.,
2015) and Fitted Q Iteration methods (Ernst et al., 2005; Riedmiller, 2005). Multiple approaches for
making more efficient use of a replay buffer have been proposed, including prioritized sampling of
transitions (Schaul et al., 2016), sharing experience across populations of agents (Schmitt et al., 2020),
learning multiple policies in parallel from a single stream of experience (Riedmiller et al., 2018), or
reanalyzing old trajectories with the most recent version of a learned model to generate new targets in
model-based settings (Schrittwieser et al., 2020; 2021) or to re-evaluate goals (Andrychowicz et al.,
2017).
The ATARI100k benchmark (Kaiser et al., 2019) was introduced to observe progress in improving
the data efficiency of reinforcement learning agents, by evaluating game scores after 100k agent steps
(400k frames). Work on this benchmark has focused on leveraging the use of models (Ye et al., 2021;
Kaiser et al., 2019; Long et al., 2022), unsupervised learning (Hansen et al., 2019; Schwarzer et al.,
2021; Srinivas et al., 2020; Liu & Abbeel, 2021), or greater use of replay data (van Hasselt et al.,
2019; Kielak, 2020) or augmentations (Kostrikov et al., 2021; Schwarzer et al., 2021). While we
consider this to be an important line of research, this tight budget produces an incentive to focus
on a subset of games where exploration is easier, and it is unclear some games can be solved from
scratch with such a small data budget. Such a setting is likely to prevent any meaningful learning on
hard-exploration games, which is in contrast with the goal of our work.

3       BACKGROUND : AGENT 57

Our work builds on top of Agent57, which combines three main ideas: (i) a distributed deep
RL framework based on Recurrent Replay Distributed DQN (R2D2) (Kapturowski et al., 2018),
(ii) exploration with a family of policies and the Never Give Up (NGU) intrinsic reward (Badia
et al., 2019), and (iii) a meta-controller that dynamically adjusts the discount factor and balances
exploration and exploitation during training, by selecting from a family of policies. Below, we give a
general introduction to the problem setting and some of the relevant components of Agent57.
Problem definition. We consider the problem of discounted infinite-horizon RL in Markov Decision
Processes (MDP) (Puterman, 1994).    P The goal is to find a policy π that maximises the expected sum
of discounted future rewards, Eπ [ t≥0 γ t rt ], where γ ∈ [0, 1) is the discount factor, rt = r(xt , at )
is the reward at time t, xt is the state at time t, and at ∼ π(a|xt ) is the action generated by following
some policy π. In the off-policy learning setting, data generated by a behavior policy µ is used to
learn about the target policy π. This can be achieved by employing a P    variant of Q-learning (Watkins &
Dayan, 1992) to estimate the action-value function, Qπ (x, a) = Eπ [ t≥0 γ t rt |xt = x, at = a]. The
estimated action-value function can then be used to derive a new policy π(a|x) using the ϵ-greedy
operator Gϵ (Sutton & Barto, 2018) 1 . This new policy can then be used as the target policy for
another iteration, repeating the process. Agent57 uses a deep neural network with parameters θ to
estimate action-value functions, Qπ (x, a; θ) 2 , trained on return estimates Gt derived with Retrace
from sequences of off-policy data (Munos et al., 2016). In order to stabilize learning, a target network
is used for bootstrapping the return estimates using double Q-learning (Van Hasselt et al., 2016); the
parameters of this target network, θT , are periodically copied from the online network parameters
θ (Mnih et al., 2015). Finally, a value-function transformation is used to compress the wide range of
reward scales present in Atari, as in (Pohlen et al., 2018).
Distributed RL framework. Agent57 is a distributed deep RL agent based on R2D2 that decouples
acting from learning. Multiple actors interact with independent copies of the environment and feed
trajectories to a central replay buffer. A separate learning process obtains trajectories from this buffer
using prioritized sampling and updates the neural network parameters to predict action-values at each
state. Actors obtain parameters from the learner periodically. See Appendix E for more details.
Exploration with NGU. Agent57 uses the Never Give Up (NGU) intrinsic reward to encourage
exploration. It aims at learning a family of N = 32 policies which maximize different weightings
of the extrinsic reward given by the environment (rte ) and the intrinsic reward (rti ), rj,t = rte + βj rti
(βj ∈ R+ , j ∈ {0, . . . , N −1}). The value of βj controls the degree of exploration, with higher values
    1
        We also use G := G0 to denote the pure greedy operator (ϵ = 0).
    2
        For convenience, we occasionally omit (x, a) or θ from Q(x, a; θ), π(a|x; θ) when it is unambiguous.


                                                        3
       N policy family members

                                                                                    Qj(at, xt)   𝛑j(at | xt)
                                                                                                                                                 +
                                                                                                                                                         Qe(at,
                                                                                                                                    Qi(at, xt)
                                                                                                                                                          xt)
                                 QN(xt, at; θ)                                      Q-value      Policy
          …                      𝜋N(at | xt)                                         Head        Head

   Q-value
                           Q1(xt, at; θ)
                                                 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023
                                                               Torso     LSTM
                                                                                                                                     Dueling             Dueling
    Head                                                                                                                              Head                Head
               Policy      𝜋1(at | xt)
               Head
                                                                                N policy family members                                                            N-mixtures
N policy family members


                                                                                                                                                                                       QN (xt, at; θ)
                                                                                                                                                 …
                                                                                                                                                                                      𝜋N (at | xt)

                                                                                                                                   Q-value                                      Q1 (xt, at; θ)
                                                                                                                                    Head
                                                                                                                                                         Policy                 𝜋1 (at | xt)
                                                                                              Torso                LSTM                                  Head


                                                                                                                              N policy family members


                                                 Figure 2: MEME agent network architecture. The output of the LSTM block is passed to each of
                                                 the N members of the family of policies, depicted as a light-grey box. Each policy consists of an
                                                 Q-value and policy heads. The Q-value head is similar as in Agent57 paper, while the policy head is
                                                 introduced for acting and target computation, and trained via policy distillation.


                                                 encouraging more exploratory behaviors, and each policy in the family is optimized with a different
                                                 discount factor γj . The Universal Value Function Approximators (UVFA) framework (Schaul et al.,
                                                                                            j
                                                 2015) is employed to efficiently learn Qπ (x, a; θ) = Eπj [ t≥0 γjt rj,t |xt = x, at = a] (we use a
                                                                                                               P

                                                 shorthand notation Qj (x, a; θ)) for j ∈ {0, . . . , N − 1} using a single set of shared parameters θ.
                                                 The policy π j (a|x) can then be derived using the ϵ-greedy operator as Gϵ Qj (x, a; θ). We refer the
                                                 reader to Appendix H for more details.
                                                 Meta-controller. Agent57 introduces an adaptive meta-controller that decides which policies from
                                                 the family of N policies to use for collecting experience based on their episodic returns. This
                                                 naturally creates a curriculum over βj and γj by adapting their value throughout training. The
                                                 optimization process is formulated as a non-stationary bandit problem. A detailed description about
                                                 the meta-controller implementation is provided in Appendix F.
                                                 Q-function separation. The architecture of the Q-function in Agent57 is implemented as two
                                                 separate networks in order to split the intrinsic and extrinsic components. The network parameters of
                                                 Qj (x, a; θe ) and Qj (x, a; θi ) are separate and independently optimized with rje and rji , respectively.
                                                 The main motivation behind this decomposition is to allow each network to adapt to the scale and
                                                 variance associated with their corresponding reward, as well as preventing the gradients of the
                                                 decomposed intrinsic and extrinsic value function heads from interfering with each other.

                                                 4    MEME: I MPROVING THE DATA EFFICIENCY OF AGENT 57
                                                 This section describes the main algorithmic contributions of the MEME agent, aimed at improving the
                                                 data efficiency of Agent57. These contributions aim to achieve faster propagation of learning signals
                                                 related to rare events ( A ), stabilize learning under differing value scales ( B ), improve the neural
                                                 network architecture ( C ), and make updates more robust under a rapidly-changing policy ( D ). For
                                                 clarity of exposition, we label the contributions according to the type of limitation they address.
                                                 A1 Bootstrapping with online network. Target networks are frequently used in conjunction with
                                                 value-based agents due to their stabilizing effect when learning from off-policy data (Mnih et al.,
                                                 2015; Van Hasselt et al., 2016). This design choice places a fundamental restriction on how quickly
                                                 changes in the Q-function are able to propagate. This issue can be mitigated to some extent by
                                                 simply updating the target network more frequently, but the result is typically a less stable agent. To
                                                 accelerate signal propagation while maintaining stability, we use online network bootstrapping, and
                                                 we stabilize the learning by introducing an approximate trust region for value updates that allows us
                                                 to filter which samples contribute to the loss. The trust region masks out the loss at any timestep for
                                                 which both of the following conditions hold:
                                                                           |Qj (xt , at ; θ) − Qj (xt , at ; θT )| > ασj                                                                                (1)
                                                                                j                              j                                     j
                                                                       sgn(Q (xt , at ; θ) − Q (xt , at ; θT )) ̸= sgn(Q (xt , at ; θ) − Gt )                                                           (2)
                                                 where α is a fixed hyperparameter, Gt denotes the return estimate, θ and θT denote the online and
                                                 target parameters respectively, and σj is the standard deviation of the TD-errors (a more precise
                                                 description of which we defer until B1 ). Intuitively, we only mask if the current value of the
                                                 online network is outside of the trust region (Equation 1) and the sign of the TD-error points away


                                                                                                                          4
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


from the trust region (Equation 2), as depicted in Figure 3 in red. We note that a very similar
trust region scheme is used for the value-function in most Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO)
implementations (Schulman et al., 2017), though not described in the original paper. In contrast, the
PPO version instead uses a constant threshold, and thus is not able to adapt to differing scales of
value functions.


                                                                                  Qj(xt,at;θ)
                        Qj(xt,at;θT) - ασj   Qj(xt,at;θT)   Qj(xt,at;θT) + ασj


Figure 3: Trust region. The position of dots is given by the relationship between the values predicted
by the online network, Qj (xt , at ; θ), and the values predicted by the target network, Qj (xt , at ; θT )
(Equation 1 and left hand side of Equation 2), the box represents the trust region bounds defined in
Equation 1, and the direction of the arrow is given by the right hand side of Equation 2. Green-colored
transitions are used in the loss computation, whereas red ones are masked out.


A2 Target computation with tolerance. Agent57 uses Retrace (Munos et al., 2016) to compute
return estimates from off-policy data, but we observed that it tends to cut traces too aggressively when
using ϵ-greedy policies thus slowing down the propagation of information into the value function.
Preliminary experiments showed that data efficiency was improved in many dense-reward tasks when
replacing Retrace with Peng’s Q(λ) (Peng & Williams, 1994), but its lack of off-policy corrections
tends to result in degraded performance as data becomes more off-policy (e.g. by increasing the
expected number of times that a sequence is sampled from replay, or by sharing data across a family
of policies). This motivates us to propose an alternative return estimator, which we derive from
Q(λ) (Watkins & Dayan, 1992):
                                        !
                           X k−1  Y
   Gt = max Q(xt , a) +               λi γ k (rt+k + γ max Q(xt+k+1 , a) − max Q(xt+k , a)) (3)
           a                                                a                       a
                             k≥0      i=0
       Qk−1
where i=0 λi ∈ [0, 1] effectively controls how much information from the future is used in the
return estimation and is generally used as a trace cutting coefficient to perform off-policy correction.
Peng’s Q(λ) does not perform any kind of off-policy correction and sets λi = λ, whereas Watkins’
Q(λ) (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) aggressively cuts traces whenever it encounters an off-policy action
by using λi = λIai ∈argmaxa Q(xi ,a) , where I denotes the indicator function. We propose to use a softer
trace cutting mechanism by adding a fixed tolerance parameter κ and taking the expectation of trace
coefficients under π:

                       λi = λEa∼π(a|xt ) I[Q(xt ,at ;θ)≥Q(xt ,a;θ)−κ|Q(xi ,a;θ)|]                     (4)
Finally, we replace all occurrences of the max operator in Equation 3 with the expectation under π.
The resulting return estimator, which we denote Soft Watkins Q(λ), leads to more transitions being
used and increased sample efficiency. Note that Watkins Q(λ) is recovered when setting κ = 0 and
π = G(Q).
 B1 Loss and priority normalization. As we learn a family of Q-functions which vary over a
wide range of discount factors and intrinsic reward scales, we expect that the Q-functions will vary
considerably in scale. This may cause the larger-scale Q-values to dominate learning and destabilize
learning of smaller Q-values. This is a particular concern in environments with very small extrinsic
reward scales. To counteract this effect we introduce a normalization scheme on the TD-errors similar
to that used in Schaul et al. (2021). Specifically, we compute a running estimate of the standard
deviation of TD-errors of the online network σjrunning as well as a batch standard deviation σjbatch , and
compute σj = max(σjrunning , σjbatch , ϵ), where ϵ acts as small threshold to avoid amplification of noise
past a specified scale, which we fix to 0.01 in all our experiments. We then divide the TD-errors by
σj when computing both the loss and priorities. As opposed to Schaul et al. (2021) we compute the
running statistics on the learner, and we use importance sampling to correct the sampling distribution.


                                                        5
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


 B2 Cross-mixture training. Agent57 only trains the policy j which was used to collect a given
trajectory, but it is natural to ask whether data efficiency and robustness may be improved by training
all policies at once. We propose a training loss L according to the following weighting scheme
between the behavior policy loss and the mean over all losses:
                                                             N −1
                                                       1−η X
                                        L = ηLjµ +                Lj                                (5)
                                                         N j=0
where Lj denotes the Q-learning loss for policy j, and jµ denotes the index for the behavior policy
selected by the meta-controller for the sampled trajectory. We find that an intermediate value for the
mixture parameter of η = 0.5 tends to work well. To achieve better compute-efficiency we choose
to deviate from the original UVFA architecture which fed a 1-hot encoding of the policy index to
the LSTM, and instead modify the Q-value heads to output N sets of Q-values, one for each of the
members in the family of policies introduced in Section 3. Therefore, in the end we output values for
all combinations of actions and policies (see Figure 2). We note that in this setting, there is also less
deviation in the recurrent states when learning across different mixture policies.
C1 Normalizer-free torso network. Normalization layers are a common feature of ResNet architec-
tures, and which are known to aid in training of very deep networks, but preliminary investigation
revealed that several commonly used normalization layers are in fact detrimental to performance in
our setting. Instead, we employ a variation of the NFNet architecture (Brock et al., 2021) for our
policy torso network, which combines a variance-scaling strategy with scaled weight standardization
and careful initialization to achieve state-of-the-art performance on ImageNet without the need for
normalization layers. We adopt their use of stochastic depth (Huang et al., 2016) at training-time but
omit the application of ordinary dropout to fully-connected layers as we did not observe any benefit
from this form of regularization. Some care is required when using stochastic depth in conjunction
with multi-step returns, as resampling of the stochastic depth mask at each timestep injects additional
noise into the bootstrap values, resulting in a higher-variance return estimator. As such, we employ a
temporally-consistent stochastic depth mask which remains fixed over the length of each training
trajectory.
C2 Shared torso with combined loss. Agent57 decomposes the combined Q-function into intrinsic
and extrinsic components, Qe and Qi , which are represented by separate networks. Such a decompo-
sition prevents the gradients of the decomposed value functions from interfering with each other. This
interference may occur in environments where the intrinsic reward is poorly aligned with the task
objective, as defined by the extrinsic reward. However, the choice to use separate separate networks
comes at an expensive computational cost, and potentially limits sample-efficiency since generic
low-level features cannot be shared. To alleviate these issues, we introduce a shared torso for the two
Q-functions while retaining separate heads.
While the form of the decomposition in Agent57 was chosen so as to ensure convergence to the optimal
value-function Q⋆ in the tabular setting, this does not generally hold under function approximation.
Comparing the combined and decomposed losses we observe a mismatch in the gradients due to the
absence of cross-terms Qi (θ) ∂Q∂θ
                                 e (θ)
                                       and Qe (θ) ∂Q∂θ
                                                     i (θ)
                                                           in the decomposed loss:
                     h                   i        h                                            i
                ∂        1           2       ∂        1               2  1                 2
                ∂θ       2 (Q(θ) − G)     ̸= ∂θ       2 (Qe (θ) − Ge ) + 2 (βQi (θ) − βGi )          (6)
                |             {z         } |                           {z                      }
                         combined loss                           decomposed loss
                         ∂                                    ∂Qe (θ)                    ∂Qi (θ)
                                                                       +β 2 Qi (θ)−Gi

  Qe (θ)+βQi (θ)−G          Qe (θ)+βQi (θ) ̸= Qe (θ)−Ge                                          (7)
                         ∂θ                                     ∂θ                         ∂θ
Since we use a behavior policy induced by the total Q-function Q = Qe + βQi rather than the
individual components, theory would suggest to use the combined loss instead. In addition, from a
practical implementation perspective, this switch to the combined loss greatly simplifies the design
choices involved in our proposed trust region method described in A1 . The penalty paid for this
choice is that the decomposition of the value function into extrinsic and intrinsic components no
longer carries a strict semantic meaning. Nevertheless we do still retain an implicit inductive bias
induced by multiplication of Qi with the intrinsic reward weight β j .
 D Robustifying behavior via policy distillation. Schaul et al. (2022) describe the effect of
policy churn, whereby the greedy action of value-based RL algorithms may change frequently over


                                                           6
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


consecutive parameter updates. This can have a deleterious effect on off-policy correction methods:
traces will be cut more aggressively than with a stochastic policy, and bootstrap values will change
frequently which can result in a higher variance return estimator. In addition, our choice of training
with temporally-consistent stochastic depth masks can be interpreted as learning an implicit ensemble
of Q-functions; thus it is natural to ask whether we may see additional benefit from leveraging the
policy induced by this ensemble.
We propose to train an explicit policy head πdist (see Figure 2) via policy distillation to match the
ϵ-greedy policy induced by the Q-function. In expectation over multiple gradient steps this should
help to smooth out the policy over time, as well as over the ensemble, while being much faster to
evaluate than the individual members of the ensemble. Similarly to the trust-region described in A1 ,
we mask the policy distillation loss at any timestep where a KL constraint CKL is violated:
          X
Lπ = −       Gϵ Q(xt , a; θ) log πdist (a|xt ; θ) ∀t s.t. KL πdist (a|xt ; θT ))||πdist (a|xt ; θ) ≤ CKL
           a,t
                                                                                                        (8)
We use a fixed value of ϵ = 10−4 to act as a simple regularizer to prevent the policy logits from
growing too large. We then use πdist ′
                                          = softmax( log πτ dist ) as the target policy in our Soft Watkins
Q(λ) return estimator, where τ is a fixed temperature parameter. We tested values of τ in the range
[0, 1] and found that any choice of τ in this range yields improvement compared to not using the
distilled policy, but values closer to 1 tend to exhibit greater stability, while those closer to 0 tend to
learn more efficiently. We settled on an intermediate τ = 0.25 to help balance between these two
                                           ′
effects. We found that sampling from πdist    at behavior-time was less effective  in some sparse reward
environments, and instead opt to have the agent act according to Gϵ πdist .


5     E XPERIMENTS

Methods constituting MEME proposed in Section 4 aim at improving the data efficiency of Agent57,
but such efficiency gains must not come at the cost of end performance. For this reason, we train
our agent with a budget of 1B environment frames3 . This budget allows us to validate that the
asymptotic performance is maintained, i.e. the agent converges and is stable when improving data
efficiency. Hyperparameters have been tuned over a subset of eight games, encompassing games with
different reward density, scale and requiring credit assignment over different time horizons: Frostbite,
H.E.R.O., Montezuma’s Revenge, Pitfall!, Skiing, Solaris, Surround, and Tennis. Specifically, we
selected Montezuma’s Revenge, Pitfall!, and H.E.R.O. as these are games exhibiting very sparse and
large scale reward signal, requiring long-term credit assignment, while being partially observable.
Additionally, Solaris and Skiing also require long-term credit assignment, but have medium scale and
large negative scale rewards, respectively. Having a high degree of randomness in the observations is
also a property of Solaris which our agents should be robust to. Finally, Surround and Tennis can be
considered as fully-observable and having small-scale, moderately sparse rewards. In particular, due
to the improvements in stability, we find it beneficial to use a higher samples per insert ratio (SPI)
than the published values of Agent57 or R2D2. For all our experiments SPI is fixed to 6. An ablation
on the effect of different SPI values can be found in Appendix L. An exhaustive description of the
hyperparameters used is provided in Appendix A, and the network architecture in Appendix B. We
report results averaged over six seeds per game for all experiments. We also show similar results with
sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018) in Appendix K. Metrics for previous methods are computed
using the mean final score per game reported in their respective publications: Agent57 (Badia
et al., 2020), MuZero 20B (Schrittwieser et al., 2020), MuZero 200M (Schrittwieser et al., 2021),
Muesli (Hessel et al., 2021). Data efficiency comparisons with Agent57 are based on the results
reported by Badia et al. (2020).

5.1   S UMMARY OF RESULTS

In this section, we show that the proposed MEME agent is able to achieve a 200-fold reduction in the
number of frames required for all games to surpass the human benchmark. The last game to surpass
   3
     This corresponds to 250M agent-environment interactions due to the standard action repeat of 4 in the Atari
benchmark.


                                                       7
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 1: Number of games above human, capped mean, mean and median human normalized scores
for the 57 Atari games. Similarly to Badia et al. (2020), we first compute the final score per game
by averaging results from all random seeds, and then aggregate the scores of all 57 games. We
sample three out of the six seeds per game without replacement and report the average as well as 95%
confidence intervals over 10,000 repetitions of this process.
                                           200M frames                            > 200M frames
  Statistic                    MEME               Muesli    MuZero     MEME              Agent57    MuZero
  Env frames                   200M               200M      200M       1B                90B        20B
  Number of games > human      54(53,55)          52        49         57(57,57)         57         51
  Capped mean                  98(97,98)          92        89         100(100,100)      100        87
  Mean                         3305(3163,3446)    2523      2856       4087(3723,4445)   4766       4998
  Median                       848(829,895)       1077      1006       1185(1085,1325)   1933       2041
  25th percentile              282(269,303)       269       153        478(429,515)      387        276
  5th percentile               100(89,108)        15        28         119(119,120)      116        0



human score with MEME is Pitfall! at 390M frames, as compared to 78B frames required for Skiing,
the last game for Agent57.
Figure 1 gives further details per game, about the required number of frames to reach the human
baseline, and shows that hard exploration games such as Private Eye, Pitfall! and Montezuma’s
Revenge pose the hardest challenge for both agents, being among the last ones in which the human
baseline is surpassed. This can be explained by the fact that in these games the agent might need a
very large number of episodes before it is able to generate useful experience from which to learn.
Notably, our agent is able to reduce the number of interactions required to outperform the human
baseline in each of the 57 Atari games, by 62× on average. In addition to the improved sample-
efficiency, MEME shows competitive performance compared to the state-of-the-art methods shown
in Table 1, while being trained for only 1B frames. When comparing with state-of-the-art agents such
as MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2020) or Muesli (Hessel et al., 2021), we observe a similar pattern
to that reported by Badia et al. (2020): they achieve very high scores in most games, as denoted
by their high mean and median scores, but struggle to learn completely on a few of them (Agarwal
et al., 2021). It is important to note that our agent achieves the human benchmark in all games, as
demonstrated by its higher scores on the lower percentiles.

5.2    A BLATIONS

We analyze the contribution of all the components introduced in Section 4 through ablation experi-
ments on the same subset of eight games. We compare methods based on the area under the score
curve in order to capture end performance and data efficiency under a single metric4 . The magnitude
of this quantity varies across games, so we normalize it by its maximum value per game in order to
obtain a score between 0 and 1, and report results on the eight ablation games in Figure 4. Appendix J
includes full learning curves for all ablation experiments as well as ablations of other design choices
(e.g. the number of times each sample is replayed on average, optimizer hyperparameters).
Results in Figure 4 demonstrate that all proposed methods play a role in the performance and stability
of the agent. Disabling the trust region and using the target network for bootstrapping ( A1 ) produces
the most important performance drop among all ablations, likely due to the target network being
slower at propagating information into the targets. Interestingly, we have observed that the trust
region is beneficial even when using target networks for bootstrapping (c.f. Figure 24 in Appendix
N), which suggests that the trust region may produce an additional stabilizing effect beyond what
target networks alone can provide. Besides having a similar stabilizing effect, policy distillation ( D )
also speeds up convergence on some games and has less tendency to converge to local optima on
some others. The Soft Watkins’ Q(λ) loss ( A2 ) boosts data efficiency especially in games with
sparse rewards and requiring long-term credit assignment, and we have empirically verified that
    4
      We first compute scores at 10,000 equally spaced points in [0, 1B] frames by applying piecewise linear
interpolation to the scores logged during training. After averaging the scores at each of these points over all
random seeds seeds, the trapezoidal rule is used to compute the area under the averaged curve.


                                                      8
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                       Montezuma's Revenge
                Pitfall!                Frostbite
                                                             MEME
                                                              Combined loss (C2)
                                                              Normalization (B1)
           Tennis                             H.E.R.O.        Soft Watkins' Q( ) (A2)
                                                              Cross-mixture training (B2)
                                                              NFNet torso (C1)
                                                              Policy distillation (D)
                                                              Trust-region Online boostrapping (A1)
               Surround                  Skiing
                             Solaris

Figure 4: Results of ablating individual components. For each experiment, we first average the score
over three seeds up to 1B frames, then compute the area under the score curve as it captures not only
final performance but also the amount of interaction required to achieve it. As absolute values vary
across games, we report relative quantities by dividing by the maximum value obtained in each game.


it uses longer traces than other losses (c.f. Figure 5 in Appendix C). Cross-mixture training ( B2 )
and the combined loss ( C2 ) tend to provide efficiency gains across most games. Finally, while we
observe overall gains in performance from using normalization of TD errors ( B1 ), the effect is less
pronounced than that of other improvements. We hypothesize that the normalization has a high
degree of overlap with other regularizing enhancements, such as including the trust region.
We further study the benefits of the proposed components in an agent-agnostic context, by examining
their performance when using the R2D2 agent (Kapturowski et al., 2018), which we present in
Appendix M.

6    D ISCUSSION
We present a novel agent MEME that outperforms the human-level baseline in a data-efficient manner
on all 57 Atari games. Our agent outperforms the human baseline across all 57 Atari games in
390M frames, using two orders of magnitude fewer interactions with the environment than Agent57,
which leads to a 62× speed-up on average. As Atari games are played at 60 FPS, this translates to
approximately 75 days of training, compared to more than 41 years of gameplay required by Agent57.
To achieve this, the agent employs a set of improvements that address the issues apparent in the
previous state-of-the art methods. Our contributions aim to achieve faster propagation of learning
signals related to rare events, stabilize learning under differing value scales, improve the neural
network architecture, and make updates more robust under a rapidly-changing policy. We ran ablation
experiments to evaluate the contribution of each of the algorithmic and network improvements.
Introducing online network bootstrapping with a trust-region has the most impact on the performance
among these changes, while certain games require multiple improvements to maintain stability and
performance. The increased stability enables more aggressive optimization, e.g. through higher
samples per insert ratios or a centralized bandit that aggregates statistics from all actors, leading to
more data-efficient learning.
Although our agent achieves above average-human performance on all 57 Atari games within 390M
frames with the same set of hyperparameters, the agent is separately trained on each game. An
interesting research direction to pursue would be to devise a training scheme such that the agent with
the same set of weights can achieve similar performance and data efficiency as the proposed agent on
all games. Furthermore, the improvements that we propose do not necessarily only apply to Agent57,
and further study could analyze the impact of these components in other state-of-the-art agents. We
also expect that the generality of the agent could be expanded further. While this work focuses on
Atari due to its wide range of tasks and reward structures, future research is required to analyze the
ability of the agent to tackle other important challenges, such as more complex observation spaces
(e.g. 3D navigation, multi-modal inputs), complex action spaces, or longer-term credit assignment.
All such improvements would lead MEME towards achieving greater generality.


                                                         9
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Tom Schaul for his excellent feedback on improving this manuscript, and
Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Alaa Saade, Daniele Calandriello, Jake Bruce, Will Dabney,
Mark Rowland, Bilal Piot, and Daniel Guo for helpful discussions throughout the development of
this work.

R EPRODUCIBILITY S TATEMENT
In this manuscript we made additional efforts to make sure that the explanations of the proposed
methods are detailed enough to be easily reproduced by the community. Regarding the training
setup, we detail the distributed setting and the computation resources used in Appendices E and G,
respectively. The optimiser details are presented in Appendix D, while the comprehensive list of
hyperparameters used is given in Appendix A. We explain the implementation details of the neural
network architecture in Appendix B with the help of Figure 2. Finally, we give additional details about
the components such as the bandit (Appendix F), the NGU and RND intrinsic rewards (Appendix H),
target computation (Appendix C), and further clarify the proposed trust region with Figure 3.

E THICS S TATEMENT
We would like to note that large scale RL experiments require a significant amount of compute, as
outlined in the Appendix G. In some cases the results obtained may not justify the incurred compute
and environmental costs. However, to this end, our paper greatly improves the sample-efficiency of
such RL methods, and we expect its development cost and environmental impact to be amortized
over many subsequent applications.
We hope that in the future, researchers will leverage the contributions presented in this paper in their
work on large-scale RL, and help reduce the environmental impact their research might have.

R EFERENCES
Rishabh Agarwal, Max Schwarzer, Pablo Samuel Castro, Aaron C Courville, and Marc Bellemare.
  Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical precipice. NeurIPS, 2021.
Marcin Andrychowicz, Filip Wolski, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Rachel Fong, Peter Welinder, Bob
 McGrew, Josh Tobin, Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba. Hindsight experience replay. NeurIPS,
 2017.
Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multiarmed bandit
  problem. Machine Learning, 2002.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi, Daniel Guo, Bilal Piot, Steven
  Kapturowski, Olivier Tieleman, Martin Arjovsky, Alexander Pritzel, Andrew Bolt, et al. Never
  give up: Learning directed exploration strategies. In ICLR, 2019.
Adrià Puigdomènech Badia, Bilal Piot, Steven Kapturowski, Pablo Sprechmann, Alex Vitvitskyi,
  Zhaohan Daniel Guo, and Charles Blundell. Agent57: Outperforming the atari human benchmark.
  In ICML, 2020.
Marc G Bellemare, Yavar Naddaf, Joel Veness, and Michael Bowling. The arcade learning environ-
 ment: An evaluation platform for general agents. JAIR, 2013.
Andy Brock, Soham De, Samuel L Smith, and Karen Simonyan. High-performance large-scale image
  recognition without normalization. In ICML, 2021.
Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Amos Storkey, and Oleg Klimov. Exploration by random network
  distillation. In ICLR, 2019.
Albin Cassirer, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Eugene Brevdo, Sabela Ramos, Toby Boyd, Thibault Sottiaux,
  and Manuel Kroiss. Reverb: a framework for experience replay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.04736,
  2021.


                                                  10
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Gabriel Dulac-Arnold, Daniel Mankowitz, and Todd Hester. Challenges of real-world reinforcement
  learning. In ICML, 2019.
Adrien Ecoffet, Joost Huizinga, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff Clune. First return, then
  explore. Nature, 2021.
Damien Ernst, Pierre Geurts, and Louis Wehenkel. Tree-based batch mode reinforcement learning.
  JMLR, 2005.
Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron,
  Vlad Firoiu, Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance
  weighted actor-learner architectures. In ICML, 2018.
Aurelien Garivier and Eric Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for non-stationary bandit
  problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:0805.3415, 2008.
Aurélien Garivier and Eric Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit
  problems. In ALT, 2011.
Steven Hansen, Will Dabney, Andre Barreto, David Warde-Farley, Tom Van de Wiele, and Volodymyr
  Mnih. Fast task inference with variational intrinsic successor features. In ICLR, 2019.
Matteo Hessel, Ivo Danihelka, Fabio Viola, Arthur Guez, Simon Schmitt, Laurent Sifre, Theo-
 phane Weber, David Silver, and Hado Van Hasselt. Muesli: Combining improvements in policy
 optimization. In ICML, 2021.
Dan Horgan, John Quan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Matteo Hessel, Hado Van Hasselt,
  and David Silver. Distributed prioritized experience replay. In ICLR, 2018.
Gao Huang, Yu Sun, Zhuang Liu, Daniel Sedra, and Kilian Q Weinberger. Deep networks with
  stochastic depth. In ECCV, 2016.
Łukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Babaeizadeh, Piotr Miłos, Błażej Osiński, Roy H Campbell, Konrad
  Czechowski, Dumitru Erhan, Chelsea Finn, Piotr Kozakowski, Sergey Levine, et al. Model based
  reinforcement learning for atari. In ICLR, 2019.
Sham Kakade and John Langford. Approximately optimal approximate reinforcement learning. In
  ICML, 2002.
Steven Kapturowski, Georg Ostrovski, John Quan, Remi Munos, and Will Dabney. Recurrent
  experience replay in distributed reinforcement learning. In ICLR, 2018.
Kacper Piotr Kielak. Do recent advancements in model-based deep reinforcement learning
  really improve data efficiency?, 2020. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
  Bke9u1HFwB.
Ilya Kostrikov, Denis Yarats, and Rob Fergus. Image augmentation is all you need: Regularizing
   deep reinforcement learning from pixels. In ICLR, 2021.
Long-Ji Lin. Reinforcement learning for robots using neural networks. Carnegie Mellon University,
  1992.
Hao Liu and Pieter Abbeel. Behavior from the void: Unsupervised active pre-training. In NeurIPS,
  2021.
Alexander Long, Alan Blair, and Herke van Hoof. Fast and data efficient reinforcement learning
  from pixels via non-parametric value approximation. In AAAI, 2022.
Marlos C Machado, Marc G Bellemare, Erik Talvitie, Joel Veness, Matthew Hausknecht, and Michael
 Bowling. Revisiting the arcade learning environment: Evaluation protocols and open problems for
 general agents. JAIR, 2018.
Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
  Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
  through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 2015.


                                                11
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Rémi Munos, Tom Stepleton, Anna Harutyunyan, and Marc Bellemare. Safe and efficient off-policy
  reinforcement learning. In NeurIPS, 2016.
Ian Osband, Charles Blundell, Alexander Pritzel, and Benjamin Van Roy. Deep exploration via
  bootstrapped dqn. NeurIPS, 2016.
Jing Peng and Ronald J Williams. Incremental multi-step q-learning. In ICML. 1994.
Alexandre Piche, Valentin Thomas, Joseph Marino, Gian Maria Marconi, Chris J. Pal, and Mo-
  hammad Emitiyaz Khan. Beyond target networks: Improving deep -learning with functional
  regularization. arXiv, 2021.
Tobias Pohlen, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Gheshlaghi Azar, Dan Horgan, David Budden, Gabriel Barth-
  Maron, Hado van Hasselt, John Quan, Mel Vecerik, Matteo Hessel, Rémi Munos, and Olivier
  Pietquin. Observe and look further: Achieving consistent performance on atari. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:1805.11593, 2018.
Martin L Puterman. Markov Decision Processes: Discrete Stochastic Dynamic Programming. John
 Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994.
Siyuan Qiao, Huiyu Wang, Chenxi Liu, Wei Shen, and Alan Yuille. Micro-batch training with
  batch-channel normalization and weight standardization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10520, 2019.
Martin Riedmiller. Neural fitted q iteration–first experiences with a data efficient neural reinforcement
 learning method. In ECML, 2005.
Martin Riedmiller, Roland Hafner, Thomas Lampe, Michael Neunert, Jonas Degrave, Tom Wiele,
 Vlad Mnih, Nicolas Heess, and Jost Tobias Springenberg. Learning by playing solving sparse
 reward tasks from scratch. In ICML, 2018.
Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, Xi Chen, Szymon Sidor, and Ilya Sutskever. Evolution strategies as a
  scalable alternative to reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.03864, 2017.
Tom Schaul, Daniel Horgan, Karol Gregor, and David Silver. Universal value function approximators.
  In ICML, 2015.
Tom Schaul, John Quan, Ioannis Antonoglou, and David Silver. Prioritized experience replay. In
  ICLR, 2016.
Tom Schaul, Georg Ostrovski, Iurii Kemaev, and Diana Borsa. Return-based scaling: Yet another
  normalisation trick for deep rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05347, 2021.
Tom Schaul, André Barreto, John Quan, and Georg Ostrovski. The phenomenon of policy churn.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00730, 2022.
Simon Schmitt, Matteo Hessel, and Karen Simonyan. Off-policy actor-critic with shared experience
  replay. In ICML, 2020.
Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Thomas Hubert, Karen Simonyan, Laurent Sifre, Simon
  Schmitt, Arthur Guez, Edward Lockhart, Demis Hassabis, Thore Graepel, et al. Mastering atari,
  go, chess and shogi by planning with a learned model. Nature, 2020.
Julian Schrittwieser, Thomas Hubert, Amol Mandhane, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Ioannis
  Antonoglou, and David Silver. Online and offline reinforcement learning by planning with a
  learned model. In NeurIPS, 2021.
John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
  policy optimization. In ICML, 2015.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy
  optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
Max Schwarzer, Ankesh Anand, Rishab Goel, R Devon Hjelm, Aaron Courville, and Philip Bachman.
 Data-efficient reinforcement learning with self-predictive representations. In ICLR, 2021.


                                                   12
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan, Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
  Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian Bolton, et al. Mastering the game of go without
  human knowledge. Nature, 2017.
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioannis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez,
  Marc Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore Graepel, et al. A general reinforcement
  learning algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go through self-play. Science, 2018.
H Francis Song, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Aidan Clark, Hubert Soyer, Jack W
  Rae, Seb Noury, Arun Ahuja, Siqi Liu, Dhruva Tirumala, et al. V-mpo: On-policy maximum a
  posteriori policy optimization for discrete and continuous control. In ICLR, 2020.
Aravind Srinivas, Michael Laskin, and Pieter Abbeel. Curl: Contrastive unsupervised representations
  for reinforcement learning. In ICML, 2020.
Felipe Petroski Such, Vashisht Madhavan, Edoardo Conti, Joel Lehman, Kenneth O Stanley, and Jeff
  Clune. Deep neuroevolution: Genetic algorithms are a competitive alternative for training deep
  neural networks for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.06567, 2017.
Richard S Sutton and Andrew G Barto. Reinforcement learning: An introduction. MIT press, 2018.
Hado Van Hasselt, Arthur Guez, and David Silver. Deep reinforcement learning with double q-
  learning. In AAAI, 2016.
Hado P van Hasselt, Matteo Hessel, and John Aslanides. When to use parametric models in
  reinforcement learning? In NeurIPS, 2019.
Christopher JCH Watkins and Peter Dayan. Q-learning. Machine learning, 1992.
Weirui Ye, Shaohuai Liu, Thanard Kurutach, Pieter Abbeel, and Yang Gao. Mastering atari games
 with limited data. In NeurIPS, 2021.


                                                13
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


A     H YPER - PARAMETERS


                                   Table 2: Agent Hyper-parameters.
                       Parameter                                                    Value
                       Num Mixtures                                                     16
                       Bandit β                                                       1.0
                       Bandit ϵ                                                       0.5
                       Bandit γ                                                    0.999
                       Max Discount                                               0.9997
                       Min Discount                                                  0.97
                       Replay Period                                                    80
                       Burn-in                                                           0
                       Trace Length                                                   160
                       AP Embedding Size                                                32
                       RND Scale                                                       0.5
                       RND Clip Threshold                                              5.0
                       IM Reward Scale βIM                                            0.1
                       βstd                                                           2.0
                       Max KL CKL                                                     0.5
                       Cross-Mixture η                                                0.5
                         ′
                       πdist Softmax Temperature τ                                   0.25
                       Soft Watkins-Q(λ) Threshold κ                                 0.01
                       λ                                                             0.95
                       Residual Drop Rate                                            0.25
                       Eval Parameter Decay ηeval                                  0.995
                       RND Stats Decay αRND                                       0.9999
                       TD Stats Decay αTD                                         0.9999
                       Priority Exponent                                              0.6
                       Importance Sampling Exponent                                   0.4
                       Max Priority Weight                                             0.9
                       Replay Ratio                                                   6.0
                                                                            5
                       Replay Capacity                             √ 2 × 10  trajectories
                       Value function rescaling              sgn(x) x2 + 1 − 1 + 0.001x
                       Batch Size                                                       64
                       Adam β1                                                        0.9
                       Adam β2                                                     0.999
                       Adam ϵ                                                       10−8
                       RL Adam Learning Rate                                   3 × 10−4
                       AP Adam Learning Rate                                   6 × 10−4
                       RND Adam Learning Rate                                  6 × 10−4
                       RL Weight Decay                                               0.05
                       AP Weight Decay                                               0.05
                       RND Weight Decay                                                0.0
                       Gradient clipping percentile pclip                            0.99
                       Gradient clipping decay αclip                               0.999


                              Table 3: Environment Hyper-parameters.
                       Parameter                                                    Value
                       Input Shape                                          210 × 160
                       Grayscaling                                                True
                       Action Repeat                                                 4
                       Num Stacked Frames                                            1
                       Pooled Frames                                                 2
                       Max Episode Length         108000 frames (30 minutes game time)
                       Life Loss Signal                                       Not used


B     N ETWORK A RCHITECTURE

B.1   T ORSO

We use a modified version of the NFNet architecture (Brock et al., 2021). We use a simplified stem,
consisting of a single 7 × 7 convolution with stride 4. We also forgo bottleneck residual blocks in
favor of 2 layers of 3 × 3 convolutions, followed by a Squeeze-Excite block.


                                                        14
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


In addition, we make some minor modifications to the downsampling blocks. Specifically, we apply
an activation prior to the average pooling and multiply the output by the stride in order to maintain
the variance of the activations. This is then followed by a 3 × 3 convolution.
All convolutions use a Scaled Weight Standardization scheme (Qiao et al., 2019). The block section
parameters are as follows:

       • num blocks: (2, 3, 4, 4)
       • num channels: (64, 128, 128, 64)
       • strides: (1, 2, 2, 2)

B.2   N ON - IMAGE F EATURES

We also feed the following features into the network:

       • previous action (encoded as a size-32 embedding)
       • previous extrinsic reward
       • previous intrinsic reward
       • previous RND component of intrinsic reward
       • previous Episodic component of intrinsic reward
       • previous Action Prediction embedding

These are fed into a single linear layer of size 256 and activation and then concatenated with the
output of the torso and input into the recurrent core.

B.3   R ECURRENT C ORE

The recurrent core is composed of single LSTM with hidden size 1024. The output is then concate-
nated together with the core input and fed into the Action-Value and Policy heads.

B.4   ACTION -VALUE AND P OLICY H EADS

We utilize separate dueling heads for the intrinsic and extrinsic components of the value function,
and a simple MLP for the policy. All heads use two hidden layers of size 1024 and output size
num_actions × num_mixtures.

C     TARGET C OMPUTATION AND T RACE C OEFFICIENTS
As motivated in Section 4 A2 , we introduce Soft Watkins Q(λ) as a trade-off between aggressive trace
cutting used within Retrace and Watkins Q(λ), and the lack of off-policy correction in Peng’s Q(λ).
We investigate this hypothesis by observing the average trace coefficients for each of the methods in
Figure 5. The lower values of the trace coefficient λ lead to more aggressive trace cutting as soon as
the data is off-policy. Conversely, the λ value of 1 signifies no trace cutting whatsoever. As expected,
Retrace’s trace coefficient is significantly lower than the other methods considered. The proposed
Soft Watkins Q(λ) has a parameter κ that allows us to control the permissiveness of the trace-cutting
which in turn affects the final trace coefficient. We ran a course sweep of this parameter over the
values {0, .1, .01} and found values of κ = 0.01 to generally perform best in our setting. As can be
seen from Figure 5 this choice considerably increases the average trace coefficient of Soft Watkins’
Q(λ) relative to κ = 0, and concentrates the distribution of trace coefficients without causing it to
collapse.

D     O PTIMIZER
We use separate optimizers for each of the RL, Action Prediction, and RND Networks, with the only
differences between them being the choice of learning rate and weight decay. The base optimizer


                                                  15
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                         1.0

Mean trace coefficient
                         0.8
                         0.6
                         0.4
                         0.2
                         0.0
                                     Retrace   Soft Watkins' Q( ) Soft Watkins' Q( ) Soft Watkins' Q( )   Peng's Q( )
                                                      =0             = 0.01 (ours)          = 0.1

  Figure 5: Average trace coefficients for each method on the set of ablation games. For each method,
  we average the trace length for transitions generated between 200M and 250M frames, as we observe
  that their values tend to stabilize after an initial transient period. Each violin plot is thus generated
  from num_seeds × num_games × num_mixtures data points.


 used is AdamW with Nesterov Momentum. A linear learning rate warmup is used for the first 200
 updates, to allow time for the Adam statistics to stabilize. Most notably, we employ an adaptive
 element-wise gradient clipping strategy whereby we maintain running estimates of the mean and
 standard deviation of the element-wise gradients using an Exponential Moving Average (EMA) with
 αclip = 0.999, and only clip when the gradient magnitude exceeds the mean by some factor c of
 the standard deviation. Concretely, the factor c is determined by specifying a percentile pclip (that
 we fix to 0.99) which is then input to the inverse CDF of a standard normal distribution. In general
 we found this clipping strategy to yield a small but consistent improvement in stability across many
 environments compared to global norm clipping. We ablate some of the optimizer choices in Figure
 19.

   E                           D ISTRIBUTED SETTING
  All experiments are run using a distributed setting. The experiment consists of the actors, learner,
  bandit and evaluators, as well as a replay buffer.
  The actors and evaluators are the two types of workers that draw samples from the environment. Since
  actors collect experience with non-greedy policies, we follow the common practice in this type of
  agent and report scores from separate evaluator processes that continually execute the greedy policy
  and whose experience is not added to the replay buffer (Kapturowski et al., 2018). Therefore, only
  the actor workers write to the replay buffer, while the evaluation workers are used purely for reporting
  the performance. The evaluation scheme differs from R2D2 (Kapturowski et al., 2018) in that a
  separate set of eval parameters are maintained, which are computed as an EMA of the online network
  with ηeval = 0.995; and these eval parameters are continually updated throughout each episode. We
  observed that the use of these eval parameters provided a consistent performance boost across almost
  all environments, but we continue to use the online network for the actors in order to obtain more
  varied experience.
  In the replay buffer, we store fixed-length sequences of (rte , rtNGU , xt , at ) tuples. These sequences
  never cross episode boundaries. For Atari, we apply the standard DQN pre-processing, as used in
  R2D2. The replay buffer is split into 8 shards, to improve robustness due to computational constraints,
  with each shard maintaining an independent prioritisation of the entries. We use prioritized experience
  replay with the same prioritization scheme proposed by Kapturowski et al. (2018) which used a
  weighted mixture of max and mean TD-errors over the sequence. Each of the actor workers writes
  to a specific shard which is consistent throughout training. The replay buffer is implemented using
  Reverb (Cassirer et al., 2021).
  Given a single batch of trajectories we unroll both online and target networks on the same sequence
  of states to generate value estimates. These estimates are used to execute the learner update step,
  which updates the model weights used by the actors, and the exponential moving average (EMA) of
  the weights used by the evaluator models, as this yields best performance which we report.
  Acting in the environment is accelerated by sending observations from actors and evaluators to a
  shared server that runs batched inference. The remote inference server allows multiple clients such as


                                                                      16
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


actor and evaluator workers to connect to it, and executes their inputs as a batch on the corresponding
inference models. The actor and evaluator inference model parameters are queried periodically from
the learner. Also, the recurrent state is persisted on the inference server so that the actor does need to
communicate it. However, the episodic memory lookup required to compute the intrinsic reward is
performed locally on actors to reduce the communication overhead.
At the beginning of each episode, parameters β and γ are queried from the bandit worker, i.e.
                                                                                      −1
meta-controller. The parameters are selected from a set of coefficients {(βj , γj )}N
                                                                                    j=0 with N = 16,
which correspond to the N -heads of the network. The actors query optimal (β, γ) tuples, while the
evaluators query the tuple corresponding to the greedy action. After each actor episode, the bandit
stats are updated based on the episode rewards by updating the distribution over actions, according to
Discounted UCB (Garivier & Moulines, 2011).
The following subsections describe how actors, evaluators, and learner are run in each stage.

L EARNER
       • Sample a sequence of extrinsic rewards rte , intrinsic rewards rtNGU , observations xt and
         actions at , from the replay buffer.
       • Use Q-network to learn from (rte , rtNGU , x, a) with our modified version of Watkins’
         Q(λ) (Watkins & Dayan, 1992) using the same procedure as in R2D2.
       • Compute the actor model weights and EMA for the evaluator model weights.
       • Use the sampled sequences to train the action prediction network in NGU.
       • Use the sampled sequences to train the predictor of RND.

ACTOR
       • Query optimal bandit action (β, γ).
       • Obtain xt from the environment.
       • Obtain rtNGU and at from the inference model.
       • Insert xt , at , rtNGU and rte in the replay buffer.
       • Step on the environment with at .

E VALUATOR
       • Query greedy bandit action (β, γ).
       • Obtain xt from the environment.
       • Obtain rtNGU and at from the inference model.
       • Step on the environment with at .

BANDIT
       • Periodically checkpoints bandit action values.
       • Queried for optimal action by actors.
       • Queried for greedy action by evaluators.
       • Updates the stats when actors pass the episode rewards for a certain action.


F    BANDIT I MPLEMENTATION

While Agent57 maintains a separate bandit for each actor, we instead utilize a centralized bandit
worker. The bandit selects between a family of policies generated by tuples of intrinsic reward weight
and discount factor (βi , γi ), parameterized as:


                                                     17
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                             0.10                                                               1.000

                                                                                                0.995
 intrinsic reward weight i   0.08
                                                                                                0.990


                                                                            discount factor i
                             0.06
                                                                                                0.985
                             0.04
                                                                                                0.980
                             0.02                                                               0.975

                             0.00                                                               0.970
                                    0   2   4   6       8    10   12   14                               0   2   4   6       8    10   12   14
                                                policy index                                                        policy index


                                                    Figure 6: β and γ for each of the 16 policies.


                                 
                                 0
                                                       if i = 0
                            βi = βIM                    if i = N − 1                        (9)
                                 β σ(8 2i−(N −2) ) otherwise
                                 
                                    IM       N −2
                               N − 1 − i                      i
                 γi = 1 − exp            log(1 − γmax ) +        log(1 − γmax )            (10)
                                N −1                        N −1
where N is the number of policies, i is the policy index, σ is the sigmoid function, βIM is the
maximum intrinsic reward weight, and γmax and γint are the maximum and minimum discount
factors, respectively.
At the beginning of each episode an actor will sample a policy index with which to act for the duration
of the episode. At the end of which, the actor will update the bandit with the obtained extrinsic return
for that policy. We use a discounted variant of UCB-Tuned bandit algorithm (Garivier & Moulines
(2008) and Auer et al. (2002)). In practice the bandit hyper-parameters did not seem to be very
important. We hypothesize that the use of cross-mixture training may reduce the sensitivity of the
agent to these parameters, though we have not explored this relationship thoroughly.

G                             C OMPUTE R ESOURCES
For the experiments we used the TPUv4, with the 2 × 2 × 1 topology used for the learner. Acting is
accelerated by sending observations from actors to a shared server that runs batched inference using
a 1 × 1 × 1 TPUv4, which is used for inference within the actor and evaluation workers.
On average, the learner performs 3.8 updates per second. The rate at which environment frames are
written to the replay buffer by the actors is approximately 12,970 frames per second.
Each experiment consists of 64 actors with 2 threads, each of them acting with their own independent
instance of the environment. The collected experience is stored in the replay buffer split in 8 shards,
each with independent prioritization. This accumulated experience is used by a single learner worker,
while the performance is evaluated on 5 evaluator workers.

H                             I NTRINSIC REWARDS
H.1                             R ANDOM N ETWORK D ISTILLATION

The Random Network Distillation (RND) intrinsic reward (Burda et al., 2019) is computed by
introducing a random, untrained convolutional network g : X → Rd , and training a network
ĝ : X → Rd to predict the outputs of g on all the observations that are seen during training by
minimizing the prediction error errRND (xt ) = ||ĝ(xt ; θ) − g(xt )||2 with respect to θ. The intuition is


                                                                            18
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


that the prediction error will be large on states that have been visited less frequently by the agent.
The dimensionality of the random embedding, d, is a hyperparameter of the algorithm.
The RND intrinsic reward is obtained by normalising the prediction error. In this work, we use a
slightly different normalization from that reported in Burda et al. (2019). The RND reward at time t
is given by
                                                  errRND (xt )
                                         rtRND =                                                   (11)
                                                      σe
where σe is the running standard deviation of errRND (xt ). As with the TD-error statistics, we compute
σe on the learner using importance sampling weights to correct the sampling distribution.

H.2         N EVER G IVE U P

The NGU intrinsic reward modulates an episodic intrinsic reward, rtepisodic , with a life long signal αt :
                               rtNGU = rtepisodic · min {max {αt , 1} , L} ,                   (12)
where L is a fixed maximum reward scaling. The life-long novelty signal is computed using RND
with the normalisation:
                                                 errRND (xt ) − µe
                                         αt =                                                  (13)
                                                         σe
where errRND (xt ) is the prediction error described in Appendix H.1, and µe and σe are its running
mean and standard deviation, respectively. The episodic intrinsic reward at time t is computed
according to formula:
                                                            1
                            rtepisodic = qP                                                    (14)
                                              f (xi )∈Nk K(f (xt ), f (xi )) + c

where Nk is the set containing the k-nearest neighbors of f (xt ) in M , c is a constant and K :
Rp ×Rp → R+ is a kernel function satisfying K(x, x) = 1 (which can be thought of as approximating
pseudo-counts Badia et al. (2019)). Algorithm 1 shows a detailed description of how the episodic
intrinsic reward is computed. Below we describe the different components used in Algorithm 1:
             • M:        episodic memory containing at time t the previous embeddings
               {f (x0 ), f (x1 ), . . . , f (xt−1 )}. This memory starts empty at each episode
             • k: number of nearest neighbours
             • Nk = {f (xi )}ki=1 : set of k-nearest neighbours of f (xt ) in the memory M ; we call Nk [i] =
               f (xi ) ∈ Nk for ease of notation
                                                            ϵ
             • K: kernel defined as K(x, y) = d2 (x,y)          where ϵ is a small constant, d is the Euclidean
                                                      d2
                                                           +ϵ
                                                       m
               distance and d2m is a running average of the squared Euclidean distance of the k-nearest
               neighbors 5
             • c: pseudo-counts constant
             • ξ: cluster distance
             • sm : maximum similarity
             • f (x): action prediction network output for observation x as in Badia et al. (2020).


I         OTHER T HINGS WE T RIED
I.1        F UNCTIONAL R EGULARIZATION IN PLACE OF T RUST R EGION

Concurrently with the development of our trust region method we experimented with using an explicit
L2 regularization term in the loss, acting on the difference between the online and target networks,
similar to (Piche et al., 2021). Prior to implementation of our normalization scheme we found that
this method stabilized learning early on in training but was prone to eventually becoming unstable
if run for long enough. With normalization this instability did not occur, but sample efficiency was
worse compared to the trust region in most instances we observed.
      5
          As opposed to Agent57 which stored d2m separately per actor, we aggregate over all actors


                                                           19
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Algorithm 1: Computation of the episodic intrinsic reward at time t: rtepisodic .
Input :M ; k; f (xt ); c; ϵ; ξ; xm ; d2m
Output :rtepisodic
Compute the k-nearest neighbours of f (xt ) in M and store them in a list Nk
Create a list of floats dk of size k
/* The list dk will contain the distances between the embedding f (xt ) and its neighbours
     Nk .                                                                                         */
for i ∈ {1, . . . , k} do
    dk [i] ← d2 (f (xt ), Nk [i])
end
Update the moving average d2m with the list of distances dk
/* Normalize the distances dk with the updated moving average d2m .                               */
        d
dn ← d2k
         m
/* Cluster the normalized distances dn i.e. they become 0 if too small and 0k is a list of
   k zeros.                                                                             */
dn ← max(dn − ξ, 0k )
/* Compute the Kernel values between the embedding f (xt ) and its neighbours Nk .      */
Kv ← dnϵ+ϵ
/* Compute the similarity between the embedding f (st ) and its neighbours Nk .         */
    qP
        k
s←      i=1 Kv [i] + c
/* Compute the episodic intrinsic reward at time t:      rti .                                    */
if x > xm then
     rtepisodic ← 0
else
     rtepisodic ← 1/s


I.2    A PPROXIMATE T HOMPSON S AMPLING

We considered using an approximate Thompson Sampling scheme scheme similar to Bootstrapped
DQN (Osband et al., 2016) whereby the stochastic depth mask was fixed for some period of time at
inference (such as once per episode, or every 100 timesteps). We observed some marginal benefit
in certain games, but in our view this difference was not enough to justify the added complexity of
implementation. We hypothesize that the added exploration this provides is not significant when a
strong intrinsic reward is already present in the learning algorithm, but it may have a larger effect if
this is not the case.

I.3    M IXTURE OF O NLINE AND R EPLAY DATA

We considered using a mixture of online and replay data as was done in the Muesli agent (Hessel
et al., 2021). This was beneficial for overall stability, but it also degraded performance in the harder
exploration games such as Pitfall!. We were not able to find an easy remedy for this so we did not
investigate further in this direction.

I.4    E STIMATING Qe (θ) + βQi (θ)

Agent57 uses two neural networks with completely independent weights to estimate Qe and Qi . As
mentioned in the work, this provides the network with more robustness to the different scales and
variance that re and ri have for many tasks.
MEME changes the separation of networks, whereby the Qe and Qi are still estimated separately, but
they share a common torso and recurrent core. However, since many of the components we introduce
are geared toward improving stability, even this separation may no longer be necessary. To analyze
this we run an experiment where the agent network has a single head that estimates Qe (θ) + βQi (θ).
Note that in this case we still estimate N sets of Q-values. Indeed, as results of Figure 7 show,
we observe similar results as our proposed method. This indicates that the inductive bias that was
introduced in maintaining separate heads for intrinsic and extrinsic Q-values is no longer important.


                                                  20
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Frostbite                                    H.E.R.O.                        Montezuma's Revenge                                    Pitfall!
                                              300k                                        15k
                                                                                                                                     100k
400k                                                                                      10k                                         80k
                                              200k
                                                                                                                                      60k
200k                                          100k                                         5k                                         40k
                                                                                                                                      20k
   0                                            0                                          0                                            0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                     Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                     Skiing                                      Solaris                                   Surround                                      Tennis
                                               40k                                        10
  -5k                                                                                                                                 20
 -10k                                          30k                                         5                                          10
 -15k                                          20k                                         0                                           0
 -20k
                                               10k                                                                                    -10
 -25k                                                                                      -5
 -30k                                                                                                                                 -20
                                                0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                               1.0              0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                          1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                     Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                                                      MEME                Single value head                    Human baseline

                            Figure 7: Results for the two approaches to estimating the total loss.


                                                                                    21
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


   J                            A DDITIONAL RESULTS

                               100B
Frames to > human score
                                10B                                                                                                     Agent57         MEME
                                 1B                                                                                                                      390M
                               100M
                                10M
                                 1M


                                                Yars' Revenge
                                                          Tennis
                                                   Tutankham
                                                      Frostbite


                                                       Freeway

                                                       Venture


                                                Wizard Of Wor


                                               Kung-Fu Master
                                                 Road Runner
                                                       H.E.R.O.


                                                        Q*BERT


                                                Fishing Derby
                                                      Breakout
                                                 Ms. Pac-Man


                                                     Robotank
                                         Montezuma's Revenge


                                                     Time Pilot


                                                 Video Pinball
                                                      Surround


                                                           Pong


                                                     Kangaroo
                                                   Ice Hockey
                                                         Pitfall!


                                                        Enduro
                                                     Asteroids


                                                        Zaxxon


                                                         Boxing
                                                   Private Eye


                                                      Riverraid


                                                   Stargunner


                                                        Atlantis
                                                Demon Attack
                                                          Skiing


                                                         Solaris
                                                       Bowling
                                                       Gravitar
                                                        Berzerk

                                                           Alien



                                                  Beam Rider
                                                     Seaquest

                                               Space Invaders


                                                        Amidar
                                           Chopper Command
                                                 Double Dunk

                                                   Bank Heist
                                                  Battle Zone
                                                         Asterix



                                                       Phoenix


                                                        Assault
                                                   Jamesbond
                                                    Centipede
                                             Name This Game


                                                   Up'n Down
                                                     Defender


                                                        Gopher
                                                Crazy Climber
                                                           Krull
  Figure 8: Number of environment frames required by agents to outperform the human baseline on
  each game (in log-scale). Lower is better. Error bars represent the standard deviation over seeds
  for each game. On average, MEME achieves above human scores using 62× fewer environment
  interactions than Agent57. The smallest improvement is 10× (Road Runner), the maximum is 734×
  (Skiing), and the median across the suite is 36×.                              Human-normalized score


                               57
     Games above human score


                                                                                                          100
                               40         57
                                          40                                                              10

                               20         20

                                          0                                                                1
                                               0         500M              1B
                                0                                                                          0
                                    0              30B      60B            90B                                  1         20              40              57
                                               Environment steps                                                                 Game
                                          MEME           Human benchmark                                             Average human      Agent57 @ 90B
                                          Agent57        MuZero @ 20B                                                MEME @ 1B          Agent57 @ 1B

 Figure 9: Comparison with Agent57. Left: number of games with scores above the human benchmark.
 Right: human-normalized scores per game at different interaction budgets, sorted from highest to
 lowest. Our agent outperforms the human benchmark in 390M frames, two orders of magnitude
 faster than Agent57, and achieves similar end scores while reducing the training budget from 90B to
 1B frames.

                           1000x
Speedup to > human score


                               100x

                                10x

                                    1x
                                     0
                                                Yars' Revenge
                                                          Tennis


                                                   Tutankham
                                                      Frostbite


                                                Wizard Of Wor



                                                       Venture

                                                       Freeway


                                               Kung-Fu Master


                                                 Road Runner
                                                       H.E.R.O.
                                                        Q*BERT


                                                Fishing Derby
                                                      Breakout
                                                 Video Pinball


                                                 Ms. Pac-Man


                                                     Time Pilot


                                                     Robotank
                                         Montezuma's Revenge
                                                      Surround


                                                           Pong


                                                     Kangaroo
                                                   Ice Hockey


                                                         Pitfall!


                                                        Enduro
                                                     Asteroids


                                                        Zaxxon


                                                         Boxing
                                                   Private Eye
                                                        Atlantis


                                                      Riverraid
                                                   Stargunner
                                                Demon Attack
                                                          Skiing


                                                       Bowling
                                                 Double Dunk



                                           Chopper Command

                                                  Battle Zone
                                                         Asterix
                                                   Bank Heist
                                                  Beam Rider
                                                           Alien
                                                   Jamesbond
                                                       Phoenix
                                               Space Invaders
                                                       Gravitar


                                                        Berzerk
                                                         Solaris



                                                    Centipede
                                                        Assault


                                                        Amidar
                                                           Krull
                                                     Seaquest

                                                     Defender
                                                        Gopher
                                                Crazy Climber
                                             Name This Game
                                                   Up'n Down


  Figure 10: Speedup in reaching above human performance for the first time, computed as the ratio
  between the orange and blue bars in Figure 1.


                                                                                                                22
  Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                          1200                                                                             4000
                          1000
Median HNS
                                                                                                           3000


                                                                                                Mean NHS
                           800                                                                                                                                      MEME
                           600                                                                             2000                                                     Muesli @ 200M
                           400
                                                                                                           1000
                           200
                             0                                                                               0
                              0.0   0.2                              0.4     0.6    0.8        1.0            0.0          0.2         0.4     0.6    0.8     1.0
                                                    Environment steps                        1e9                                 Environment steps          1e9


                                                                    Figure 11: Median and mean scores over the course of training.


   K                          S TICKY ACTIONS RESULTS
 This section reproduces the main results of the paper, but enabling sticky actions (Machado et al.,
 2018) during both training and evaluation. Since our agent does not exploit the determinism in the
 original Atari benchmark, it is still able to outperform the human baseline with sticky actions enabled.
 We observe a slight decrease in mean scores, which we attribute to label corruption in the action
 prediction loss used to learn the controllable representations used in the episodic reward computation:
 due to the implementation of sticky actions proposed by Machado et al. (2018) the agent actions are
 ignored in a fraction of the timesteps. This phenomenon is aggravated by the frame stacking used in
 the standard Atari pre-processing, as the action being executed in the environment can vary within
 each stack of frames. We hypothesize that the gap between the two versions of the environment
 would be much smaller with a different implementation of sticky actions that did not corrupt the
 action labels used by the representation learning module.
  All reported results are the average over six different random seeds.

                                                                    57
                                          Games above human score


                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                             MEME
                                                                                                                                             Human benchmark
                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                             MuZero [2021] @ 200M


                                                                    0
                                                                         0   200M     400M           600M           800M          1B
                                                                                    Environment steps

  Figure 12: Number of games with scores above the human benchmark when training and evaluating
  with sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018).

                            1B                                                                                                                                               505M
Frames to > human score


                          100M

                           10M

                            1M
                                        Yars' Revenge


                                                  Tennis
                                           Tutankham
                                               Venture
                                               Freeway


                                              Frostbite
                                        Wizard Of Wor


                                       Kung-Fu Master


                                         Road Runner
                                               H.E.R.O.


                                                Q*BERT


                                        Fishing Derby


                                              Breakout
                                         Ms. Pac-Man
                                 Montezuma's Revenge


                                             Time Pilot


                                         Video Pinball



                                             Robotank
                                                   Pong


                                              Surround


                                             Kangaroo
                                           Ice Hockey
                                                 Pitfall!


                                                Enduro
                                             Asteroids


                                                Zaxxon


                                                 Boxing
                                           Private Eye


                                              Riverraid


                                           Stargunner


                                                Atlantis
                                        Demon Attack
                                                  Skiing
                                                 Solaris
                                             Seaquest
                                                Amidar
                                                Berzerk

                                               Gravitar
                                   Chopper Command



                                                   Alien



                                       Space Invaders

                                               Bowling
                                          Beam Rider
                                           Bank Heist


                                               Phoenix
                                     Name This Game


                                          Battle Zone
                                                Assault

                                                 Asterix
                                             Defender
                                                Gopher


                                            Centipede
                                           Up'n Down
                                           Jamesbond

                                                   Krull
                                         Double Dunk
                                        Crazy Climber


  Figure 13: Number of environment frames required by agents to outperform the human baseline
  on each game when training and evaluating with sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018). The human
  baseline is outperformed after 505M frames.



                                                                                                                    23
 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                                                                     3500
             1000
                                                                     3000
Median HNS


             800


                                                          Mean NHS
                                                                     2500
             600                                                     2000                                                    MEME
                                                                     1500                                                    Muesli @ 200M
             400
                                                                     1000
             200                                                      500
               0                                                        0
                0.0   0.2      0.4       0.6    0.8      1.0             0.0        0.2      0.4     0.6      0.8      1.0
                            Environment steps          1e9                                Environment steps          1e9


 Figure 14: Median and mean scores over the course of training when training and evaluating with
 sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018).


Table 4: Number of games above human, capped mean, mean and median human normalized scores
for the 57 Atari games when training and evaluating with sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018).
Metrics for previous methods are computed using the final score per game reported in their respective
publications: MuZero (Schrittwieser et al., 2021), Muesli (Hessel et al., 2021).
                                                                               200M frames                 > 200M frames
                             Statistic                    MEME                  Muesli         MuZero      MEME
                             Env frames                   200M                  200M           200M        1B
                             Number of games > human      54                    52             49          57
                             Capped mean                  97.51                 92.52          89.78       100.0
                             Mean                         2967.52               2523.99        2856.24     3462.93
                             Median                       830.57                1077.47        1006.4      1074.25
                             25th percentile              299.65                269.25         153.1       402.56
                             5th percentile               103.86                15.91          28.76       118.78


                                                                               24
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


L        E FFECT OF S AMPLES PER I NSERT R ATIO
Results of the ablation on the amount of replay that the learner performs per sequence of experience
that the actors produce can be seen in Figure 15. We can see that, while a samples per insert ratio (SPI)
of 10 still provides moderate boosts in data efficiency in games such as H.E.R.O., Montezuma’s
Revenge and Pitfall!, it is not as pronounced as the increase that is seen from SPI of 3 to 6. This
implies that with an SPI of 10 we obtain a much worse return in terms of wall-clock time as we replay
more frequently.

                     Frostbite                                 H.E.R.O.                      Montezuma's Revenge                                    Pitfall!
600k                                       1.2M                                   15k
                                                                                                                                100k
                                             1M                                                                                  80k
400k                                                                              10k
                                           750k                                                                                  60k
200k                                       500k                                       5k                                         40k
                                           250k                                                                                  20k
    0                                         0                                       0                                            0
        0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8
                                  1.0             0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                            1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                    Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                      Skiing                                   Solaris                                Surround                                      Tennis
                                                                                      10
                                            40k                                                                                  20
 -10k                                                                                 5                                          10
                                            30k
                                            20k                                       0                                           0
 -20k
                                                                                      -5                                         -10
                                            10k
 -30k                                                                                                                            -20
                                             0                                    -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4    0.6    0.8
                                  1.0             0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                            1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                     1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                    Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9               Environment frames 1e9
                                   MEME (SPI=6)                SPI=0.8           SPI=3                  SPI=10                  Human baseline

                            Figure 15: Sweep over sample per insert ratios on the full ablation set.


                                                                                 25
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


M         R2D2 ABLATIONS
We further study the benefits of the proposed components in an agent-agnostic context, by examining
their performance when used with the R2D2 agent (Kapturowski et al., 2018), as shown in Figure 16.
Similarly to the original ablations of MEME, we can see that the trust region and online bootstrap-
ping constitute the most important component, which once removed deteriorates the performance
significantly. In general, the rest of the components are beneficial as well, as MEME R2D2 can be
seen to obtain human-level performance on the largest number of games; although the set of Atari
games used in this ablation is not fully representative as Montezuma’s Revenge, Pitfall! and Skiing
are not expected to be solvable without intrinsic motivation or the ability to leverage larger discount
factors.
                     Frostbite                                   H.E.R.O.                        Montezuma's Revenge                                   Pitfall!
                                                                                                                                    6k
                                              60k                                        4k
400k                                                                                                                                4k
                                                                                         3k
                                              40k
                                                                                         2k                                         2k
200k
                                              20k                                        1k
                                                                                                                                     0
    0                                          0                                          0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9                     Environment frames 1e9                     Environment frames 1e9
                     Skiing                                     Solaris                                   Surround                                     Tennis
                                              40k                                        10
                                                                                                                                    20
 -10k                                                                                     5
                                              30k                                                                                   10
 -20k                                         20k                                         0                                          0
                                              10k                                         -5                                        -10
 -30k
                                                                                                                                    -20
                                               0                                         -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                              1.0              0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                         1.0              0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9                     Environment frames 1e9                 Environment frames 1e9
                     MEME R2D2                                                                 Policy distillation (D)                      NFNet torso (C1)
                      Trust-region Online boostrapping (A1)                                    Soft Watkins' Q( ) (A2)                    Human baseline
                      Normalization (B1)

               Figure 16: Ablation study of the proposed components while using the R2D2 agent.


                                                                                   26
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


N        F ULL ABLATIONS

                     Frostbite                                    H.E.R.O.                          Montezuma's Revenge                                    Pitfall!
                                              300k                                          15k
                                                                                                                                       100k
400k                                                                                        10k                                         80k
                                              200k
                                                                                                                                        60k
200k                                          100k                                           5k                                         40k
                                                                                                                                        20k
    0                                           0                                            0                                            0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                     Skiing                                      Solaris                                     Surround                                      Tennis
                                               40k                                          10
  -5k                                                                                                                                   20
 -10k                                          30k                                           5                                          10
 -15k                                          20k                                           0                                           0
 -20k
                                               10k                                           -5                                         -10
 -25k
 -30k                                                                                                                                   -20
                                                0                                           -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8
                                                                               1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                            1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                                                       MEME                     Combined loss                    Human baseline

Figure 17: Comparison between our combined loss and the separate losses used by Agent57 on the
full ablation set.

                     Frostbite                                    H.E.R.O.                          Montezuma's Revenge                                    Pitfall!
                                              300k                                          15k
                                                                                                                                       100k
400k                                                                                        10k                                         80k
                                              200k
                                                                                                                                        60k
200k                                          100k                                           5k                                         40k
                                                                                                                                        20k
    0                                           0                                            0                                            0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                     Skiing                                      Solaris                                     Surround                                      Tennis
                                               40k                                          10
  -5k                                                                                                                                   20
 -10k                                          30k                                           5                                          10
 -15k                                          20k                                           0                                           0
 -20k
                                               10k                                           -5                                         -10
 -25k
 -30k                                                                                                                                   -20
                                                0                                           -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8
                                                                               1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                            1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9              Environment frames 1e9
                             MEME                                       Cross-mixture training                                          Human baseline
                              Normalization                             Cross-mixture training Normalization

  Figure 18: Results without cross-mixture training and TD normalization on the full ablation set.


                                                                                      27
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Frostbite                                     H.E.R.O.                         Montezuma's Revenge                                     Pitfall!
                                               300k                                         15k
                                                                                                                                        100k
400k                                                                                        10k                                          80k
                                               200k
                                                                                                                                         60k
200k                                           100k                                          5k                                          40k
                                                                                                                                         20k
   0                                             0                                           0                                             0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                        Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9
                     Skiing                                       Solaris                                    Surround                                       Tennis
                                                40k                                         10
  -5k                                                                                                                                    20
 -10k                                           30k                                          5                                           10
 -15k                                           20k                                          0                                            0
 -20k
                                                10k                                                                                      -10
 -25k                                                                                        -5
 -30k                                                                                                                                    -20
                                                 0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8
                                  1.0                 0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8
                                                                                1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                            1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                        Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9               Environment frames 1e9
                            MEME                       Nesterov momentum                            Percentile clipping                   Human baseline

                             Figure 19: Ablation experiments over different optimizer features.
                     Frostbite                                     H.E.R.O.                         Montezuma's Revenge                                     Pitfall!
                                               300k                                         15k
                                                                                                                                        100k
400k                                                                                        10k                                          80k
                                               200k
                                                                                                                                         60k
200k                                           100k                                          5k                                          40k
                                                                                                                                         20k
   0                                             0                                           0                                             0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8   1.0         0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                        Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9
                     Skiing                                       Solaris                                    Surround                                       Tennis
                                                40k                                         10
                                                                                                                                         20
 -10k                                           30k                                          5                                           10
                                                20k                                          0                                            0
 -20k
                                                10k                                          -5                                          -10
 -30k                                                                                                                                    -20
                                                 0                                          -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8
                                  1.0                 0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8
                                                                                1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                            1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                        Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9
                                                      MEME                     Policy distillation                   Human baseline

                            Figure 20: Results without policy distillation on the full ablation set.
                     Frostbite                                     H.E.R.O.                         Montezuma's Revenge                                     Pitfall!
                                               300k                                         15k
                                                                                                                                        100k
400k                                                                                        10k                                          80k
                                               200k
                                                                                                                                         60k
200k                                           100k                                          5k                                          40k
                                                                                                                                         20k
   0                                             0                                           0                                             0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8
                                  1.0                 0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8
                                                                                1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                        Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9
                      Skiing                                       Solaris                                   Surround                                       Tennis
                                                40k                                         10
                                                                                                                                         20
 -10k                                           30k                                          5                                           10
                                                20k                                          0                                            0
 -20k
                                                10k                                                                                      -10
                                                                                             -5
 -30k                                                                                                                                    -20
                                                 0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8
                                  1.0                 0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6    0.8
                                                                                1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                            1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                        Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9                Environment frames 1e9
                                  MEME                                       Weight decay                                               Human baseline
                                   Stochastic depth                          Weight decay Stochastic depth

    Figure 21: Results for agents with different amounts of regularization on the full ablation set.


                                                                                       28
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Frostbite                               H.E.R.O.                      Montezuma's Revenge                                    Pitfall!
600k                                     300k                                   15k
                                                                                                                              100k
                                                                                                                               80k
400k                                     200k                                   10k
                                                                                                                               60k
200k                                     100k                                       5k                                         40k
                                                                                                                               20k
   0                                       0                                        0                                            0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0           0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                          1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                  Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                      Skiing                                 Solaris                                Surround                                      Tennis
                                          40k                                       10
                                                                                                                               20
 -10k                                     30k                                       5                                          10

 -20k                                     20k                                       0                                           0
                                          10k                                       -5                                         -10
 -30k                                                                                                                          -20
                                           0                                    -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0           0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                          1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                   1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                  Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9          Environment frames 1e9
              Soft Watkins' Q( )                Soft Watkins' Q( ), = 0                   Peng's Q( )               Retrace( )       Human baseline

                        Figure 22: Results with different learning targets on the full ablation set.


                     Frostbite                               H.E.R.O.                      Montezuma's Revenge                                    Pitfall!
                                         300k                                   15k
                                                                                                                              100k
400k                                                                            10k                                            80k
                                         200k
                                                                                                                               60k
200k                                     100k                                       5k                                         40k
                                                                                                                               20k
   0                                       0                                        0                                            0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0           0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                          1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                  Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9                      Environment frames 1e9
                      Skiing                                 Solaris                                Surround                                      Tennis
                                          40k                                       10
                                                                                                                               20
 -10k                                     30k                                       5                                          10
                                          20k                                       0                                           0
 -20k
                                          10k                                       -5                                         -10
 -30k                                                                                                                          -20
                                           0                                    -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                  1.0           0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                          1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                   1.0               0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                  Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9        Environment frames 1e9
                                        MEME (NFNet)                       ConvNet                            GroupNorm ResNet
                                        LayerNorm ResNet                   RMSNorm ResNet                     Human baseline

                       Figure 23: Results for agents with different torsos on the full ablation set.


                                                                               29
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                     Frostbite                                H.E.R.O.                       Montezuma's Revenge                                     Pitfall!
                                          300k                                     15k
                                                                                                                                 100k
400k                                                                               10k                                            80k
                                          200k
                                                                                                                                  60k
200k                                      100k                                        5k                                          40k
                                                                                                                                  20k
   0                                        0                                         0                                             0
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8
                                  1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8
                                                                           1.0             0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0          0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9                    Environment frames 1e9                       Environment frames 1e9
                      Skiing                                  Solaris                                 Surround                                       Tennis
                                           40k                                        10
                                                                                                                                  20
 -10k                                      30k                                        5                                           10
                                           20k                                        0                                            0
 -20k
                                           10k                                        -5                                          -10
 -30k                                                                                                                             -20
                                            0                                      -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8
                                  1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8
                                                                           1.0             0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                     1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9                    Environment frames 1e9            Environment frames 1e9
                                  MEME                              Online boostrapping                                     Human baseline
                                   Trust-region                     Trust-region Online boostrapping

Figure 24: Results for agents without online bootstrapping and trust-region on the full ablation set.


                     Frostbite                                H.E.R.O.                       Montezuma's Revenge                                     Pitfall!
                                                              12.5k                           60k
300k                                      150k
                                                                10k
200k                                                                                          40k
                               100k                            7.5k
                                                                 5k                           20k
100k                            50k
                                                               2.5k
   0                              0                               0                             0
     0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0        0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0         0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0       0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
        Environment frames 1e9         Environment frames 1e9          Environment frames 1e9        Environment frames 1e9
                      Skiing                                  Solaris                                   Surround                                     Tennis
  -5k                                      30k                                                                                    20
 -10k                                                                                 5                                           10
 -15k                                      20k
                                                                                      0                                            0
 -20k
                                           10k                                        -5                                          -10
 -25k
                                                                                                                                  -20
 -30k                                       0                                      -10
        0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6    0.8
                                  1.0            0.0    0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8
                                                                           1.0             0.0    0.2    0.4   0.6   0.8
                                                                                                                     1.0                0.0    0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1.0
              Environment frames 1e9                   Environment frames 1e9                    Environment frames 1e9            Environment frames 1e9
                                  Multi-headed architecture                  Single-headed architecture                     Human baseline

Figure 25: Comparison of head architectures. The single-headed architecture is similar to the one in
Agent57, where the network is conditioned on a one-hot encoding of the mixture id. All experiments
are run without cross-mixture training and TD normalization for fairness. These results demonstrate
that our multi-headed architecture, introduced to enable efficient computation of Q values for all
mixtures in parallel, does not degrade performance.


                                                                                 30
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


O    S CORES PER GAME

                                             Table 5: Scores per game.
 Game                        Agent57 @ 1B             Agent57 @ 90B             MEME @ 200M                   MEME @ 1B
 Alien                   3094.46 ± 1682.49    252889.92 ± 31085.48           41048.78 ± 8702.03        83683.43 ± 16688.58
 Amidar                    329.99 ± 124.14      28671.19 ± 1046.52            7363.47 ± 1033.44         14368.90 ± 2775.86
 Assault                  1183.25 ± 482.14      49198.37 ± 9469.92           33266.67 ± 6143.71        46635.86 ± 14846.53
 Asterix                  2777.67 ± 697.39     763476.87 ± 105395.98     861780.67 ± 97588.31        769803.92 ± 143061.91
 Asteroids                2422.64 ± 412.96      105058.07 ± 45380.23       217586.98 ± 17304.43     364492.07 ± 13982.31
 Atlantis              44844.67 ± 15838.85     1508119.97 ± 24913.10      1535634.17 ± 20700.45     1669226.33 ± 3906.17
 Bank Heist                364.26 ± 156.87       17274.04 ± 12145.09        15563.35 ± 14565.74     87792.55 ± 104611.67
 Battle Zone             19065.86 ± 999.82    868540.57 ± 26523.78         733206.67 ± 84295.20       776770.00 ± 19734.15
 Beam Rider               2056.68 ± 131.88    283845.01 ± 11289.64           68534.71 ± 4443.34         51870.20 ± 2906.10
 Berzerk                    614.26 ± 84.32       31565.12 ± 34278.20          7003.12 ± 2592.61      38838.35 ± 14783.99
 Bowling                      34.00 ± 4.19            240.33 ± 18.96             261.83 ± 2.30               261.74 ± 8.42
 Boxing                       97.92 ± 1.08             99.93 ± 0.03                 99.77 ± 0.17               99.85 ± 0.14
 Breakout                    62.09 ± 34.67            696.94 ± 63.20             747.62 ± 64.06             831.08 ± 6.18
 Centipede              14411.24 ± 1780.60    348288.74 ± 11957.45         112609.74 ± 42701.73       245892.18 ± 39060.78
 Chopper Command         3535.40 ± 1031.08    959747.29 ± 10225.76        842327.17 ± 168089.18      912225.00 ± 112906.65
 Crazy Climber          85166.13 ± 9121.39    456653.80 ± 13192.11          295413.67 ± 5974.67       339274.67 ± 14818.41
 Defender               33613.13 ± 6856.21    666433.14 ± 17493.30         518605.50 ± 18011.92        543979.50 ± 7639.27
 Demon Attack             1786.19 ± 911.24       140474.21 ± 2931.07        139349.75 ± 1927.91      142176.58 ± 1223.59
 Double Dunk                 −21.76 ± 0.52               23.64 ± 0.06               23.60 ± 0.06             23.70 ± 0.44
 Enduro                     437.34 ± 97.19            2349.03 ± 7.46            2338.62 ± 38.96            2360.64 ± 3.19
 Fishing Derby             −43.36 ± 19.65              83.42 ± 4.11                 67.19 ± 5.30               77.05 ± 3.97
 Freeway                      22.46 ± 0.49               32.13 ± 0.71               33.82 ± 0.14             33.97 ± 0.02
 Frostbite                 980.15 ± 581.61      507775.65 ± 35925.95       136691.77 ± 35672.33     526239.50 ± 18289.50
 Gopher                  9760.20 ± 1790.84        98786.14 ± 4600.57        117557.53 ± 3264.72      119457.53 ± 4077.33
 Gravitar                  666.43 ± 304.08         18180.26 ± 627.48          13049.67 ± 272.66        20875.00 ± 844.41
 H.E.R.O.                8850.63 ± 1313.70      102145.96 ± 50561.27         33872.29 ± 6917.14     199880.60 ± 44074.56
 Ice Hockey                  −14.87 ± 1.71             62.33 ± 5.77                 26.07 ± 4.48               47.22 ± 4.41
 Jamesbond                 534.53 ± 408.19      107266.11 ± 15584.58     137333.17 ± 21939.77         117009.92 ± 55411.15
 Kangaroo                 3178.86 ± 996.26      18505.37 ± 5016.41            15863.50 ± 675.45          17311.17 ± 419.17
 Krull                   9179.71 ± 1222.12    194179.21 ± 21451.96         157943.83 ± 26699.67       155915.32 ± 43127.45
 Kung-Fu Master         31613.73 ± 8854.35       192616.60 ± 9019.89      364755.65 ± 387274.47    476539.53 ± 518479.85
 Montezuma’s Revenge       200.43 ± 192.50         8666.10 ± 2928.92           2863.00 ± 117.94       12437.00 ± 1648.44
 Ms. Pac-Man              3348.12 ± 630.07      57402.56 ± 3077.27           22853.12 ± 2843.55         29747.91 ± 2472.33
 Name This Game          4463.97 ± 1747.50      48644.27 ± 2390.83           31369.93 ± 2637.53         40077.73 ± 2274.25
 Phoenix                 7359.04 ± 5542.07    858909.13 ± 37669.01         602393.53 ± 43967.79       849969.25 ± 43573.52
 Pitfall!                  274.33 ± 413.21        13655.05 ± 5288.29            574.32 ± 811.43      46734.79 ± 30468.85
 Pong                        −15.02 ± 1.96             20.29 ± 0.65                 17.91 ± 6.61               19.31 ± 2.42
 Private Eye             5727.66 ± 1619.10       79347.98 ± 29315.82        64145.31 ± 21106.93         100798.90 ± 1.07
 Q*BERT                  3806.99 ± 1654.33   437607.43 ± 111087.57          96189.83 ± 17377.23      238453.50 ± 272386.91
 Riverraid               6077.47 ± 1810.98        56276.56 ± 6593.69         40266.92 ± 4087.60       90333.12 ± 4694.40
 Road Runner            25303.07 ± 4360.56      168665.40 ± 40390.00    447833.33 ± 128698.32        399511.83 ± 111036.59
 Robotank                     13.67 ± 2.55           116.93 ± 10.64                 87.79 ± 5.85             114.46 ± 3.71
 Seaquest                2146.63 ± 1574.51     999063.77 ± 1160.16         577162.47 ± 56947.06       960181.39 ± 25453.79
 Skiing                −25261.49 ± 1193.77        −4289.49 ± 628.37          −3401.56 ± 185.93           −3273.43 ± 4.67
 Solaris                 2968.25 ± 1470.62      39844.08 ± 6788.17           13514.80 ± 1231.17         28175.53 ± 4859.26
 Space Invaders            640.13 ± 185.45        35150.40 ± 3388.53         33214.80 ± 5372.10       57828.45 ± 7551.63
 Stargunner             11214.14 ± 4667.13    796115.29 ± 73384.04         221215.33 ± 13974.19       264286.33 ± 10019.21
 Surround                     −8.57 ± 0.69                8.83 ± 0.58                9.64 ± 0.17               9.82 ± 0.05
 Tennis                      −18.34 ± 2.41             23.40 ± 0.15                 23.18 ± 0.53               22.79 ± 0.65
 Time Pilot              3561.51 ± 1114.00      382111.86 ± 17388.79       169812.33 ± 37012.23     404751.67 ± 17305.23
 Tutankham                  106.68 ± 13.87       2012.54 ± 2853.44               402.16 ± 22.73            1030.27 ± 11.88
 Up’n Down              15986.44 ± 2213.66    614068.80 ± 32336.64         472283.82 ± 23901.66       524631.00 ± 20108.60
 Venture                   477.71 ± 251.24          2544.90 ± 403.53            2261.17 ± 66.39         2859.83 ± 195.14
 Video Pinball          18042.46 ± 2773.10    885718.05 ± 54583.24         778530.78 ± 79425.86      617640.95 ± 127005.48
 Wizard Of Wor           3402.48 ± 1210.12     134441.09 ± 8913.57          67072.67 ± 13768.12         71942.00 ± 6552.86
 Yars’ Revenge          26310.18 ± 6442.63     976142.42 ± 3219.52        654338.02 ± 100597.12      633867.66 ± 128824.41
 Zaxxon                  7323.83 ± 1819.10    195043.97 ± 18131.20           79120.00 ± 9783.55         77942.17 ± 6614.61


                                                           31
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


Table 6: Scores per game when training and evaluating with sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018).
       Game                            MEME @ 200M                   MEME @ 1B           Go-Explore
       Alien                     48076.48 ± 10310.65       68634.82 ± 15653.10
       Amidar                       7280.27 ± 808.09        20776.93 ± 4859.39
       Assault                    27838.75 ± 4337.41       31708.64 ± 14199.48
       Asterix               843493.60 ± 126291.56          729820.40 ± 82360.83
       Asteroids                 212460.60 ± 5585.36      335137.50 ± 32384.14
       Atlantis               1462275.60 ± 144898.14      1622960.80 ± 1958.79
       Bank Heist                  6448.48 ± 3066.16        45019.92 ± 8611.39
       Battle Zone              756298.00 ± 71092.41      763666.00 ± 53978.21
       Beam Rider               54395.06 ± 8299.92            38049.60 ± 3714.79
       Berzerk                   16265.88 ± 10497.83       45729.94 ± 13228.29       197376 (@10B)
       Bowling                        264.73 ± 0.89               212.70 ± 65.93        260 (@10B)
       Boxing                            99.77 ± 0.10              99.86 ± 0.11
       Breakout                      521.32 ± 49.04               475.87 ± 53.73
       Centipede                  55068.43 ± 6370.11         63792.64 ± 24203.69    1422628 (@10B)
       Chopper Command         170450.00 ± 318026.00     181573.80 ± 342149.46
       Crazy Climber            272227.40 ± 24884.40       291033.20 ± 5966.79
       Defender                 521330.30 ± 10194.48       561521.30 ± 7955.85
       Demon Attack              130545.44 ± 9343.72       142393.12 ± 1119.30
       Double Dunk                       23.12 ± 0.58              23.78 ± 0.09
       Enduro                        2339.31 ± 13.75            2352.94 ± 14.33
       Fishing Derby                     68.12 ± 4.92              79.65 ± 2.65
       Freeway                           33.88 ± 0.08                33.92 ± 0.02        34 (@10B)
       Frostbite                137638.50 ± 38943.68      498640.46 ± 38753.40
       Gopher                 105836.08 ± 13458.22           96034.76 ± 17422.13
       Gravitar                    12864.10 ± 260.14         19489.40 ± 825.38         7588 (@10B)
       H.E.R.O.                   27998.94 ± 5920.99      175258.87 ± 15772.55
       Ice Hockey                        38.14 ± 9.23             52.51 ± 10.04
       Jamesbond               144864.80 ± 8709.86          118539.20 ± 47454.71
       Kangaroo                   15559.00 ± 1494.83         16951.60 ± 275.12
       Krull                  127340.42 ± 27604.33           93638.02 ± 28863.77
       Kung-Fu Master            182036.20 ± 4195.48       208166.80 ± 2714.94
       Montezuma’s Revenge           2890.40 ± 42.06           9429.20 ± 1485.32      43791 (@10B)
       Ms. Pac-Man                25158.68 ± 1786.43         27054.73 ± 152.14
       Name This Game             29029.20 ± 2237.35        34471.30 ± 2135.99
       Phoenix                  440354.08 ± 70760.72      788107.78 ± 33424.51
       Pitfall!                      235.90 ± 493.77        7820.94 ± 16815.61         6954 (@10B)
       Pong                              19.38 ± 0.58              20.71 ± 0.08
       Private Eye               90596.05 ± 19942.76         100775.10 ± 15.57        95756 (@10B)
       Q*BERT                   137998.15 ± 86896.43     328686.85 ± 257052.72
       Riverraid                  36680.36 ± 1287.15        67631.40 ± 4517.53
       Road Runner             515838.00 ± 153908.19      543316.20 ± 64169.67
       Robotank                          93.47 ± 4.18             114.60 ± 4.61
       Seaquest                 474164.86 ± 62059.73      744392.88 ± 41259.26
       Skiing                      −3339.21 ± 14.59            −3305.77 ± 8.09        −3660 (@10B)
       Solaris                     13124.24 ± 657.30        28386.28 ± 2381.29        19671 (@20B)
       Space Invaders             26243.09 ± 6053.57        52254.64 ± 4421.24
       Stargunner               173677.60 ± 19678.82       190235.40 ± 6141.42
       Surround                           9.60 ± 0.24                9.66 ± 0.23
       Tennis                          22.65 ± 0.73                  22.61 ± 0.53
       Time Pilot               159728.20 ± 39442.90      354559.80 ± 22172.76
       Tutankham                      383.85 ± 61.43            924.47 ± 130.59
       Up’n Down                478535.54 ± 15969.44       528786.12 ± 5200.79
       Venture                       2318.20 ± 56.39          2583.40 ± 175.95         2281 (@10B)
       Video Pinball           750858.98 ± 115759.28      759284.69 ± 37920.13
       Wizard Of Wor              65005.80 ± 7034.75        66627.00 ± 9196.92
       Yars’ Revenge         654251.90 ± 121823.94         556157.86 ± 147800.84
       Zaxxon                  85322.00 ± 12413.86            69809.20 ± 2229.49


                                                    32
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023


                Alien                            Amidar                            Assault                           Asterix                          Asteroids                          Atlantis
                                   30k                               80k                               1M                               400k
100k                                                                                                                                                                      1.5M
                                   20k                               60k                              750k                              300k
 75k                                                                                                                                                                       1M
 50k                                                                 40k                              500k                              200k
                                   10k                                                                                                                                    500k
 25k                                                                 20k                              250k                              100k
   0                                0                                 0                                 0                                 0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
             Bank Heist                        Battle Zone                       Beam Rider                          Berzerk                          Bowling                            Boxing
300k                               1M                               100k                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                       60k
                                  750k                               75k                                                                200                                75
200k                                                                                                   40k
                                  500k                               50k                                                                                                   50
100k                                                                                                   20k                              100                                25
                                  250k                               25k
  0                                 0                                 0                                 0                                                                   0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
              Breakout                         Centipede                     Chopper Command                     Crazy Climber                        Defender            150k
                                                                                                                                                                                     Demon Attack
                                                                     1M                                                                 600k
800
                                  400k                              750k                              400k
600                                                                                                                                     400k                              100k
400                                                                 500k
                                  200k                                                                200k                              200k                               50k
200                                                                 250k
  0                                 0                                 0                                                                   0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
            Double Dunk           2.5k
                                                 Enduro                         Fishing Derby          35
                                                                                                                    Freeway                           Frostbite                          Gopher
 20                                 2k                               50                                30                                                                 100k
 10                                                                                                                                     400k
                                  1.5k                                                                 25
  0                                 1k                                0                                20                                                                  50k
                                                                                                                                        200k
 -10                              500                                -50                               15
                                                                                                                                          0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
              Gravitar                          H.E.R.O.                         Ice Hockey                        Jamesbond                          Kangaroo                            Krull
                                  300k                                                                                                                                    300k
 20k                                                                 60                               150k
                                                                                                                                         15k
                                  200k                               40                                                                                                   200k
                                                                                                      100k
 10k                                                                 20                                                                  10k
                                  100k                                                                 50k                                                                100k
                                                                      0                                                                   5k
  0                                 0                                                                   0                                                                   0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
           Kung-Fu Master                Montezuma's Revenge                    Ms. Pac-Man                     Name This Game                        Phoenix                            Pitfall!
                                   15k
1.5M                                                                                                                                                                      100k
                                                                     30k                               40k                              750k
                                   10k                                                                                                                                     75k
 1M                                                                                                    30k
                                                                     20k                                                                500k                               50k
                                    5k                                                                 20k
500k                                                                 10k                                                                250k                               25k
                                                                                                       10k
  0                                 0                                 0                                                                   0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
                Pong                           Private Eye                         Q*BERT                           Riverraid                       Road Runner                         Robotank
 20                               100k                               1M                                                                 600k
                                                                                                      100k
 10                                75k                              750k                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                       75k                              400k
  0                                50k                              500k                               50k
                                                                    250k                                                                200k                               50
 -10                               25k                                                                 25k
                                    0                                 0                                 0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
              Seaquest                           Skiing              40k
                                                                                   Solaris                       Space Invaders                      Stargunner                         Surround
 1M                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                       60k                              300k
750k                              -10k                               30k                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                       40k                              200k
500k                                                                 20k                                                                                                    0
                                  -20k
250k                                                                 10k                               20k                              100k
                                                                                                                                                                            -5
  0                               -30k                                0                                 0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
               Tennis                          Time Pilot                        Tutankham                         Up'n Down                          Venture                         Video Pinball
                                                                                                                                                                           1M
 20                               400k                                1k                                                                  3k                              750k
                                                                    750                               400k
  0                                                                                                                                       2k                              500k
                                  200k                              500
                                                                                                      200k                                1k
                                                                    250                                                                                                   250k
 -20
                                    0                                 0                                 0                                 0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9                               1e9
           Wizard Of Wor                      Yars' Revenge                        Zaxxon
                                   1M
100k                                                                100k
                                  750k                                                                            MEME
 50k
                                  500k                                                                            MEME with sticky actions
                                                                     50k                                          Human baseline
                                  250k
  0                                 0                                 0
       0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00          0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
                           1e9                               1e9                               1e9



Figure 26: Score per game as a function of the number of environment frames, both with and without
sticky actions (Machado et al., 2018). Shading shows maximum and minimum over 6 runs, while
dark lines indicate the mean.


                                                                                                 33
